CHRONICLE
BOB GELDOF, the Irish rock musician, admits that he dislikes rising early.
Given the reviews received by a new television program he is involved with, he may consider staying in bed.
Mr.
Geldof, the organizer of the Live Aid benefits for famine relief in Africa, is a director of Planet 24, the company that produces "The Big Breakfast," a daily program on Channel 4, one of Britain's four national networks.
The 7 to 9 A.M. program, a melange of news, cartoons, household tips, gossip and interviews, made its debut on Monday, and some London critics lost no time in attacking it as superficial and frenzied.


Keene to Conduct 'Regina'
Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, will conduct the company's new production of "Regina," replacing William Henry Curry, who withdrew on Friday for what a company spokeswoman described as personal reasons.
"Regina," with a score and libretto by Marc Blitzstein, is an adaptation of the Lillian Hellman play "The Little Foxes." Performances are scheduled on Oct. 9, 18, 20 and 24.


K-Tel International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congressional Roundup; Effort Moves Ahead On J.F.K. Records
The House today voted to approve the Senate version of legislation that will unseal Government records on the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Although the two chambers had adopted slightly different versions of the bill, the House, in the press of business near the close of the session, decided not to haggle over relatively minor differences in the bills.


Brauns Fashions Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Rangers Are Trying to Figure Out a Flurry of Rule Changes
There were times last season when Tie Domi would stand rinkside, shifting his weight uncomfortably in street clothes, dreaming of a schedule like this.
Domi was one of two Rangers last night to play in a third exhibition game in three successive days, waiving his player union rights by agreeing to participate in what became a 4-1 victory over the Islanders at Madison Square Garden.


Jerry Jontry; Publishing Executive, 81
Jerry Jontry, a former president of the publishing group of Esquire Inc., died on Sunday at his Manhattan home.
He was 81 years old.
He died after a long illness, said Fred Ferguson, a family friend.


COMPANY NEWS
PEOPLES NATIONAL BANK OF COMMERCE, Miami, was bought by a group of South Florida businessmen headed by Garth Reeves Sr., William Armstrong, Thaddeus Wilcox and Wayman Adkins.
ATLANTIC RECORDS, a unit of Time Warner Inc., and Mammoth Records agreed to jointly develop artists.


La Russa on Canseco: Big Bat, Big Ego, Big Pain
Oakland Athletics Manager Tony La Russa, angered over recent criticism leveled at the organization by Jose Canseco, lashed back today at the former A's outfielder, saying that the team often lied to protect Canseco.
"This organization protected him, offered him all kinds of support and literally lied for him," La Russa said in a half-hour barrage before tonight's game between Oakland, Canseco's old team, and Texas, his new one.
"That was humiliating. He was offered help for every one of his problems, whether it was on or off the field."


Bridge
Bridge has many affinities to real life: Prayers are sometimes answered, justice is not always done.
An example is the diagramed deal, played in May at the Young Man's Philanthropic League in Manhattan.
South was Jeanne Rahmey of Brooklyn, and she had a problem on the second round after opening one diamond and hearing the major suits bid by the opponents.
Some would pass and some would make a take-out double.
She chose two clubs and was raised to game by a highly optimistic partner.


Corrections
Articles on Monday and Tuesday about Ross Perot's plan to reduce the Federal deficit referred incorrectly to John White, who oversaw the drafting.
He is an executive of the Eastman Kodak Company, not the Xerox Corporation.


Louise Natale Wagner Coloratura Soloist, 74
Louise Natale Wagner, a coloratura soprano who was a frequent soloist in choral performances in the 1950's and 60's, died on Sunday at Rahway Hospital in Rahway, N.J.
She was 74 years old and lived in Rahway.
She died of a heart attack, said a spokesman for the Lehrer-Gibilisco Funeral Home.


The Candidate Less Disliked
When Gerald Ford put his foot in his mouth about Poland in a 1976 debate, he may have turned the tide in Jimmy Carter's direction.
When Ronald Reagan cheerfully extended his hand to President Carter at their 1980 debate, he may have sealed his winning margin.
Now, finally, a moment of equivalent drama seems possible in 1992.
After weeks of shameless evasion, President Bush declares he is willing to debate Gov.
Bill Clinton, on the four Sundays before the election.
There may be less than meets the eye to his offer.
For one thing, it trashes the reasonable schedule already established by a bipartisan commission and creates scheduling chaos.


AT HOME WITH: Ted and Vicki Kennedy; Crossed Paths, A Second Chance
ALL of the cooks went to see for themselves.
There was Rose Kennedy's longtime cook, Ethel Kennedy's cook from next door in the Kennedys' ocean-front compound and Eunice Kennedy Shriver's cook from just down the street.
Rumor had it that Victoria Reggie Kennedy, the newest member of the family, who married Senator Edward M. Kennedy in July, was in the kitchen actually cooking.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Sacra  Cathedral of St. John the Divine
Musica Sacra's choral concert on Saturday afternoon spanned a huge historical divide.
It began with a world premiere and culminated in a 16th-century masterwork.
"Songs and Psalms of the Divine" was the theme, a homage to the cathedral, where Musica Sacra performed regularly from 1974 to 1985; not coincidentally, a recording bearing that title has just been released on the RCA label.
The group's polish and cohesion have slipped somewhat in recent years, but its conductor, Richard Westenburg, came through with an artfully assembled program and a pragmatic response to St.
John's hazy acoustics.


Advanced Gravis reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Actidev Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Hospitals In 2 Boroughs Join Efforts
The New York Hospital will replace the Salvation Army as the controlling force behind Booth Memorial Medical Center, the largest voluntary hospital in Queens.
Under the change, announced yesterday, the New York Hospital, on the Upper East Side, will appoint the board that sets policy at Booth Memorial, a 487-bed hospital in Flushing, Queens, but it will remain, a New York Hospital official said, an "independent, free-standing hospital."


Andretti and Mansell Switch Circuits
MICHAEL ANDRETTI, the 1991 Indy-car champion, and England's NIGEL MANSELL, the 1992 Formula One world champion, will switch circuits starting next season, and one driver who knows about that changeover is a Brazilian, EMERSON FITTIPALDI, who has won a championship in each of those two types of racing.
"I think Michael will have an easier time adapting to Formula One racing than Nigel will have adapting to Indy-car racing," Fittipaldi said in a conference call yesterday.


More Developmental Ills Seen in Foster Children; Family Preservation
To the Editor:
Your series on "Shattered Lives: When Foster Care Fails" (Sept. 8 to 10) clearly points up serious, even life-threatening situations that exist for some children who have been separated from their parents.


Honoring Trigere, at a 'Family' Reunion
SEVENTH AVENUE circled its wagons Tuesday night, surrounding Pauline Trigere, the grande dame of American fashion, with a palpable aura of love and respect.
It was the designer's golden jubilee, and more than 600 manufacturers, designers, salespeople, models and retailers turned up at the Fashion Institute of Technology to review her work and exchange tales.
They paid from $350 to $10,000 to view a retrospective of the designer's work, see clients and friends model her clothes and dine in the school's cafeteria on smoked salmon, veal and poached pears prepared by Taste.


Nazi-Era Romanians Ransomed Minorities
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 news article "Germany Reaches Deal to Deport Thousands of Gypsies to Romania" says that during the regime of Nicolae Ceausescu, the Romanians received millions of dollars from Germany for repatriation of ethnic Germans and similar millions from Israel for allowing Romanian Jews to emigrate.


The Russian Art World Is Feeling The Troubles of Its Country
Two weeks before the 800 artworks in the "Great Utopia" show at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum were to be shipped from Moscow, the Government's Ministry of Culture was dissolved.
Russian museum officials said that almost put an end to the show, which is composed of works of the Russian and Soviet avant-garde from 1915 to 1932 drawn from 72 institutions throughout the former Soviet Union.
Eventually, the museums delivered the works on their own, without the expected financial support from a central Government, and the show opened on schedule in Manhattan on Friday.
But many of the regional museums participating in the show had received more lucrative offers from other nations for the loan of their holdings and threatened to pull out.
Where Chaos Prevails


Review/Film Festival; Watching A Painting Come Slowly Into Being
As one of the people seen in Victor Erice's "Dream of Light" (none of them are actors) finally wonders, "How can such a small tree bear so much fruit?" The same question might be asked about this quiet, meticulous and supremely simple film, which concentrates exclusively on the process whereby a painter, Antonio Lopez Garcia, works on a still life of the above-mentioned tree.
Mr.
Erice's method is modest, yet his film manages to achieve a mesmerizing intensity.
The purity and breadth of this meticulous study are all the more gratifying in view of its unprepossessing style.
For nearly two and a half hours, Mr.
Lopez Garcia is seen working patiently on his project, observing and painting a small tree that stands in his Madrid backyard.
Mr.
Lopez Garcia is most emphatically not in a hurry.
Neither is Mr.
Erice, whose tranquil pace appears to be set by his subject.
So the film watches serenely as Mr.
Lopez Garcia arrives home with his canvas, stretches it out and nails it to a frame.
He is then seen looking long and hard at the tree itself, which he later dots with a series of unexplained white markings.
A string with a weight attached is tied to the foliage, and a horizontal line is drawn along the backyard wall.


Chain Link Defines the Perimeter of an Urban Oasis


Review/Pop; A Singer Puts His Stamp On Well-Known Songs
When Jimmy Scott takes on a standard, it's as though he'd picked up a bar of steel and twisted it into some beautiful and irregular shape.
At the Bottom Line on Tuesday night, playing to a supportive, sold-out audience, Mr.
Scott, who is 67 years old, sang songs that others have been singing for years, like "Embraceable You," and songs that he's been singing for years, like "When Did You Leave Heaven?" As soon as he laid his hands on them, the songs became his own.
Wearing a tuxedo, black bow tie and heavy black-framed glasses, Mr.
Scott began the set with his arms pulled tight to his sides and his head tilted a little to one side.
His quartet -- piano, guitar, bass and drums -- played a slow, reassuring tempo.
Mr.
Scott opened his mouth and sang, "All of me, why not take all of me," and the voice that came out was incomparable: high and graceful, like a woman's voice, yet with a masculine clarity of intent.
When he came to the line, "Take my arms, I'll never refuse you," adapting the lyrics to his own taste, his hands unclenched and his arms, timidly, unfolded from his sides.
When he came around again to that line at the end of the song, he opened himself completely and threw his arms wide into the air.
He hit his last note so straight he practically split it down the middle.


A Day at the Track With the Governor
Mario M. Cuomo sat high over the finish line at Belmont Park yesterday and said, yes, he knew that people portrayed him as a Governor who resented and maybe even suspected horse racing, and he peered back a half a century for reasons.
"My impressions of racing," he said, "were the same as anybody who was raised in a neighborhood like mine: very poor. My father owned a grocery store in Queens and he gave credit to people, and he resented it when people didn't pay him but they did go to the bookmaker and pay him. The best-dressed guy in the neighborhood was the bookmaker."


Richard Grossman, 82, Ex-Corporate Lawyer
Richard Grossman, a retired corporate lawyer, died on Sunday at Highland Park Hospital in Chicago.
He was 82 years old.
He died of complications from pneumonia, his family said.


Books of The Times; Woodpecker's Brain Survives, but Will Humans'?
The Diversity of Life  By Edward O. Wilson  Illustrated. 424 pages.
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. $29.95.
In many respects, Edward O. Wilson's important new book, "The Diversity of Life," is a celebration of the miracle of evolution and the astonishing inventiveness of natural selection.
You suspect that he's building a case to show how little we know of the environment's complexity and how recklessly we are spending the abundance of nature's storehouse.


Shcherbo Tries to Cash In on the Gold
It took Vitaly Shcherbo some time, but then the world's greatest gymnast understood.
The burglar who cleaned out his apartment back in Minsk, Belarus, probably had done him a favor.
Shcherbo didn't need his worldly possessions, or the $25,000 he had saved from a series of exhibitions.
Everything was to start anew.
He was on his own, financially, athletically.
The six Olympic gold medals from August, still resting safely in his mother's home, could not assure him success in future ventures of any sort.


Cobi Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


State Says Hospital Error Caused Death of Executive
St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center was responsible for the death of a noted radio station executive who was admitted to the Manhattan hospital for minor foot surgery three months ago, a New York State Health Department inquiry has concluded.
The report on the investigation said that in preparing the patient, Rick Sklar, for surgery, medical personnel inserted an anesthesia tube that sent oxygen to the stomach rather than the lungs.
It also concluded that the anesthesiologist failed to notice for 20 minutes that equipment intended to monitor Mr.
Sklar's oxygen intake was not working, and that, despite the failure of that equipment, a "false entry" of the machine's readings was placed in Mr.
Sklar's records.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 29


Review/Dance; All the Way Down to Dread
Whimsy was followed by wonder and wonder gave way to dread when Evelyn Velez and a group called R. Justice Allen and Friends shared a program Monday night as part of the Movement Research series at the Judson Memorial Church at 55 Washington Square South in Greenwich Village.
Ms.
Velez was green from head to toe, for her skin as well as her costume had been painted.
When she scrambled about in a pile of leaves in her "Sol-A," she resembled a forest sprite.
She darted in every direction and, at times, raced as if carried by a gust of wind.
It was hard to guess what she would do next in this solo.
And because she was so unpredictable, it was also impossible to tell if she was portraying a playful elf or a malicious goblin.
Her games may not have been all in fun.


3 Officers Plead Not Guilty In Shooting of Newark Youth
Three Newark police officers pleaded not guilty today to charges involving an early-morning ambush four months ago in which a 17-year-old car-theft suspect was shot and seriously wounded.
The officers, who appeared relaxed and bantered with their lawyers before their 10-minute hearing in Superior Court, were allowed to remain free on bail and were ordered by Judge Joseph A. Falcone to appear Oct. 26 for a pretrial conference.


Anne G. Wilder, 63, Leader of Expansion Of Theater, Is Dead
Anne G. Wilder, who led the expansion of Playwrights Horizons, a nonprofit developmental theater in Manhattan, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart attack, her family said.


Milking Our Memories
It sounded too good to be true.
For years many people have drunk milk only under duress, or when it was flavored with chocolate.
Now, it suddenly appeared, Mom had it all wrong.
A group of doctors headed by the fabled Dr.
Benjamin Spock seemed to be saying the other day that you don't need milk to grow up strong and healthy.
In fact, you'd be better off leaving it to the calves.
Their evidence was seductive.
Milk has lots of fat in it.
Some people can't tolerate milk digestively.
It can lead to iron deficiency in tiny infants.
One worrisome study, not yet replicated, suggests milk may trigger juvenile diabetes in genetically susceptible individuals.


Altai Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Medsonic Inc. reports earnings for Year June 30


The Collor Legacy: Not All Bad
Tuesday's impeachment vote brings a tawdry close to the once-shining presidency of Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil's first democratically elected leader in a generation.
Mr.
Collor still faces a Senate trial, but his removal from office now seems a virtual certainty.
In the drama of the moment, many Brazilians are ready to dismiss the two-and-a-half-year Collor administration as a total waste.
That's not just unfair but unwise.
The success of the new Government, under acting President Itamar Franco, depends on pressing forward with Mr.
Collor's undeniable achievements, as well as repudiating his spectacular personal failures.


Review/Television; The Unwanted Children of Romania
Whatever the sins of television, again and again it has brought the youngest victims of nature's caprices and men's cruelties out of obscurity and into millions of homes and hearts.
In just the last few weeks, painful pictures from Somalia and Bosnia have moved the world to action or at least gestures.
"Lost and Found: The Story of Romania's Forgotten Children," tonight's deeply felt documentary at 10:30 on Channel 13, about Romania's orphans, should awaken compassion for their suffering, too.
The children seen here, dirty, frightened, ill, wasting away in institutions for so-called irrecoverables, are a legacy of the rule of Nicolae Ceausescu, the dictator who was driven from office and executed in 1989.
For almost two decades, the Communist State encouraged its people to have children.
Birth control and abortion were outlawed; families with fewer than five children were penalized.


ITI Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Corrections
An article on Sept. 12 about a bill that would regulate tobacco and cigarette advertisements in New York City misstated the provision for payment for the public health messages required under the bill.
The cost of developing and printing the advertisements would be paid by nonprofit groups that oppose smoking.
The cost of the space, as well as the posting and maintenance of the ads, would be paid by the companies that have contracts with the city to sell advertising in public places like subways and bus shelters.
The tobacco industry has voiced fear that those costs would be passed on to it.


Los Angeles Archbishop Asks for Film Guidelines
In an unusual 40-page pastoral letter, Roger Cardinal Mahony, the Archbishop of Los Angeles, challenged the entertainment industry today to adopt general guidelines for the depiction of violence, sex, family life and the treatment of women.
Implicitly criticizing the movie industry for an avalanche of films that "pander to baser instincts," Cardinal Mahony, who leads the largest archdiocese in the nation, with 3.5 million Catholics, went out of his way to insist that he rejected censorship or a return to the kind of production code, specifically governing how film makers deal with sex and other issues, that dominated the movie industry for decades.


Hubbard Holding reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


I.B.M. MARKETS CICS SOFTWARE FOR HEWLETT COMPUTERS
The Hewlett-Packard Company and the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that I.B.M.'s Customer Information Control System, or CICS, software products would be made available in a version to run on Hewlett-Packard's PC-RISC line of business computers and work stations.
CICS, a provider of on-line transaction processing programs, has been available only on I.B.M. computers.
Products will be shipped in the second half of 1993.
The companies said the agreement supported the growth of open systems, an approach to computing that allows customers to combine hardware and software from many different suppliers rather than relying on a single vendor.


Congressional Roundup; House Passes Bill To Improve Schools
The House passed and sent to the Senate an $800 million measure that is intended to encourage improved education but that was sharply attacked by Republicans as falling short of President Bush's proposals.
Republicans contended that the bill was too friendly to teacher unions and the bureaucrats of the education establishment.
"What you don't get is any kind of systemic reform from the bill you see before you," said Representative Bill of Goodling of Pennsylvania.


BioChem Pharma reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Canada Southern Petroleum   reports earnings for Year to June 30


Iranians Again Banned At Frankfurt Book Fair
Iranian publishers were again excluded from the Frankfurt Book Fair, the world's biggest, when it opened on Tuesday.
They have been banned since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini declared "The Satanic Verses" by Salman Rushdie to be blasphemous to Islam in February 1989 and offered a multi-million-dollar reward for the death of the author.
Fair organizers said Iran would be kept out until it lifted the death threat.


Companies' New Securities Balloon to Record Amount
The rush by corporate America to raise money from the public continued at a breakneck pace in the third quarter, as companies issued a record amount of securities.
For Wall Street, that translated into an unsurpassed payday as investment firms raked in record fees.
Corporations issued $224.7 billion in debt and equity securities in the three-month period ended yesterday, up 50.2 percent from the $149.7 billion in offerings that hit the market in the third quarter of 1991, according to the Securities Data Company.
That amount also solidly broke the record of $212.9 billion in securities that were issued in the second quarter of this year.


Cryomedical Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Harlyn Products Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Exhibit of Ethnic Celebrations
THEY are the steppingstones in every life, the points of reference of every culture.
The ways people celebrate birth, death and the important moments in between are the subject of a modest but moving exhibition at the Balch Institute for Ethnic Studies in Philadelphia, at 18 South Seventh Street, between Market and Chestnut streets.
The show, "Rites of Passage in America: Traditions of the Life Cycle," examines with photographs and artifacts how Americans from 18 different ethnic backgrounds celebrate life's important events.


Sports of The Times; The Lakers Don't Play Angola
IT'S all upbeat now.
Magic Johnson's return to the Los Angeles Lakers is a triumph for him, for the Lakers' stature, for the National Basketball Association's image, for the spirit of others infected with H.I.V., the virus that leads to AIDS, for basketball and sports in general.
But there's a downbeat, too.
"We're all concerned about a limited number of games," said Jerry West, the Lakers' general manager.
"This raises questions for the coaches."


David Pardues Try to Clear Their Name
The David Pardue who was arrested the other day on charges of throwing cinder blocks off the roof of a 45-story Manhattan condominium on East 93d Street is not, repeat
not
, the David Pardue who lives on East 74th Street.
The David Pardue who was
not
arrested wants you to know that.
So after receiving a dozen frighteningly vicious hate calls, he has put this message on his telephone answering machine:


The Son-in-Law Proves His Meddle
A medical license qualifies its bearer to be a doctor and practice medicine.
A bar association certificate means the person whose name is on it is entitled to practice law.
But where does it say that a marriage certificate qualifies someone to run a major league baseball team?
To be sure, a marriage certificate can create a remarkable change in a person's life.
Yesterday you were a high school basketball coach; today you are in charge of the most valuable franchise in sports history.


Bernard R. Kant, 82, Ex-Gimbel Executive
Bernard R. Kant, a former president and chairman of the Gimbel Brothers Philadelphia division, died Sept. 15 at his home in Elkins Park, Pa.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Kant died of congestive pulmonary disease, said his daughter, Carole K. Rosenthal of Jenkintown, Pa.


Mochrie Discover The Element of Fun
No one in golf conveys quite the same need to succeed as Dottie Mochrie.
With headlights for eyes, steel in her jaw and the fast-forward bearing of the dowhill skier she used to be, Mochrie might be a menace to the sport's pedestrians if she were not so often in the middle of the fairway.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
KITCHEN faucets receive hard use and can need repair as often as every few years.
The good news is that, generally, little skill and few tools are needed to make these repairs, and replacement parts for most faucets are inexpensive and available at hardware stores.
Probably the most popular style of kitchen faucet has a single handle that controls both hot and cold water.
Of these there of two common types, a ball faucet and a cartridge faucet.
A ball faucet handle has a dome-shaped base; a cartridge faucet has a cylindrical top that fits over the handle.


Elizabeth Policeman Is Shot During Chase
An Elizabeth police officer was shot early today as he searched for suspects in a shooting incident in Newark.
The officer, Timothy Kirk, 31 years old, was hit from behind as he searched backyards along Mary Street.
The bullet passed through his right shoulder and lodged in his bulletproof vest.
There was no damage to bones or internal organs, said Douglas Harris, a spokesman for Elizabeth General Hospital, where the officer was reported in stable condition.


Nets, Refusing to Match Offer, Give Up Rights to Mills
Rather than lock themselves into a five-year, $9.4 million deal for a player who would very likely never be more than their backup power forward and who insisted that he didn't want to play for them, the New Jersey Nets yesterday refused to match the contract offer the Detroit Pistons made to Terry Mills.
Willis Reed, the Nets' senior vice president, said that relinquishing the rights to Mills was a "basketball decision," but it was one that left him with no suitable reserve for Derrick Coleman, the team's best player.
Coleman missed 17 games last season, mostly as a result of ankle sprains.


Fate of the Rusyns
To the Editor:
In "Ugly Echoes in Slovakia" (editorial, Sept. 13), reference is made to the "600,000 ethnic Hungarians as well as Gypsies and Ukrainians." Most of these "Ukrainians" do not consider themselves Ukrainians but rather Rusyns.


Making a Panel for the AIDS Memorial Quilt
WHEN Beverly Rotter's daughter, Iris De La Cruz, died from complications with AIDS in 1991, Ms.
Rotter and Iris's daughter, Melissa, wanted to commemorate her with a panel in the AIDS memorial quilt.
But Ms.
Rotter, a restaurant manager who lives in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, didn't know how.
Through the People With Aids Coalition in Manhattan, Ms.
Rotter was put in touch last spring with Bob Wilson, one of 10 volunteers with Metro New York Quilters, who have made panels for the quilt since 1988.


More Developmental Ills Seen in Foster Children; Legal Service Disparity
To the Editor:
Missing from your coverage of the problems of foster care in New York City (Sept. 8 to 10) is a story that never gets any attention.
Despite Federal and state laws requiring that government agencies make every possible effort to keep families together, thousands of children who could safely be kept with their parents end up in foster care each year.


A Stage for the House of Atreus Is Set in a 19th-Century Armory
A stone-faced, imposing woman with iron-gray curls and an air of maximum concentration, Ariane Mnouchkine surveyed the vast stage before her in the 14th Regiment Armory in Brooklyn on a recent afternoon.
"Let's go!" she called out in French.
Juliana Carneiro da Cunha, a star of Miss Mnouchkine's Parisian troupe, the Theatre du Soleil, began moving slowly across a stage that looked like a pine-planked bullring.
The lights came up, but not on cue.
"Stop!" said Miss Mnouchkine.
She sighed.
Then slowly, with determination, she pulled off the baggy gray sweater that had enveloped her like a thundercloud and tied it around her waist, in a gesture that said it was time to get serious.


Rasmussen's Prowess Impresses Royals
A one-hitter in September against the American League's worst hitting team might not be worth as much as one against a contender in July.
DENNIS RASMUSSEN will find out when he talks about renewing his contract with the Kansas City Royals exactly how much he impressed the front office with his 2-0 victory Tuesday night over the California Angels in Anaheim.


Niagara Crash Brings Cry for Rules on Helicopters
Like many of the thousands of people who make their livings off Niagara Falls, Nick Ricci, who owns a hotel on a wooded ridge overlooking the falls, now wants the Canadian and American Governments to regulate the sightseeing helicopters that churn through the skies overhead at a rate of nearly one every five minutes.
Watching the thundering green-blue waters of the falls today, Mr.
Ricci noted that the collision of two of the helicopters on Tuesday caused one to crash just 200 yards from his building.
"If the wind had been blowing in toward the hotel instead of out, that copter could have hit us," he said.
"It's pretty unsettling."


CML Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


DEP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Drug Screening Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Waived James Brooks, running back, and Jeff Francis, quarterback.
Activated Kevin Mack, running back, from injured reserve.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Activated Vance Johnson, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Re-signed Frank Robinson, cornerback.
Waived Robert Perryman, fullback, and Ricky Nattiel, wide receiver.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Placed James Campen, center, on injured reserve.
Signed Tom Neville, center-guard.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Corey Widmer, linebacker, to the practice squad.
Released Michael Wright, cornerback, from the practice squad.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Released Jesse Small, linebacker.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Reggie Clark, linebacker, to the practice squad.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Signed Gary Hindley, coach, to a one-year contract.


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Seminoles' Ward Keeps Them Guessing
The quarterback squeaks when he speaks.
That may be one of the few remaining items on Charlie Ward's rapidly shrinking list of weaknesses as he approaches his fifth game as a starter at Florida State.
When the Seminoles take an undefeated record into the Orange Bowl this Saturday, before a sellout crowd cheering for Miami to extend its 47-game home-field winning streak, the X-factor may well prove to be a quiet, gifted quarterback.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH Ashleigh and Grace Anne Howe are 7-year-old identical twins, they've always looked quite different from each other.
Grace Anne was born with several congenital defects.
The bones on the left side of her face didn't form completely.
She was born with a cleft palate and without a left ear.
Despite seven reconstructive operations, she still doesn't look like her sister or her classmates.
"No child has ever been nasty to Grace Anne because she looks different," said Dawn Howe, the girls' mother, who lives in Quantico, Va.
She admits that her daughter is often stared at by children who don't know her.
Adults will sometimes say things that are insensitive and ignorant; a man recently asked if the girls' dance teacher would allow Grace Anne on stage during a class recital.
Ms.
Howe told the man that there was nothing wrong with her daughter's legs.


Who Picks Police Board Is Snag for Dinkins and Vallone
Negotiations between City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and Mayor David N. Dinkins over how to structure an independent board to review police misconduct have come down to a single issue: who will appoint the board members.
Mr.
Vallone and Mr.
Dinkins said yesterday that they have come a long way toward reaching an accord.
On one side, Mr.
Vallone has agreed with the Mayor that the 13-member board should be independent from the Police Department, with civilian investigators and subpoena power.
On the other, the Mayor has said he is willing to mandate that some of the members have law-enforcement expertise.


Classical Music in Review
The Music Project  Weill Recital Hall
The Music Project began its season on Sunday with a program other chamber groups might take as a model.
This loose consortium of young musicians offered the unusual without sacrificing substance to novelty.
Balancing the afternoon were two string-quartets-plus-one: first Martucci's Piano Quintet in C, then Dvorak's G-major Quintet with a double bass as the added instrument.


More Developmental Ills Seen in Foster Children
To the Editor:
For those professionals who have been working with children caught up in the child welfare system, your series of articles on "Shattered Lives: When Foster Care Fails" (front pages, Sept. 8 to 10) comes as no surprise.
Your portrayal of the inadequacies of the overburdened child welfare system and the overwhelmed and poorly trained or prepared staff are clearly accurate.


Indians Are Becoming Little Team That Could
After the Indians defeated the Yankees on Tuesday to strengthen their grasp on fourth place, second baseman Carlos Baerga leaped high to celebrate, acting as if the games still mean something.
To the Indians, they do.
Fourth place is their pennant chase.
While the Yankees dawdle and irritate Manager Buck Showalter, the enthusiastic Indians have stormed into fourth place in American League East and are zooming toward one of the more memorable turnarounds in club history.
After losing, 4-2, to the Yankees tonight, the Indians are still a respectable 75-83 and have 18 more victories than last season.
And since July 19, they are 11 games over .500.


Abrams Fires Back
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT Narrator: Bob Abrams.
His record squeaky clean.
His reputation beyond reproach.
But Al D'Amato.
Scandal after scandal.
Housing grants for his friends.
Contracts for his contributors.
And backroom deals for his brother.
A Senate ethics investigation concluded D'Amato allowed his office to be systematically misused for personal gain.
Now D'Amato is attacking Bob Abrams' integrity?
Come on, Al!
Who do you think you're kidding?
PRODUCER: Struble-Totten of Washington.
ON THE SCREEN: Narration over a color picture of Abrams with newspaper mastheads and headlines.
Black-and-white picture of Mr.
D'Amato against an ominous-looking etching of the United States Capitol.
Photograph of Mr.
D'Amato with quotations from a Senate Ethics Committee report.
Photograph of Mr.
D'Amato with headlines of negative stories about him.
Full-frame photograph of Mr.
D'Amato for the final narration.
ACCURACY: The statements referring to Mr.
Abrams were taken from opinions on the editorial pages of the Buffalo News and the Troy Record.
The quotations themselves are correct.
"Scandal" is, of course, a word subject to interpretation -- it is indeed true that friends of Mr.
D'Amato's, as well as his cousin, have gotten housing grants, and that contributors, including several defense firms, have gotten government contracts after Mr.
D'Amato helped them.
But Mr.
D'Amato routinely says he helps all New Yorkers, whether they support him or not, and he has not been convicted of any crime.
The "personal gain" cited in a Senate Ethics Committee investigation was not Mr.
D'Amato's, but his brother's: the committee said Senator D'Amato had "conducted the business of his office in an improper and inappropriate manner" by allowing the brother, Armand, to use his office and official stationery for lobbying work on behalf of a client who was seeking a defense contract.
The committee did not substantiate other allegations of improper influence on the Senator's part, although it said its investigation was hampered because about half its witnesses refused to testify after pleading Fifth Amendment protections against self-incrimination.
SCORECARD: This ad is the Abrams campaign's response to recent D'Amato commercials that accused him of improper fundraising practices.
The "Come on, Al" line at the end evokes the "Really, Bob!" conclusion of one D'Amato ad that mocks Mr.
Abrams's claims of integrity.
The ad will probably quiet fears of some Abrams supporters that the Democratic candidate was not fighting back and was allowing Mr.
D'Amato to define him to voters.
But it carries risks as well: for one thing, it reinforces the notion that somebody is out there criticizing Mr.
Abrams on ethical grounds.
And as with most negative ads, it gives free air time to the opponent: it is Mr.
D'Amato whose face is on the screen during most of the commercial.


Feodor Chaliapin Jr. Dies at 87; Singer's Son and Longtime Actor
Feodor Chaliapin Jr., who blossomed into an octogenarian movie star after 60 years of mostly bit parts and cameos, died on Sept. 17 in Rome.
He was 87 years old and had been a resident of Rome since shortly after World War II.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


The World of a Drug Bazaar, Where Hope Has Burned Out
The hum of the streets rises to fever pitch as dusk settles on a battered block in Bushwick.
"Most Wanted, Most Wanted," calls a man leaning against a graffiti-filled wall.
"Lamborghini," another whispers to passers-by.
A third paces the sidewalk, chanting, "Jungle Fever, Jungle Fever, Jungle Fever." He stops by a rumpled woman whose grocery bags hang like weights from her wrists, and trades a tiny package -- "Jungle Fever" heroin -- for a crumpled bill.
The deal, one of hundreds made here each day, is done.
Lurid Brand Names
The police call it "the Well" -- this block of Knickerbocker Avenue, between Troutman and Jefferson Streets, that has become the most notorious drug bazaar in Brooklyn and one of the toughest in New York City.


Doctor Says Stockton's Better Than New
The Utah Jazz's orthopedic surgeon, Dr.
LYLE MASON, expects the All-Star point guard JOHN STOCKTON to be "virtually indestructible" once training camp begins Oct. 9.
Stockton, who fractured his leg during the Tournament of the Americas last June, was playing limited minutes by the end of the Olympics.


'Charlie Rose' Program To Be Carried by PBS
The "Charlie Rose" program, which is broadcast at 11 P.M. each weeknight on Channel 13 in New York, is to become a national program on the Public Broadcasting Service on Jan. 4, PBS announced yesterday.


No Headline
"This is the starting point of the capitalist education of the Russian people." -- ANATOLY B. CHUBAIS, the Deputy Prime Minister of Russia.  [ A1:3. ]


Gladys Merrifield, 85, A Prize-Winning Poet
Gladys Merrifield, a poet and editor, died on Friday at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 85 years old.
She died of emphysema, said her daughter, Gail Merrifield Papp.


Abrams Gets A Concession From Ferraro
Two weeks after the Democratic primary for the United States Senate nomination, Geraldine A. Ferraro finally conceded today that she had narrowly lost to Robert Abrams.
But Ms.
Ferraro, described by friends as still enraged over the negative advertising that helped sink her bid, pointedly withheld any endorsement of Mr.
Abrams or pledge that she would campaign for him.
Mr.
Abrams's opponent in the general election, Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, has repeatedly portrayed Mr.
Abrams as having run a "nasty" and "vicious" campaign against Ms.
Ferraro.
And the Senator invoked her name once again today in responding to Mr.
Abrams's first television commercials, which his campaign released today, that said Mr.
D'Amato had been involved in "scandal after scandal."


Breast Cancer Unit For Sloan-Kettering
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center dedicated a new unit yesterday that consolidates services related to the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer.
The $20 million unit, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 64th Street, is believed to be the most comprehensive of its kind and was designed to simplify the gantlet of treatment run by breast cancer patients, said a hospital spokesman, Tom Olson.
It does not offer surgery and radiology, which are provided by Memorial Hospital.


Clues to the Crash of the Job Market
To the Editor:  Almost 30 years ago a diverse group of concerned citizens sent a report to President Johnson titled "The Triple Revolution," predicting a cybernetic revolution in which computers would eliminate jobs and create a "human slag heap of tens of millions of Americans who do not have the skills to compete in a computerized society."


Maxwell Labs reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Essay; Bush's Scandal
The Clinton-Gore campaign has finally discovered that George Bush has been desperately trying to contain a major scandal called "Iraqgate." It's about time.
The dimensions of the scandal were outlined by Senator Al Gore in a scorching speech the other day.
As Mr.
Bush prepared to pervert the purpose of a grain-export program to provide backdoor foreign aid to Saddam Hussein, this is what we now know the President knew:


Fischer Loses Game 12 As Chess Match Resumes
Boris Spassky got the type of attacking position he loves and steamrollered Bobby Fischer yesterday in Game 12 of their exhibition match in Belgrade.
This was only Spassky's third victory against Fischer's five, but the way he accomplished it has got to be a great morale-builder.
Ten victories are needed to take the $3.35 million winner's prize, and Spassky showed he is not out of contention for it.
A great part of Spassky's fame has always rested on his power with a direct attack on the enemy king, and Game 12 showed why.
It was more of an execution than a battle.


CHRONICLE
"My daughter the artist," is how GENE SHALIT of the "Today" show started the invitation he sent out for a party tonight at the New York Palace hotel to celebrate publication of the book "Life Cast: Behind the Mask" by WILLA SHALIT.
For more than 15 years, Ms.
Shalit has captured the essence of such celebrities as Jimmy Carter, Michelle Pfeiffer, Dizzy Gillespie, Isaac Stern, Muhammad Ali, Richard M. Nixon, Edward Teller, Ted Turner and Louise Nevelson by making casts directly of their faces, first in plaster and then bronze.


A Pristine Victorian House Comes Out of the Cobwebs
THE talk of the Park Slope house tour in late spring was the 19-room Romanesque Revival mansion on the slope's parkside "Gold Coast" -- a catalogue of Victorian embellishments assembled by George Tangeman, a baking-powder baron, when he had the house built in 1891.
It was bought last fall by Harriet and Barry Lipsitz for the bargain price of $550,000.
Despite being laden with elaborate stained glass and woodcarving, the house had languished on the market for almost a year and a half before the Lipsitzes saw it.
Neighborhood people called it "the contessa's house," after its previous owner, Helene di Portelli, an Australian opera singer who had married an Italian aristocrat.
"Actually, she was a marchesa," Mrs.
Lipsitz said.
"The house deed was under Marchesa di Portelli."


Brother Casimir Costello; Professor, 82
Brother Casimir Gabriel Costello, a professor emeritus at Manhattan College who wrote a two-volume history of the institution, died on Tuesday at the Christian Brothers residence in Lincroft, N.J.
He was 82 years old and had lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He died of complications from a stroke, said Patrice E. Athanasidy, a Manhattan College spokeswoman.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about trading in the credit markets misstated Wall Street's expectations about the September unemployment report.
The consensus is that while payrolls fell by 125,000, the private sector gained about 30,000 jobs.


Capital Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Raiders Move to Recapture Imagination on the Field
The Los Angeles Raiders, always proud to be a dysfunctional family, are seeing it backfire.
Today, Coach Art Shell said his 0-4 team was switching offensive choreographers, and this is just after he swapped quarterbacks two weeks ago.
"Wish I could suit up, but I know I can't," said Shell, a Hall of Fame tackle.


William Miller, Author Of History Texts, 79
William Miller, an author, historian and educator, died on Sunday at the Wicke Health Center in Shelton, Conn.
He was 79 years old and lived in Redding, Conn.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on the Word and Image page on Tuesday about The New Yorker misstated the number of fiction articles in the first issue edited by Tina Brown.
That issue, dated Oct. 5, has two pieces of fiction, not one.


Officer Charged in Fatal Fistfight Is Cleared
Assault charges were dropped yesterday against a New York City police officer who was involved in a traffic dispute last year in Greenwich Village that left a pedestrian dead.
The officer, Richard Frazier, 32 years old, had been facing a misdemeanor charge of third-degree assault for his role in the fight on East Eighth Street near Fifth Avenue on the evening of May 4, 1991.
He was off-duty at the time.


Utility Plans Debt Gambit
Operating under bankruptcy protection, the El Paso Electric Company wants to reorganize in part by turning a common bankruptcy practice on its head.
Instead of diluting shareholders' stakes by issuing new stock to bondholders, El Paso would prefer a certain group of bondholders take the biggest hit in the company's plan to reduce $2 billion in debt.


Calendar: Garden Tours And Architectural Talks
Architectural Tours and Talks  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
Barry Lewis, an architectural historian, will offer a series of 11 lectures and four walking tours to explore the history of architectural styles in New York City.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  EVERY MAN A CAPITALIST
Starting today, Russia will issue vouchers to everyone that can eventually be used to buy shares in companies now owned by the state.
The goal is to win broad support for a transition to capitalism.
A1  CALL FOR RECOUNT IN ROMANIA
With reformers hoping to unseat the President in elections held last Sunday, the Central Electoral Bureau said nearly 15 percent of the ballots cast had been judged invalid, and called for a recount.
A3  EASING YUGOSLAV SANCTIONS?
After a request from the Yugoslav Prime Minister, the United States is considering whether to ease the international trade embargo and permit relief supplies like heating oil to be shipped to Serbia and Montenegro for the winter.
A3  BRITAIN CHATS UP EUROPE
On a day of intense diplomatic activity intended to mend fences and show Britain's commitment to European unity, Prime Minister Major met with President Mitterrand in Paris and the British Foreign Secretary traveled to Bonn for talks.
A11  END RUN ON IRAQ SCANDAL
A court document shows that as Federal agents investigated a multibillion-dollar fraud involving Iraq and a big Italian bank, the Rome Government tried to circumvent the inquiry through lobbying of senior Bush Administration officials.
A7  THREAT TO CHANGE IN SOUTH AFRICA
News Analysis: The opposition of Chief Buthelezi, the Zulu leader, to agreements between the South African Government and the African National Congress threatens to delay the transition to democracy.
A6
In Angola, questions on the fairness of this week's elections.  A6
Some relief operations are suspended in the Sudan after killings.
A8  HOW HAITIANS KEEP GOING
A year after the overthrow of a democratically elected President, Haiti has managed to survive an international trade embargo.
The reason, economists say, is the millions of dollars pouring in from Haitian relatives in the U.S.
A13  The Brazilian Vice President prepares to take over for Collor.
A5  National A16-23, D23-24  NEGOTIATIONS ON DEBATES
The two Presidential campaigns opened direct negotiations on debates, as Gov.
Bill Clinton warily responded to President Bush's new eagerness to face off on national television.
A1
TV networks see scheduling dilemmas in Mr. Bush's debate plan.  A18
Hillary Clinton showed a new jocularity in a speech in New York.
A18  NEW LINE OF ATTACK ON CLINTON
Seeking to maintain the offense, President Bush used Gov.
Bill Clinton's record on children's issues as the springboard for a new attack on his opponent's credibility.
A18  INVESTIGATIONS OF OWN WORKERS
Ross Perot hired a California private investigator to conduct investigations on some of the volunteers in his campaign.
A1
Mr. Perot still faces the questions he left hanging when he withrew.  A19
What are Perot supporters saying?
He should run, of course.
A20  BATTLE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
Discontent among voters is forcing a scion of New England Republicanism into a fight he didn't expect.
Gov.
Judd Gregg of New Hampshire is now in a tight Senate race.
A20  WHAT MAKES A HUMAN HUMAN?
Scientists have made the first comprehensive maps of two human chromosomes, offering evidence that the widely heralded effort to analyze the human genetic blueprint is living up to its promise.
A1  NEW FINDINGS ON HEART VALVE
Researchers working for the maker of a defective heart valve implanted in 50,000 patients say they believe they can determine which valves may fail within 6 to 18 months.
D23  RULING TODAY ON ABORTION LIMIT
A Federal district judge says he will rule this morning on whether regulations forbidding federally financed family planning clinics to discuss abortion go into effect today.
A16  LITTLE PROGRESS ON SCHOOL GOALS
Only modest progress has been made toward the six national education goals that President Bush and governors agreed to in 1989, a new report says.
A22  CRAWLING TOWARD ADJOURNMENT
Washington Talk: Some legislative bodies rush toward adjournment.
Not the U.S.
Congress.
D24  GOVERNMENT FINANCING EXTENDED
Congress moved to extend Government programs until Oct. 5 to give it time to complete work on spending bills.
D24  The House sustained the President's veto of the family-leave bill.
D24  An officer's slaying has shattered a Minneapolis police-gang truce.
A16  Metro Digest B1  DOCTORS FOR ALL POOR
In a move aimed at lowering costs and improving medical care, the Dinkins administration is taking its first steps toward providing poor residents with their own doctors.
In the first step, welfare recipients in Brooklyn will choose their doctors from a list provided by the city.
A1  A BLOCK FULL OF DRUGS
The police call it "the Well" -- this block of Knickerbocker Avenue that has become the most notorious drug bazaar in Brooklyn.
To spend two weeks in the Well is to see how the drug trade can invade and occupy the life of a neighborhood.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-10  A Victorian house comes out of the cobwebs.
C1  At home with Ted and Vicki Kennedy.
C1  Got something to hide?
Don't even try!
C1  Parent &amp; Child C10  Arts/Entertainment C11-20  Setting the stage for "Les Atrides." C13  Troubles in Russian art world.
C13  Fischer loses Game 12 as chess match resumes.
C16  Film: "The Oak." C13  Music: Jimmy Scott appropriates standards.
C13  Sports B9-15  Obituaries D25  Feodor Chaliapin Jr., an actor.
Anne G. Wilder, a theater leader.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  The candidate less disliked.
Brazil under Collor: not all bad.
Milking our memories.
The Navy at its brassiest.
Letters  William Safire: Bush's scandal.
Leslie H. Gelb: TLC for Mexico.
Harold Baer Jr.: Why I quit the New York bench.
Stefan Kanfer: Can this guy be serious?


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  'WELL' OF DRUGS, STREET OF FEAR
The police call it "the Well" -- the block of Knickerbocker Avenue, between Troutman and Jefferson Streets in Bushwick, that has become the most notorious drug bazaar in Brooklyn and one of the toughest in New York City.
To spend two weeks in the Well -- to talk with its residents, addicts, dealers, police officers and social-service workers -- is to see how the drug trade can invade and occupy the entire life of a neighborhood.
A1.
DOCTORS FOR THE POOR
In a move aimed at lowering costs and improving medical care, the Dinkins administration is taking its first steps toward providing poor residents with their own doctors.
Beginning today, in a sweeping overhaul of health care provided to the poor, welfare recipients in southwest Brooklyn will be asked to choose their doctors from a list provided by the city.
The goal is to give Medicaid recipients an alternative to emergency room care, which for many of the city's poor has been the mainstay of their medical care.
A1.


Denver Signs Stith, One of Its No. 1 Picks
BRYANT STITH, one of the Denver Nuggets' two No. 1 picks and the 13th choice over all in the 1992 N.B.A. draft, has signed a contract.
Stith is the fourth-highest-picked player from the 1992 draft to sign.
The others were SHAQUILLE O'NEAL, selected first over all by Orlando; ADAM KEEFE, chosen 10th over all by Atlanta, and ROBERT HORRY, picked 11th over all by Houston.
The Nuggets also selected JIMMY JACKSON of Ohio State in the first round of the draft. (AP)


Schoenfeld to Dissect N.H.L. on ESPN
ESPN, which signed a contract to broadcast National Hockey League games this season only to have SportsChannel America contest it in court, yesterday announced the hiring of JIM SCHOENFELD, the former coach of the New Jersey Devils, as a game analyst.
He will be paired with GARY THORNE, a play-by-play announcer.


A Safe for Every Treasure
"OUR objective," said Richard Krasilovsky, "is to take the competitive edge away from the thief." That's an old line, he acknowledged.
But then Mr.
Krasilovsky is president of teh Empire Safe Company, which sells and destributes safes.
Once seen mainly in businesses and banks, safes are becoming popular for houses and apartments, in part because of the easy availability of inexpensive, fire-resistant safes at locksmiths, hardware stores and discount outlets.
A dizzying array of safes, large and small, heavy and relatively light, are on the market, for private and commercial purposes.
And the widest variety is offered by companies like Empire that specialize in safes and vaults.


Acoustics Isn't the Problem in New York Subways' P.A. System
To the Editor:
Regarding your news article announcing $75 million to be spent upgrading the subway public-address system (Sept. 13) by, among other things, hiring an acoustics consulting firm: Have you already forgotten what "acoustical consultants" did to Lincoln Center?
More important, how was it decided to misspend this huge amount of money on acoustics and rewiring?


Torborg May Shift Johnson to 3d in '93
The night's lineup card was on Jeff Torborg's desk, its makeup and its assignment of keeping the Mets out of last place in the National League East ignored for the moment.
The manager was asked to conceive a lineup for 1993, one that might contend for first place in the National League East.
Eddie Murray at first base, Jeff Kent at second, Howard Johnson at third, Dick Schofield at shortstop, Vince Coleman in left field, Ryan Thompson in center, Bobby Bonilla in right, and Todd Hundley behind the plate.
The alignment was offered for Torborg's evaluation.


When the Going Gets Good, Jets Go Bad
Last season, the Jets had an annoying habit of leading in the first half of a game, then collapsing in the second half, losing when it appeared they could have won.
Most of the time the overriding factor was turnovers that opponents converted into scores.
Jets coaches attributed the syndrome to a young team still learning in the second year of a system.
They were certain those problems would be corrected by the time this season rolled around.


Dynamic Classics Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Next Foe for the Giants Is Hardly Fearsome
The Giants-Raiders matchup Sunday in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum seems one-sided.
The Giants are coming off an impressive 27-14 victory over the Chicago Bears and then a bye week that has helped many of their injuries heal.
The Raiders are coming off a disastrous 27-7 loss Monday night to the Kansas City Chiefs.
This season, the once-mighty Raiders are 0-4.
Listen to Art Shell, their head coach and once their Hall of Fame offensive tackle, a Raider for 25 years.
Listen to Howie Long, their defensive end for 12 years.


Westchester Medical Center Faces Loss of Federal Funds
The Westchester County Medical Center has moved a step closer to losing $107 million in Federal money unless it agrees to offer an unrestricted job to a pharmacist infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
The possibility that the hospital could lose the Federal funds became likelier this week when it lost the last in a series of administrative challenges and the Federal Government said on Tuesday that all Medicaid and Medicare payments would be stopped after 30 days.
That left open the possibility that an "agreement in principle" to satisfy the Federal Government although none has been forthcoming.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Graf Advances Easily  Steffi Graf and Conchita Martinez advanced to the quarterfinals of the Grand Prix women's tournament yesterday in Leipzig, Germany, while Zina Garrison moved into the second round.
Graf, who is seeded No. 1 and has won both previous editions of the tournament, needed 58 minutes to eliminate Larissa Savchenko-Neiland of Latvia, 6-3, 6-3.
"She is tough to play, but she began making mistakes when I became more patient," Graf said.
Martinez, from Spain and seeded No. 2, outlasted Alexia Dechaume of France, 6-4, 3-6, 6-2.
Garrison, seeded sixth, came back to beat Jo Durie of Britain, 5-7, 6-1, 6-1.
Seventh-seeded Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria also advanced, defeating Natalya Medvedeva of Russia, 6-3, 6-7, 7-5.
Jennifer Santrock beat a fellow American, Linda Harvey-Wild, 6-2, 6-3. (AP)


Fountain Powerboat Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Home Video
Something Extra
For the film that was to become "King Kong," the director Merian C. Cooper first wanted to have West African gorillas wrestle Komodo dragons.
That being impractical, Cooper settled for animation and an 18-inch model, heavily shellacked to help hold it together.
That information and much else about the 60-year-old classic is in the documentary "It Was Beauty Killed the Beast." The 24-minute film, which comes with the $59.98 anniversary edition of "King Kong," just released by Turner, is an example of a growing number of behind-the-scenes documentaries being made to accompany reissues of major films.


New System: How It Works For Medicaid
Starting today, people who live in southwest Brooklyn and reapply for Medicaid coverage will be required to sign up with one of the following managed-care organizations: Aetna Health Plans of New York; Cigna Healthplan of New York; Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield Healthnet; Lutheran Medical Center's Health Care Plus, Oxford Health Plans and U.S.
Healthcare.
Elsewhere in the city, Medicaid recipients can enroll where plans are available, but enrollment is not mandatory and will not be until after the trial period in Brooklyn.


Cutting a Building Down to Size, Very Carefully
After watching their cityscape rise higher and higher over the centuries, New Yorkers are about to witness something remarkable: a shrinking skyscraper.
High above the Upper East Side, a cocoon of metal mesh and netting is soon to envelop the top of an empty 31-story apartment tower at 108 East 96th Street.
Within the cocoon, a robotic demolition device will begin pounding away at concrete slabs and columns.
By the time the cocoon has disappeared, the top 12 floors -- 12 too many for New York's zoning rules -- will be gone.


BE Aerospace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


2d Officer Recounts Details Of Arrest in Crown Heights
As he leaned against a car, his shirt bloodied, Yankel Rosenbaum stared transfixed at a black teen-ager and then pulled himself up and asked the youth why he had stabbed him, a police detective testified yesterday in Brooklyn Supreme Court.
The detective, Steven Litwin, was the second officer to testify that Mr.
Rosenbaum, a visiting rabbinical scholar who was fatally stabbed in racial disturbances in Crown Heights last year, identified the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., as his attacker.
The testimony yesterday was critical to the prosecution's case because it reaffirmed the first officer's statements and gave greater detail.


Ostriches Don't Fly In a Town Of Farms
THIS used to be a realm of rolling cornfields and sunny meadows, where the livestock was no more exotic than the dairy cow and people lived and worked and got along together.
Now, however, the ostrich has arrived in this picturesque Litchfield County town, and it has raised (along with its skinny, constantly swiveling neck) a host of questions about everything from local zoning to the social compact here.


So, What Does Nagle Need? Just a Little Room to Grow
Coach Bruce Coslet knew that there would be some growing pains when he chose to start Browning Nagle, a second-year quarterback who attempted two passes as a rookie.
Coslet said today that some of the Jets' troubles in an 0-4 start are tied to Nagle's inexperience.
"A lot, quite frankly, and that's no alibi," Coslet said.
"It's a whole combination of things. He's the guy making the decisions back there for 65 snaps a game and it's different."
But Coslet doesn't think that the team has made a mistake. 'A Step Forward'
"I think we've taken a step forward, starting Browning Nagle," he said.
"We're talking about quarterbacks, right?"


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A report in the A la Carte column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about a Lobster and Chardonnay Fest and wine auction to benefit St.
Charles Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I., misstated the date.
The event, at Pindar Vineyards on Route 25 in Peconic, L.I., will be held at 2:30 P.M. on Saturday, not Sunday.


Review/Film Festival; A Spiritual Journey in Romania, After the Fall
"The Oak," being shown at the New York Film Festival today at 9:30 P.M. and on Saturday at 6:15 P.M., is a good festival choice.
It represents Romania, a country whose films don't often turn up here.
The world it evokes is completely alien to contemporary American experience.
Though sometimes baffling, it is never boring.
To feel your way through it is like the exploration of a house of horrors in an amusement park in space.
You can't be sure which way is up.
"The Oak" is the work of Lucian Pintilie, a Romanian film maker who has spent most of the last 20 years in exile, earning a formidable reputation as a director of innovative theatrical productions in France, Britain and the United States.
This film, a French-Romanian co-production, is Mr.
Pintilie's reaction to the 1989 collapse of the Communist regime in his country and his expectations for the future.
It begins as a nightmare and ends with a vague expectation of the break of day.


Inotek Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about a deal involving Phibro Energy and Mobil Oil misidentified Phibro's software subsidiary.
It is MC2 Technologies Inc.


Got Something to Hide? Don't Even Try!
SAY it isn't so.
This picture of corporate elegance sitting in a sleek mid-Manhattan office can't be a gumshoe, a shamus, a private eye.
Where are you, Sam Spade?
Philip Marlowe?
Mike Hammer?
What's happened to standards -- the gum-snapping stacked blond receptionist, the seen-better-days trench coat, the bottle hidden in the desk drawer, the unpasteurized English, the attitude?
O.K.
It isn't so.
Joseph T. Mullen fixes a stern eye across the glass-topped desk.
A life-size cutout of Humphrey Bogart looms behind him.
Gum shoe?
Shamus?
He looks pained.
"Private investigator," he says firmly.
A little later he bends, but private eye is as far as he'll go.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Bartok  Weill Recital Hall
Whatever else might be said about the Columbus quincentennial celebration, it is paying at least one cultural dividend: musical ensembles from Spain, Italy and Latin America have persuaded their governments to underwrite expeditions to the United States.
So far this tide has brought in several early-music groups, and there are orchestras and opera companies in the offing.
On Tuesday night, the Ensemble Bartok, a contemporary-music group from Chile, presented recent works from its homeland and from Brazil, Mexico and the United States in a lively program.


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Foreign Affairs; A Little TLC for Mexico
Topic A here is the just-completed freer trade pact among Mexico, Canada and the U.S.
Almost daily, newspapers splash the story on their front pages using the initials "TLC." This stands for "el Tratado de Libre Comercio." It does not stand for "Tender Loving Care," though Mexico needs a little of that from a U.S. that either ignores the treaty entirely or turns it into a campaign football.
Mexicans, it seems, follow every whiff of news about the issue with the attention Americans usually reserve for serial killers.
"Perhaps it is because we take you more seriously than you take yourselves," said a senior government official.


The Navy at Its Brassiest
Early this year a man described female Navy pilots as comparable to "go-go dancers, topless dancers or hookers." On hearing the smoking language with which one woman pilot described being sexually assaulted at last September's Tailhook convention in Las Vegas, he commented, "Any woman that would use the F word on a regular basis would welcome this type of activity."
Who is this guy, anyway?
Some layabout pontificating at his neighborhood bar?
Not at all.
He is Rear Adm.
Duvall M. Williams Jr., one of the senior Navy officials charged with finding out what happened at Tailhook -- a reunion of retired and active-duty aviators during which female guests, among them 14 officers, were forced to drink from a simulated rhinoceros penis and run a gantlet of drunken gropers.


Chauncey Scott Northern; Tenor, 90
Chauncey Scott Northern, a tenor and voice teacher, died on Sept. 22 at the Englewood Hospital and Medical Center in Englewood, N.J.
He was 90 years old and lived in Englewood.
He died of a stroke, his family said.
Mr.
Northern was one of the first black opera singers to appear on the Italian stage, making his debut in the 1920's at the Teatro Politeana in Naples.
He remained in Europe until 1937, when he returned to the United States and established the Northern Vocal Arts School at Carnegie Hall, where he taught until his death.
He also appeared in solo concerts around the country.


Computervision Stock Plummets on Forecast
Just six weeks after making its initial public stock offering, the Computervision Corporation watched Wall Street hammer that stock yesterday, after the company announced that results for its third fiscal quarter would be "substantially below" expectations.
Computervision's shares lost more than 30 percent of their value yesterday, falling $3 each to close at $6.25 in New York Stock Exchange trading.


CRITICS QUESTION BARBIE'S SELF-ESTEEM (OR LACK THEREOF)
The American Association of University Women, a group with 135,000 members, is demanding that Mattel Inc. to recall and reprogram a talking Barbie doll that titters, "Math class is tough." Sharon Schuster, president of the group, said: "We are pleased that Barbie has finally been given a voice. But it's a shame that Mattel didn't give a more confident one." Ms.
Schuster said the phrase perpetuates a sexist stereotype damaging to the self-esteem of young girls.
Mattel points out that the doll also recites such lines as "We should start a business." The company says it will not reprogram Barbie.


A Two-Fisted Governor With a 'Foot in Mouth' Style
Barely a month into his first year in office, Gov.
Kirk Fordice visited the annual meeting of the state Parent-Teacher Association and ended up in a shouting match over education financing.
Within weeks the group, joined by the state teachers' association, was chanting "recall" outside the Governor's mansion.
In the half-year since then Mr.
Fordice, Mississippi's first Republican governor in 115 years, has frequently come close to choking on what both he and his critics call a brusque, "foot in the mouth" style.
He suffered some embarrassing missteps with appointees and saw two of his vetoes overridden by the Democratic-controlled Legislature, a record for a first-year Mississippi governor.


The Art Market
5 for the Getty
The J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., has gone shopping again, but this time not for one of the multi-million-dollar show-stoppers it has gained a reputation for buying.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the Presidential candidates' stands on job creation misstated their plans for military spending.
President Bush proposes spending a total of $1.42 trillion on the military during the next five years.
Gov.
Bill Clinton favors spending about $60 billion less than Mr.
Bush has proposed over that period.


Lead Fears Allayed, A School Reopens
The slogan on the black T-shirts worn by teachers and parents yesterday captured the renewed optimism at Public School 3 in Greenwich Village: "100% Lead Free. We survived P.S. 3 -- 1992."
Nearly a month after the school was closed for fear of lead poisoning, parents, teachers and students happily returned.
"It's good to be home," one parent said.


Review/Dance; High-Spirited Rhythms From Brazil, in 'Oba Oba'
"We say oba oba when we're happy," singers proclaimed in resounding tones at the Marquis Theater.
By so doing, they implied that at least some people in Brazil are happy all the time.
"Oba Oba '93" is the latest in a series of extravagant Brazilian revues that Franco Fontana has been producing since 1984.
It's a high-spirited spectacle, and the choreography by Roberto Abrahao involves virtually nonstop parading and kicking.


ISRAEL IS SEEKING RABIN-ASSAD TALKS
Israel's leaders have made clear in a series of statements this week that they want to arrange a meeting between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, arguing that without it there will be no peace between the two countries.
Mr.
Rabin himself made the point today in a speech to members of his Labor Party, although he added that there was little chance he and Mr.
Assad would be shaking hands soon.


Ruling Party Takes Lead in Angola
Jose Eduardo dos Santos and his party, a once avowedly Marxist group that has controlled Angola since independence in 1975, took an early lead today in this country's first openly contested presidential and parliamentary elections.
Preliminary results this evening gave Mr. dos Santos about 60 percent of the vote in the presidential contest and a wide lead over his chief rival, Jonas Savimbi, the former guerrilla leader.


Review/Art; Abstractly to Zealously, a Glossary of Ways to Use Space
"The Spatial Drive" is another of the high-concept, low-impact group shows that have become a house style at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in the last few years.
It brings together a dozen or so youngish international artists, most of whom have created pieces especially for the exhibition.
Like its recent predecessors, the show projects a certain dizzy, stylish charm and includes some engaging work, but is thematically so vague that it seems to evaporate on the spot.
The problem is well illustrated by the show's catalogue.
In place of interpretive or historical essays, this dense little book offers a 350-page compendium of hundreds of space-related quotations, many drawn from sources with an up-to-the-minute academic pedigree, arranged alphabetically by subject.
Beginning with "abstract space" and ending, after an extremely episodic journey, with "world market," the catalogue resembles collated notes for an uncompleted research project.
The material looks serious enough, but the kind of synthetic thinking that produces fresh ideas -- including one that might serve as a focus for this show -- doesn't occur.


If I. F. Stone Heard Presidential Posturing
To the Editor:
Any unprejudiced reader of I. F. Stone's books and articles would know that if the K.G.B. had him on the payroll to peddle the Soviet line, the K.G.B. was taken to the cleaners and should sue his estate for failure to perform contracted services.


Japan's New Scandal: The More Things Change . . .
For weeks now, Japan has been consumed with yet another scandal, one that sounds eerily like the last three: powerful politicians are caught taking millions of dollars from businessmen desperate to manipulate the country's political system, the public is outraged and the Government offers vague promises to clean up a rampantly corrupt system.
But in critical ways, this scandal has been dramatically different.
Rather than resign and sink out of view for a decent interval, the key players have all but brushed the latest scandal off.
This morning, only days after admitting to charges that he received $4 million in illegal contributions, Japan's most powerful politician, Shin Kanemaru, emerged from his house for the first time in a month, declared that the issue was settled, and headed off to work.


Frederick Combs, An Actor, Director And Playwright, 57
Frederick Combs, an actor, playwright, director and teacher, died on Sept. 19 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 57 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a friend, Jane Richmond.


Review/Film; A Romantic Comedy Set in Paris
The chief pleasures to be found in "A Fine Romance," a strained romantic comedy starring Julie Andrews and Marcello Mastroianni, come from watching two indomitable troupers go through familiar paces with an obvious relish.
Set in Paris, which has rarely looked more appetizing, the film portrays the highly improbable romance between two people who meet after their spouses have fallen in love and run off together.
Pamela Picquet, the prim English do-gooder abruptly abandoned by her doctor husband, is just the kind of modern-day Mary Poppins role that has always been a cinch for Miss Andrews.
Cesareo Gramaldi, whose wife has run off with Pamela's husband, is also a quintessential Mastroianni role.
Continually tipsy and slobberingly sentimental, the character is also a charmer who indulges his emotions and appetites as enthusiastically as Pamela represses hers.


For Fischer and Spassky, A Quiet Draw in Game 13
Boris Spassky improved a system of defense that had cost him an earlier defeat and effortlessly made a draw yesterday with Bobby Fischer in Game 13 of their exhibition match in Belgrade.
The score stays the same: Fischer 5, Spassky 3.
The draw has no effect on the scoring; to gain the winner's prize of $3.35 million it is necessary to amass 10 victories.
Still, it is psychologically important to justify one's choice of defense in a match like this.
The opponent knows that White can't afford to squander the initiative of the first move in game after game.
Thus, the burden of finding a better strategy in this line now shifts to Fischer.


F.S.U.-Miami: Symbol and Streak Clash
One by one, the Miami Hurricanes walked out on a soggy practice field today to study the imitation Seminole spear that could change the tenor of what had been a respectful rivalry with Florida State.
A flaming spear, thrown into the ground whenever the Seminoles play at home in Tallahassee, has come to symbolize the intensity of a series that holds an annual impact on the national rankings.
But the seven-foot stick that the Hurricanes spotted today, the width of a broom handle, was painted red and plunged into the 35-yard line of the offensive unit's field.
"Hey U.M.," it read.
"The Streak Ends Here. Andrew Rocked You. We Will Crush You!


Merit Selection of Judges Translates to Politics as Usual; Keep It Supreme
To the Editor:
I take issue with suggestions that New York's major trial court be renamed.
The colonial New York Assembly called it Supreme in 1691 when it set up the judicial structure we still have: lower courts for the smaller trials and the Supreme Court for the larger proceedings.


Executive Changes
ASHLAND OIL INC., Ashland, Ky., appointed Philip W. Block administrative vice president, human resources, a new position.
Ashland Oil is a diversified energy company engaged in petroleum refining, marketing and transportation; retail gasoline marketing; motor oil marketing; chemicals; coal; highway construction, and oil and gas exploration.
BUDGET RENT A CAR CORP., Lisle, Ill. named L. Eugene Williams senior vice president of human resources.


U.S. Missile Hits Turks
At least one and possibly two missiles fired accidentally from the aircraft carrier Saratoga hit a Turkish ship during NATO exercises yesterday in the eastern Mediterranean.
American Navy officials said at least 5 Turks aboard the destroyer Muavenet were killed and 15 injured.
Article, page A8.


Benetton Skips Next Issue Of New Yorker in Ad Dispute
LESS than a week after The New Yorker published its first issue under its new editor, Tina Brown, a dispute has developed between her and one of the magazine's advertisers.
As the pre-Brown New Yorker might have put it: A friend writes, What took so long?


On My Mind; The Great Grovel
The banker at the New York dinner party had made a huge loan to a speculator who used the money to take over a fine American business, swiftly spinning the company into bankruptcy.
I asked the banker how he could have made a loan that so quickly cost many workers their jobs.
He said if he had passed it up some other bank would have made the loan, and the loan profit.
I asked him if that was the way he wanted to go on living his one life; he said no.


M. C. Robinson, 88, Mother and Subject Of Son's Biography
Maggie Comer Robinson, whose efforts to overcome her own impoverished background and inspire her children to pursue higher education were recounted in a biography and in a television documentary, died Monday at St.
Catherine's Hospital in East Chicago, Ind.
She was 88 years old.
Mrs.
Robinson died of septicemia, a blood infection, said a son, Dr.
James P. Comer of North Haven, Conn.


When Perot Said He Wouldn't Run
When Ross Perot withdrew from the Presidential campaign on July 16, he gave a news conference in Dallas to explain his decision.
Here are excerpts from his opening statement then and from his response to a reporter's question.
Perot -- We have said among ourselves, and publicly, that we must win in November.
We must win a majority of electoral votes.
As you know, if we cannot win in November the election will be decided in the House of Representatives, and since the House of Representatives is made up primarily of Democrats and Republicans, our chances of winning would be pretty slim.


Congressional Roundup; Senate Sustains China-Trade Veto
The Senate today sustained President Bush's veto of legislation intended to curb favorable trading status for China in 1993.
While 59 Senators voted to override the veto, 40 voted to sustain.
That was eight votes short of the two-thirds majority.
Fifty-one Democrats and eight Republicans voted to override.
Five Democrats and 35 Republicans voted to sustain Mr.
Bush.


10 Innings Later, Brewers Are Still Alive
With three days left to the season, the Milwaukee Brewers are still mathematical contenders in the American League East.
But their days may be numbered anyway.
The Brewers scored five runs in the 10th inning tonight to beat the Seattle Mariners, 7-2, at the Kingdome and moved to within two games of the Toronto Blue Jays in the A.L.
East with three to play.


Needless Agony, for $100,000
In 1986, after a blood vessel burst in her brain, a comatose Jean Elbaum was transferred from the hospital to a Long Island nursing home.
For the next three years her husband, Murray Elbaum, begged the nursing home, Grace Plaza, to remove the stomach tube by which she was being fed.
His wife, he said, had told him several times in the past that she did not want to be kept alive by artificial means.
After the nursing home refused, Mr.
Elbaum said he would not pay the bill.
When Grace Plaza sued for the $100,000 payment, Mr.
Elbaum, in turn, asked a state court to order the home to remove the tube.
The lower court refused; a state appellate court reversed the decision; and Mrs.
Elbaum was moved to a hospice where the tube was removed and she died.
Subsequently, the lower court ruled that Mr.
Elbaum was not responsible for Grace Plaza's bill.


3 Families Share a Grief Not Made for Television
EVERYONE meets the issue sometime, usually in a private moment that long haunts the memory.
Some people go numb.
Some sob.
Others sit silently, nodding while their stomachs grow very cold.
Sally Nunn is a registered nurse.
It happened for her a few years ago in a large hospital ward.
She'd just been part of a "Code Blue," a simultaneously inspiring and terrifying time when a patient stops breathing, alarms sound and a resuscitation squad descends on the troubled bed.
In medically choreographed chaos, they stick tubes and wires in the body.
They yell orders.
Someone puts the paddles on the naked chest.
They shout, "Clear!" Everyone steps back.
Bam!
The body convulses.
All eyes watch the heart monitor.


Art in Review
David Nash Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 10
The English sculptor David Nash is adept at taking advantage of the natural properties of wood: that it can be shaped and colored by burning; that it splits and cracks as it dries, and of course that it can be carved, cut and sliced into shapes that in this artist's case are eccentrically geometric.
As a sculptor of wood, Mr.
Nash has never seemed very original, but this show, his fourth in New York City, concentrates on his efforts as a sculptor of living trees who grafts, shapes and disciplines his materials into slightly unnatural configurations.
It has a mildly sadistic frisson and places Mr.
Nash on the heretofore unrecognized cutting edge where earth art meets inspired English gardening.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Avco Financial Services Inc., Irvine, Calif., a subsidiary of Textron Inc., is offering $200 million of 5 7/8 percent senior notes due 1997 at a price of 99.722 to yield 5.94 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.
*
James River Corp.
Richmond,is offering $200 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due 1999 at a price to yield 6.80 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Sports of The Times; Football The Way It Oughta Be
A GREAT university is supposed to produce well-rounded citizens, and Columbia is certainly doing its bit.
There was something very appealing about Des Werthman rumbling in for two touchdowns as a running back against Harvard two weeks ago, and then scoring a touchdown on an interception in a victory over Fordham last week.
The school that won the Rose Bowl merely 60 seasons ago is helping restore the golden days, when players had to block as well as tackle.
Columbia has four players primed to contribute on both offense and defense tomorrow against Colgate at the lovely northern tip of Manhattan.


Money Fund Assets Down
The assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds decreased $4.28 billion, to $379.73 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The assets of the 377 taxable retail money market funds were down $3.49 billion, to $303.88 billion, while the assets of the 232 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $793.1 million, to $75.85 billion.


Jury Acquits Man of One Count In the Harassment of Playwright
, the man whose confidence scheme gained him access to the homes of several prominent New Yorkers and inspired John Guare's award-winning play "Six Degrees of Separation," was acquitted yesterday on one count of harassing the playwright in an effort to obtain money from him.
A jury deadlocked on a second count of harassment.
Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office, said Mr.
Hampton would be retried on the second count.


Television Ads Are Directed At Urban Youths and Drugs
The television camera zooms in on a boy's hand holding out a marijuana cigarette, then shifts to the strained face of another youngster struggling to resist the offer.
"No," he says, "I better not."
The first boy coaxes.
The second boy thinks again, but finally turns away and the scene ends with an adult voice intoning: "A friend who offers you drugs is not your friend."


Catholic Archdiocese Weighs Closing Parishes
The Archdiocese of New York announced yesterday that it was studying the possibility of closing a number of its 412 parishes because of shifts in Roman Catholic population, the declining number of priests and economic difficulties.
At the same time, the archdiocese said it might open new parishes in fast-growing areas such as Orange and Dutchess Counties.


The Uses of Ross Perot
He's through with the teasing but not the trifling.
At the "request" of what's left of his once-impressive volunteer army, Ross Perot has resumed his Presidential race.
His chances of winning are much less than when he quit in July.
His only dim practical hope is to confuse and destabilize the contest.
But there is one important way in which Mr.
Perot's quixotic candidacy can serve constructive purposes.
His economic program, published after his withdrawal, contains many bold and sensible ideas.
If he's now willing to carry these ideas to the public and defend them in detail, he will sharpen the debate and do much to educate the country.
But that will require a candor and courage he has so far failed to display.


Review/Film; New Facets Highlighted in a Classic
Lennie is a gentle giant of a man with the mental capacities of an 8-year-old.
He loves to fondle soft things, like mice, puppies and rabbits, even a small piece of velvet.
His friend George has brains enough for two.
Together they ride the freights through Depression America, working as hired hands and dreaming of the day when they can buy their own spread.
The trouble is that whenever they settle into a good place, where they might save some money, Lennie gets into trouble and they have to move on.
Sometimes just ahead of a posse.
"Of Mice and Men," John Steinbeck's haunting 1937 novella about these two now-legendary bindle stiffs, has withstood time's ravages with remarkable ease.
The prose is too rock-hard to age and so clean and spare that it remains outside fashion.


A.&amp; P.'s Times Sq. Cup
By hooking a Con Edison steam line to a billboard, the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company plans to erect a billboard in Times Square, depicting a 13-foot steaming cup of coffee.
The billboard, to be erected above the southeast corner of 46th and Broadway, will advertise A.&amp; P.'s private label brand Eight O' Clock Bean Coffee.
A.&amp; P. had a steaming billboard in Times Square in 1978.
From 1941 to 1966, a Camel cigarette billboard puffed a steady stream of smoke rings over Times Square.


Dinkins and Clergy Discuss Police Issues
To ease tensions with the police after an unruly demonstration two weeks ago, Mayor David N. Dinkins met with 20 religious leaders yesterday to discuss how to improve morale and relations.


500 Muslims Driven by Serbs Through a Gantlet of Terror
Over the last two days, hundreds of Muslims have been pouring into Sarajevo's city center from their homes in a Serb-held neighborhood, offering compelling evidence that at least some of the Serbs fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina are reneging on a promise to end the widely condemned practice of "ethnic cleansing."
From noon on Wednesday until dusk today, at least 500 residents of Grbavica, a leafy suburb that clings to the steep hillsides across the Miljacka River from the heart of Sarajevo, have come across the bridges into the city center, sometimes being fired on as they ran.


Review/Architecture; The Genius Of California Visits SoHo
IF nothing else, "Angels and Franciscans" ought to shake New York's complacent faith in its innate cultural superiority.
California is a vibrant center of American architecture today, and this small show of work by 11 architects based in Los Angeles and San Francisco picks up the good vibrations.
The show's New York-based curators, however, have failed to translate the vibes into a coherent message.
The result is a show of smart, handsomely displayed design, bogged down by curatorial thinking with no more rigor than an overripe avocado.
There's a generous idea behind this show: A desire to share the pleasure of seeing firsthand the remarkable work by California's gifted young architects.
It's a tourist's kind of pleasure, the intoxicating sensation of taking in too many wonderful sights in too short a time.
And this is a tourist's kind of show: a walk-in version of one of those segmented picture postcards that cram too many attractions into a space that is hopelessly small to begin with.


Review/Film; The Giving And Taking Of Credit
"Hero" is a big, expensive-looking, quite harmless Hollywood comedy that is finally far more enjoyable than it has any right to be, largely because of Dustin Hoffman, Andy Garcia and Geena Davis, but most of all because of Ms.
Davis, though not for the expected reasons.
There's nothing wrong with her performance as a beautiful, high-powered television news personality.
She's good.
Yet what really counts is her angularly comic presence.
She's as cheering and surprising as the sight of a very tall lollipop careering around on Rollerblades.
It's Ms.
Davis who pulls together the various elements of a screenplay whose complicated mechanics keep slowing down what should be the fun.


Custody Issue Raised in Case Of 1-Year-Old
In the gilded splendor of the state Supreme Court, lawyers gathered today to argue over a child's future in a case that many here believe could influence the way adoptions are handled in Connecticut.
The case involves a 1-year-old girl whose mother, Gina Pellegrino, left her in a New Haven hospital hours after she was born.
The child was placed with foster parents who wanted to adopt her, and Ms.
Pellegrino's parental rights were ended after a hearing at which she was not present.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; A Tremor Now, Not a Groundswell
Ross Perot shook the scaffolding of American politics by re-entering the Presidential race today, but it was only an aftershock compared with the major earthquakes he caused earlier this year.
No one knows for sure from whom he is likely to take more votes, or how many, and the campaign staffs of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton are both more apprehensive than they let on; their almost fawning eagerness to send delegations to appeal for his support early this week is proof of that.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reaction; Bush Campaign Welcomes Perot As Reconfiguring the Election . . .
The Bush campaign, searching anxiously for anything that could shake up the Presidential race, said today that it welcomed Ross Perot's formal announcement of his candidacy.
Although Mr.
Perot could seriously challenge Mr.
Bush in Texas and in Florida, both central to his re-election strategy, Bush aides said they hoped that Mr.
Perot would also force Gov.
Bill Clinton to expend resources in California, which the Republicans had largely ceded to the Democratic nominee, and in other states for which Mr.
Clinton had not budgeted time or money.


People
*
Jill Gruber was named senior vice president and media director at Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer Advertising, New York, assuming the media responsibilities of Monica Shaffer, a founder and partner, who is moving to Los Angeles.
Ms.
Gruber was most recently vice president and associate media director at Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein, New York. *
Elliot Marion, 67 years old, publisher of Bride's &amp; Your New Home magazine, announced his retirement, effective Nov. 15.
Mr.
Marion will be succeeded by Roger Antin, 39, the magazine's advertising director.


John A. Weed; Investment Executive, 52
John A. Weed, a vice president of Salomon Brothers Asset Management, died yesterday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 52 years old.
He died of abdominal cancer, his wife, Elizabeth, said.


A Two-Fisted Governor With a 'Foot in Mouth' Style
Barely a month into his first year in office, Gov.
Kirk Fordice visited the annual meeting of the state Parent-Teacher Association and ended up in a shouting match over education financing.
Within weeks the group, joined by the state teachers' association, was chanting "recall" outside the Governor's mansion.
In the half-year since then Mr.
Fordice, Mississippi's first Republican governor in 115 years, has frequently come close to choking on what both he and his critics call a brusque, "foot in the mouth" style.
He suffered some embarrassing missteps with appointees and saw two of his vetoes overridden by the Democratic-controlled Legislature, a record for a first-year Mississippi governor.


Review/Music; Pittsburgh Symphony In a Gala Worth The Name
Gala concerts are becoming almost commonplace in contemporary musical life as aging institutions celebrate themselves.
They simply pick an occasion, plan events requiring black tie, raise ticket prices and book big-name artists.
Carnegie Hall celebrated the opening of its 102d season on Wednesday night with just such a gala.
But one aspect of this concert set it apart from the ordinary.
Although on paper the program was commonplace -- Lorin Maazel conducting the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in music by Tchaikovsky -- in execution the music provided enough reason for celebration, particularly in a stunning reading of the Fifth Symphony.


Dismal Economic Data Lift Bonds
Unremittingly dismal economic reports fueled a strong advance in the credit markets yesterday that pushed some short-term Treasury yields to record lows.
But with awful September unemployment figures and Federal Reserve easing widely anticipated today, some analysts wondered whether the credit markets enjoyed today's rally yesterday -- pre-empting another sharp price gain.


Mexicans Are Favorites in Marathon
A year after SALVADOR GARCIA of Mexico won the New York City Marathon, two of his countrymen have become the men to beat in the 1992 race on Nov. 1.
They are ANDRES ESPINOZA , who placed second last year with a time of 2 hours 10 minutes, the fastest of his career, and ALEJANDRO CRUZ , who won the far flatter Chicago marathon in 2:08:57 in 1988.


Bonn Tells Of Support For Pound
Germany's central bank says it spent the equivalent of more than $30 billion trying to prop up the value of the pound and the lira last month before Britain and Italy gave up defending their currencies and pulled out of Europe's monetary system.
The disclosure, made in a statement from the Bundesbank that appeared today in The Financial Times, was intended to head off criticism from British officials that Germany had done little to support sterling during the currency crisis and in some ways had undermined the pound.
The Bundesbank said most of the $30 billion had been spent supporting the pound.


The New Chief at Digital Outlines His Strategy
A new era began today at the Digital Equipment Corporation as Robert B. Palmer officially became president and chief executive of the troubled $14 billion computer giant.
In a conference room packed with financial analysts, consultants and journalists, Mr.
Palmer outlined his plans to overhaul Digital and focus it sharply on customers' needs.


U.S. Violence Studies Are Free of Racial Bias
To the Editor:
In "U.S. Hasn't Given Up Linking Genes to Crime" (letter, Sept. 18), Dr.
Peter R. Breggin is mistaken in his interpretation of research conducted by the National Institute of Mental Health into the causes and effects of violence.
I believe he is also misguided in discounting the legitimate part that can be played by public health agencies in helping us understand the increased incidence of violence affecting our country today.


Ban Doesn't Extend To Big East Tourney
Despite the ban from post-season competition, Syracuse will be able to participate in the Big East basketball tournament, provided that the conference's athletic directors approve.
Under regulations of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, each conference has the right to determine if a member that has been banned from post-season play will be allowed to participate in the conference tournament.
Under N.C.A.A. regulations, conference tournament games count as regular-season games.


Review/Film Festival; Another Seasonal Tale From Rohmer
No matter how Eric Rohmer classifies his films, whether as Moral Tales, Comedies and Proverbs or Tales of the Four Seasons, which is the title of his current cycle, each film comes down to the same thing: a most singular woman.
She is always young, usually very pretty, sometimes beautiful, with a capacity to enchant that is equaled only by her maddeningly stubborn, sometimes wayward pursuit of destiny as she sees it.
This has been true since the 1969 release of "My Night at Maud's," the French director's first hit in this country.
It is still true of "A Tale of Winter," his second installment in Tales of the Four Seasons, which he initiated recently with "A Tale of Springtime." "A Tale of Winter" will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 9:15 and on Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Though the Rohmer films' methods and obsessions are now familiar, their particular details are always new.


Bribes for Building Inspectors Portrayed as Business as Usual
Paying off New York City building inspectors became so routine in recent years that some builders gave cash to inspectors without even being asked, according to testimony in the Federal trial of eight inspectors accused of corruption.
More often, inspectors indicated the amount of cash that they wanted, sometimes simply writing a number on a piece of paper and silently showing it to the builder, said witnesses in the trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Seeking Middle Ground In Fight on Police Board
The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, is trying to play the role of mediator in the bitter fight between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the police union over establishing an independent board to review police misconduct.
Whether Mr.
Vallone will succeed in shaping a compromise remains to be seen, but the fact that the Speaker has stepped into the middle of a debate that is threatening to polarize New York reflects a new willingness on the part of the Council and its leader to tackle explosive issues.
In August, Mr.
Vallone played a similar role in the less divisive battle over the city's long-range waste disposal plan.


Increase Budget for Nuclear Site Checkups
To the Editor:
"Nuclear Opening in North Korea" (editorial, Sept. 21) correctly notes the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in inspections of North and South Korea nuclear sites and in helping to develop confidence in this historically troubled relationship.
But I regret you did not urge strengthening the agency so it can carry out this new, expanded task.


Newark Youth Revisits Park Where He Was Shot
Howard Caesar did not talk about the police officers who were indicted Tuesday in his shooting.
He would not talk about Newark's car thieves.
In his first public appearance since being released from the hospital Saturday, nearly four months after he stepped from a stolen car and was shot outside a park here, he stood today with a cane in that same park and said simply: "I thank God for being alive."
The 18-year-old read a five-minute prepared statement at a news conference today, but his only reference to the events of the night he was shot was a brief remark at the beginning, when he said, "Being here brings back memories of that horrible night when I was almost killed."


Kurds Continue Raids in Turkey After Big Battle


Horses Are the Stars in Saturday's Double Feature
New York intensifies the countdown to the Breeders' Cup championships when international stars from England, France and Canada take the track against 11 American horses tomorrow in two of the year's most imposing races at Belmont Park.
The two races are the $200,000 Vosburgh Stakes at seven-eighths of a mile and the $500,000 Turf Classic Invitational at a mile and a half, and between them they test the classic racing demands of speed and distance.


U.S. Backs Trial in Bank-Loan Case
Facing growing Democratic criticism that the Government has prevented a full investigation of $4 billion in illegal bank loans to Iraq in the late 1980's, Federal prosecutors reversed themselves today and agreed to bring the criminal case to trial rather than accept a guilty plea from the banker accused of wrongdoing.
By taking the case to trial, the Government may blunt the accusation that it is reluctant to let the evidence play out in public and is trying to settle the matter more quietly with a guilty plea.
A trial will not take place until after the election in November.


Review/Film Festival; Chinese Woman in Search of Justice
Zhang Yimou is the superb Chinese film maker whose life sounds like the stuff of legend (he is said to have "sold his blood to buy his first camera") and whose rural historical dramas (among them "Raise the Red Lantern" and "Ju Dou" ) would be accessible in any part of the globe.
Now in "The Story of Qui Ju," which will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 6:15 and on Sunday at 9:30 P.M., Mr.
Zhang has attempted something more modern and no less fascinating.
With the simplicity of a folk tale or a fable, he tells of a farmer's wife and her search for justice, and in the process he provides a remarkably detailed view of contemporary Chinese life.
The principal performers in "The Story of Qui Ju" are professional actors, most notably his familiar star, the beautiful Gong Li, who again emerges as a figure of astonishing fortitude.
But this film's background figures are real people, caught unawares by Mr.
Zhang's cameras as they travel and congregate in public settings.
Without diminishing the film's dramatic interest, this realistic backdrop gives the film a documentary aspect, which is presented no less elegantly than the spare, historical details of the director's earlier films.
Once again, it is Mr.
Zhang's keen and universal view of human nature that raises his work far above its own visual beauty and into the realm of timeless storytelling.


Savage Tease That Is the Blue Jays
There are 21 major league teams scattered around North America wishing for one ounce of the excitement heading Toronto's way as the final weekend of the season approaches.
Pennant fever truly grips only a few dozen players at this late stage, making the hundreds of also-rans pine for the excitement.
Why, only two nights ago, it gripped Frank Viola of the last-place Boston Red Sox.
He volunteered to pitch against American League East-leading Toronto only because it might affect the division hopes of the Blue Jays.
Explained the exuberant Viola as he led a bunch of suddenly eager Red Sox: "It's what everybody wants. A race is what the whole world wants."


No to Posthumous Pardon In Young Briton's Hanging
The British Government today denied a request for a posthumous pardon of Derek Bentley, a young retarded man who was hanged for the murder of a police officer in 1953.
In making the decision, Home Secretary Kenneth Baker rejected a long and emotional campaign by Bentley relatives, legal experts and politicians who consider the 19-year-old man a victim of a miscarriage of justice.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on the Word and Image page on Sept. 22 about Presidential debates referred imprecisely to a question asked of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis by Bernard Shaw, CNN's Washington anchor, in a 1988 debate.
Mr.
Shaw asked, "Governor, if Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered, would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?"


Lazard Freres Promotes 2
Lazard Freres &amp; Company has promoted Steven Rattner and Kim Fennebresque to be co-heads of the firm's investment banking operations.
They replace William Loomis, who ran the operation for four years.
Mr.
Rattner began his investment banking career at Lehman Brothers.
In 1984 he joined Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, where he rose to general partner before leaving five years later.
At Morgan Stanley and at Lazard Freres, which he joined in 1989, Mr.
Rattner focused on deals in the media industry.
He is a graduate of Brown University and was a reporter for The New York Times before going to Lehman Brothers.


Sounds Around Town
Soul Double Bill
Irma Thomas and Robert Ward, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
A double bill that rates right up there with, well, name your vices.
Ms.
Thomas is one of the three great living soul singers -- Etta James and Aretha Franklin are the competition -- and she has New Orleans songwriting and rhythms behind her as well.
Robert Ward is a fine soul singer himself; passion might as well be his middle name.
The shows tonight start at 8:30 and 11:30.
Tickets are $15 for general seating or $20 for reserved seats.
Bassist and Band
Buster Williams, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, (212) 255-4037.
Bassists rarely lead bands, and Mr.
Williams, one of jazz's best bassists, rarely leads bands, so this engagement is an occasion.
He has recruited some of the more respected young musicians around -- the pianist Renee Rosnes, the vibraphonist Steve Wilson and the drummer Billy Drummond -- for a terrific group.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 P.M., 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $12 and there is a $7.50 minimum.


New York City Teachers Take Plea for Pay Raise to City Hall


Art in Review
Stuart Diamond McKee Gallery 745 Fifth Avenue (near 58th Street) Through Oct. 10
Over the last few years Stuart Diamond has moved from making painted wood reliefs to painting on big wood panels.
The change from a shallow three-dimensionality to true flatness has improved and clarified his art without eliminating its basic problem, which is an incipient academicism.


Energy Bill Cleared for Final Votes
After a final flurry of horse-trading, Senate and House negotiators today put the finishing touches on an energy bill that should lower electricity prices and set new efficiency standards for many home appliances but do little to decrease the country's dependence on foreign oil.
Congress first took up energy legislation after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
But two years of back-room haggling, filibuster threats, and skirmishes between the oil and auto industries and environmental groups gradually pruned the bill to a shadow of its former self.


A Two-Fisted Governor With a 'Foot in Mouth' Style
Barely a month into his first year in office, Gov.
Kirk Fordice visited the annual meeting of the state Parent-Teacher Association and ended up in a shouting match over education financing.
Within weeks the group, joined by the state teachers' association, was chanting "recall" outside the Governor's mansion.
In the half-year since then Mr.
Fordice, Mississippi's first Republican governor in 115 years, has frequently come close to choking on what both he and his critics call a brusque, "foot in the mouth" style.
He suffered some embarrassing missteps with appointees and saw two of his vetoes overridden by the Democratic-controlled Legislature, a record for a first-year Mississippi governor.


Review/Theater; Transition In Romania: An Instant History
"Mad Forest," first produced by the New York Theater Workshop, has reopened at the Manhattan Theater Club, City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 5, 1991.
Three months after the 1989 fall of the Ceausescus, the British playwright Caryl Churchill, a director named Mark Wing-Davey and 10 of Mr.
Wing-Davey's acting students went to Romania on what promised to be a preposterous mission.
Their aim was to become instant experts on a nation in postrevolutionary turmoil and to make a play about what they saw.
Their visit was scarcely longer than a week.


Head of S.&amp; L. Bailout Office Defends the Agency's Efforts
Defending their efforts to recover damages from wrongdoers, Government officials in charge of the savings and loan bailout today disassociated themselves from White House efforts to draft guidelines that would make it more difficult for the agency to bring lawsuits.
Giving the Senate Banking Committee a 66-page staff report to support his testimony, Albert V. Casey, the president and chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, asserted that the agency's recent reorganization had strengthened its litigation efforts.


Accounts
*
Holiday Inns Inc., Atlanta, to McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., to handle the introduction in 1993 of the lodging chain's Sun Spree Resorts and Crowne Plaza Resorts.
McKinney &amp; Silver had been handling the account on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Six Flags Great Adventure, Jackson, N.J., to Deutsch Inc., New York, from Bozell New York, in a review that included Deutsch, which handles the corporate Six Flags account, and five other New York shops: Griffin Bacal; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond; Hal Riney &amp; Partners; Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano, and Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
Billings were estimated at $4.5 million.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will close soon:
Closing This Weekend "THE REAL INSPECTOR HOUND" and "THE 15-MINUTE HAMLET," Roundabout at the Criterion Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street, midtown.
Two plays by Tom Stoppard, directed by Gloria Muzio.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M., tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $39.
Information: (212) 869-8400 or (212) 719-9393.
"JOYICITY" and "FRANKLY BRENDAN," Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue South, at Grove Street, Greenwich Village.
Two one-man shows, in repertory, presented by the Irish Repertory Theater Company.
"Joyicity," a play by Ulick O'Connor, based on the writing of James Joyce, starring Vincent O'Neill.
"Frankly Brendan," a series of sketches based upon characters from the writings of Brendan Behan and Frank O'Connor, written and performed by Chris O'Neill.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M. ("Frankly Brendan"); tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M. ("Joyicity").
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 691-6226.
GARTH FAGAN DANCE, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
SAM FRANCIS AND STANLEY WILLIAM HAYTER, Associated American Artists, 20 West 57th Street, midtown.
Lithographs and etchings by Sam Francis; prints by Stanley William Hayter.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 399-5510.
"A SALUTE TO PETER DEAN BY HIS FRIENDS," G. W. Einstein gallery, 591 Broadway, near Houston Street, SoHo.
Works by 14 artists including Lawrence Faden and Bill Barrell, painters; Tom Duncan, a sculptor, and Frank Viner, who works with mixed media.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 226-1414.
"BEST OF ALL WASHABLE WORLDS," Downtown Art Company, 64 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A performance piece with music performed by Washboard Jungle.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 5 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 732-1227.
"WHICH WAY, MISTER, TO PEKING?" Danspace Project at St.
Marks Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
A dance piece by Ching Gonzales; "Conflagration," by Clarinda MacLow.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today through Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Suggested admission: $10.
Information: (212) 674-8194.
RONNY WHYTE, Carlyle Hotel, Bemelmans Bar, 35 East 76th Street, Upper East Side.
Music of Jerome Kern and Cole Porter by the jazz pianist and singer.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 9:30 P.M.
Music charge: $5.
Information: (212) 744-1600.
Closing Next Weekend "ANNA KARENINA," Circle in the Square, 235 West 50th Street, midtown.
A musical based on the Tolstoy novel, with book and lyrics by Peter Kellogg and music by Daniel Levine; Theodore Mann, director.
Through Oct. 11.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 and $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
MARX BROTHERS FILM FESTIVAL, Kaufman Theater, 534 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Double features of Marx Brothers movies.
Daily at 7 P.M.
Through Oct. 10.
Admission: $7 per double feature.
Schedule and other information: (212) 563-1684.
"PARIS STORIES AND OTHER FOLLIES," Sidney Janis Gallery, 110 West 57th Street, midtown.
Twenty-one new photographs by Duane Michals.
Through Oct. 10.
Hours: Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 586-0110.
OLIVER JONES TRIO, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village.
Jazz performances; with Lynn Seaton and Sherrie Maricle.
Through Oct. 11.
Shows: Tuesday through Thursday and Sunday, 10 P.M. and midnight; Friday and Saturday, 10 P.M., midnight and 1:30 A.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $6 minimum for all shows.
Information: (212) 242-1785.


Pittsburgh Journal; Airport Offers Flights of Meditation
The first passenger came to the new airport terminal here at 3:30 A.M., four hours before his flight, because he was so fearful of getting lost in the three-million-square-foot complex that opened today.
The only other person in the terminal was its architect, Tasso Katselas, who gave the man what reassurances he could.
"Airports make people very anxious," Mr.
Katselas said.
"I only wish our Meditation Room had been finished; that's what its designed for, to soothe people's spirits."


Nuclear-Arms Pact Endorsed in Senate
With a decade of negotiations and an era of superpower rivalry gone by, the Senate endorsed an arms control treaty that sharply reduces the numbers of long-range nuclear weapons held by the United States and four republics of the former Soviet Union.
Even greater cuts are already planned under a subsequent agreement by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, which is currently being translated into treaty language.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN - Man in the News: James Bond Stockdale; Eager to Face the Test
James Bond Stockdale has been researching a book about Epictetus, the Greek Stoic philosopher and teacher, and Mr.
Stockdale said today that before going to Dallas to be anointed as Ross Perot's running mate, he "looked for the apt Epictetus quote that would give me power in this clutch."
This was what he settled on: "A life not put to the test is not worth living."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Asserts Bush Is Too Eager To Befriend the World's Dictators
Gov.
Bill Clinton, launching a new broadside against the Bush Administration's foreign policy, charged today that President Bush was overly eager to befriend "potentates and dictators" and said he would be more prepared than Mr.
Bush to use trade sanctions or even force to protect human rights abroad.
Mr.
Clinton also stepped up his campaign's attack on Mr.
Bush on Iraq, saying he was "angered by the Administration's appeasement of Saddam Hussein" before the gulf war last year and "disappointed by its callous disregard for democratic principles after the war."  [ Excerpts, page A21. ]


Sounds Around Town
Torme Returns
Mel Torme, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, midtown, (212) 758-2272.
For his seventh consecutive fall engagement at Michael's Pub, the consummate pop-jazz vocal technician leads and sings with a superb 15-piece band.
Playing Mr.
Torme's lean, pounding arrangements, the ensemble swings hard, especially in a suite of Duke Ellington songs.
And Mr.
Torme's vocal improvisations have the precision and power of machine-gun fire.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:45 and 11:15 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
There is a $40 cover charge and a two-drink minimum tonight and tomorrow, and a $35 cover charge and two-drink minimum on Sunday.
A Musical Romance
Susannah McCorkle, the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, midtown, (212) 840-6800.
The astutely chosen songs in Ms.
McCorkle's new show follow the ups and downs of a romance in delightfully unpredictable ways.
Always a supple pop-jazz technician, Ms.
McCorkle also broadens her expressive range, drawing everything from the blues to Broadway to Brazilian pop, and adapting her style accordingly.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $25 music charge and a $10 food and beverage minimum.
Cook at the Carlyle
Barbara Cook, Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, Upper East Side, (212) 744-1600.
What has always made Miss Cook's golden lyric soprano special is the way she projects an overriding compassion as well as sweetness.
The high points of her new show, which features 10 songs she has never performed before, include Amanda McBroom's gorgeous "Ship in a Bottle" and "I'm Way Ahead," an obscure gem from the 1973 musical "Seesaw." Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:45 and 10:45 P.M.
Admission is $40, plus a $10 minimum.


B.C.C.I. Report Tells How Bank Halted Inquiries
In the most comprehensive look yet at the activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in the United States, a Senate report released today showed that the bank successfully derailed Congressional inquiries into its affairs, which ranged from international money laundering to terrorism.
The long-awaited analysis by the ranking Democrat and Republican on the Senate Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations offers a scathing portrait of how political influence and international bribery, combined with Government incompetence and inaction, acted as a catalyst for one of the biggest financial frauds in history.


Abroad at Home; Why Perot?
George Orwell might have written the script.
A billionaire hires people to demand that he run for President, calls them "volunteers" -- and then says he must listen to them as the voice of the people.
Why are we paying any attention to Ross Perot?
To me that is the puzzling question.
Here is a man known to be as qualified for the Presidency as a starfish.
Yet the press has hung on him these last days, dramatizing every nod and wink leading up to the announcement that he is back in the race.





Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
4.47
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.58
2.67
5.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.73
2.82
5.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.75
5.88
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.37
7.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.45
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.39
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Principal Who Remains the Coach
The man called Coach dogtrots down the high school corridors, his 200 pounds balanced lightly on plastic hips, his eyes pecking at teachers, students, janitors, monitors as if they are tacklers to be run over.
His voice is smooth, rich, but edged with locker-room authority.
"Hey, my man. You have an eye infection?"
A male student freezes, turns, understands the question and slowly removes his sunglasses.
"No."


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Daly Is in Lead Again  John Daly, who last week won the B.C.
Open for his second PGA Tour victory, shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday, his fifth consecutive round of 67 or better, for a share of the first-round lead in the Southern Open in Pine Mountain, Ga.
Using his length off the tee to shrink the 7,057-yard, par-72 Mountain View Golf Course at Callaway Gardens, Daly shot nines of 34 and 33 to grab a share of the lead with Ed Humenik, Kelly Gibson, Ed Fiori and rookie Robert Friend. (AP) TENNIS Top Players Advance  Petr Korda, Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl -- the top three seeded players -- advanced to the quarterfinals of the Swiss Indoors in Basel.
Korda, seeded No. 1, was ahead, 6-2, 3-0, when Jaime Oncins withdrew because of an injury.
No. 2 Becker served 15 aces in beating Nicklas Kulti, 6-4, 7-5, and third-seeded Lendl beat Arnaud Boetsch, 6-3, 6-4.
Andrei Chesnokov upset No. 5 Brad Gilbert, 6-1, 2-6, 7-6 (7-3). (AP) A Maleeva Beats Garrison: Magdalena Maleeva upset sixth-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-4, 6-4, in the second round of the Grand Prix women's tournament in Leipzig, Germany.
The victory moved Maleeva into a quarterfinal match with top-seeded Steffi Graf, who won her second-round match a day earlier.
Katarina Maleeva, Magdalena's sister, defeated Judith Wiesner, 6-0, 6-4. (AP) SOCCER  FIFA Bans Yugoslavia  Yugoslavia was banned from the 1994 World Cup yesterday by soccer's world governing body.
Yugoslavia was barred from the European championship in June after the United Nations imposed sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, the two remaining Yugoslav states.
FIFA said at the time that Yugoslavia would be banned from the World Cup if the United Nations sanctions were not lifted by the end of August. (AP)


Girl, 3, Who Vanished From New Haven Found Safe in Dumpster on Bronx Street
A 3-year-old New Haven girl who vanished from her bedroom early Wednesday was found frightened but apparently unharmed early yesterday, wrapped in garbage bags in a rusty, trash-filled Dumpster on a Bronx street.
The police in New York and New Haven and the Federal Bureau of Investigation called it a kidnapping and said the case was under investigation.
There were no immediate arrests and no suspects were publicly identified, but the authorities said they expected to solve the case soon.


Big Shearson Charge Seen
The plunge in the Computervision Corporation's stock on Wednesday will probably result in a third-quarter pretax charge of between $100 million and $105 million for Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., which holds a 22 percent stake in Computervision.
That estimate, derived from company documents and confirmed yesterday by Shearson officials, represents more than a doubling of an earlier forecast by Shearson that it would take a pretax charge of between $40 million and $45 million because of Computervision.


Art in Review
Maria Nordman Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through Oct. 10
A few years ago, Maria Nordman erected a small portable house at the 59th Street entrance to Central Park behind the statue of Sherman.
Made of plain wood and equipped with seats, it seemed almost unsociably bland in design.
But its door was always open, and what transformed it visually was the sight of passers-by venturing inside to satisfy their curiosity and take a minute's rest before disappearing back into the tumult of the city.


Mademoiselle Editor Shifted And a Successor Is Named
Amy Levin Cooper, the editor in chief of Mademoiselle since 1980, was transferred from that post yesterday and named to the newly created position of editor at large for Conde Nast Publications.
Ms.
Cooper, 45 years old, is being replaced by Gabe Doppelt, associate editor for Vogue.
Ms.
Doppelt, 32, was born in South Africa and began her publishing career in London, where she trained under two of Conde Nast's best-known editors, Tina Brown, new editor of The New Yorker, and Anna Wintour, editor in chief of Vogue.
A Wintour Protege
Ms.
Doppelt was assistant to Tina Brown in 1979 when Ms.
Brown was editor of the Tatler.
In 1986 Ms.
Doppelt joined British Vogue and worked with Anna Wintour, then that magazine's editor in chief.
When Ms.
Wintour came to the United States in 1987 to become editor of HG, she brought Ms.
Doppelt with her as associate editor.
When Ms.
Wintour assumed her present position at Vogue, Ms.
Doppelt once again followed her mentor there as associate editor.


Senate Endorses Pact to Reduce Strategic Arms
With a decade of negotiations and an era of superpower rivalry gone by, the Senate endorsed an arms control treaty today that sharply reduces the numbers of long-range nuclear weapons held by the United States and four republics of the former Soviet Union.
Even greater cuts in nuclear arms are already planned under a later agreement reached last June by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
That agreement, currently being translated into treaty language, would cut warheads to 3,000 in the Russian arsenal and 3,500 in the American one, less than a third of today's levels.


Shameful Death of a Worthy Reform
The expiring Independent Counsel Act was buried on the Senate floor in the dead of a recent evening when it would attract little attention.
Proximate cause of death was the threat by 28 Republican senators to filibuster a bill renewing the law.
President Bush was ready to kill it with a veto if Congress was bold enough to act.
But the real killers were House Democrats, so cowed by scandals and public antipathy that they preferred to let the bill die rather than fight for it.
This major post-Watergate law reform deserved a better fate.


Manufacturing Activity Slumped in September
The nation's manufacturing economy, jolted by sagging new orders and less robust production, slumped in September to its lowest level of growth in seven months, according to a monthly survey by the nation's purchasing managers.
The report, which was released yesterday and provides the first look at the nation's manufacturing economy for September, not only portrays anemic economic growth but also the prospect of more of the same for October.
The sharp decline in the level of new orders, the engine of production, indicates that it will be some time before the manufacturing sector sees profound improvement, economists said.


Bush Offers Plan for Wider Use of Ethanol in Fuel
President Bush today proposed changes in the Clean Air Act that would encourage wider use of ethanol, a corn-based alcohol used in automobile fuel.
The proposal was welcomed by farmers in the hotly contested political battleground of the Middle West, but was criticized by some environmentalists and the energy industry, especially in oil-producing states that make competing additives for gasoline.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A scathing Senate report on B.C.C.I. says the bank derailed Congressional inquiries by using political influence and bribery.
That, combined with Government incompetence and inaction, catalyzed the biggest financial fraud in history.
It cited John Culver, a former Democratic Senator from Iowa, and Michael Pillsbury, a senior aide to Senator Orrin Hatch, Utah Republican.  [ Page A1. ]


Abrams Changes Tactics And Challenges D'Amato
Lashing back at his rival in the New York Senate race, State Attorney General Robert Abrams yesterday demanded that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato make public his testimony in the Senate Ethics Committee's inquiry into his conduct in office last year.
But Mr.
D'Amato's staff refused, saying the matter was closed.
Mr.
Abrams, the Democratic nominee, has been on the defensive for two weeks, in the face of harsh and heavy television advertising by Mr.
D'Amato, the two-term Republican incumbent, that questions Mr.
Abrams's fund-raising tactics and accuses him of favoring big tax increases.
So yesterday, he held a news conference at his Manhattan headquarters to rebut Mr.
D'Amato's assertions point by point, and make a few of his own.


Pepsi to Run Magic Johnson Spot
The Pepsi-Cola Company said yesterday that it would bring back a television commercial featuring Magic Johnson after the basketball star's decision earlier this week to return to the Los Angeles Lakers.
The spot, called "We Believe in Magic," celebrated Mr.
Johnson as he prepared to play for the United States Olympic basketball team at the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.


Bush Considers Signing Cable TV Bill
Confronted with the likelihood of a defeat in Congress, White House officials are exploring the possibility that President Bush should reverse himself and sign a bill regulating cable television prices.
Mr.
Bush has vowed to veto the legislation, which passed the House and Senate by veto-proof margins, contending that it would impose costly, burdensome and unnecessary regulations on the cable industry.
But some advisers are almost certain that he will be overridden, and they have been looking at options.


Honors
*
Luis Carlos Mendiola, president and chief executive of Grupo PMP, Mexico City, was elected senior vice president for 1992-94, and world president-elect for 1994-96, of the World Council of the International Advertising Association at the organization's 33d World Advertising Congress in Barcelona, Spain. *
Philip H. Geier Jr., chairman, chief executive and president at the Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, was presented the I.A.A.
Award for distinguished service in international advertising and marketing, at the International Advertising Association's 33d World Advertising Congress.


Last-Ditch Union Effort Fights Layoffs in Trenton
As several dozen union members spent what could well be one of their last lunch hours as state employees protesting outside the Statehouse today, another state worker sat two blocks away in a spacious food court hunched over a table playing solitaire.
"I lost," she said as she collected rows of cards, shuffled them briefly and then began distributing them for another game.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  BUSH BACKS AIR BAN IN BOSNIA
The President says he is ready to ban Serbian combat flights over Bosnia, but how the ban can be enforced is a major question mystery.
A1  'CLEANSING' SARAJEVO
Pouring across bridges in the center of the Bosnian capital, hundreds of Muslims expelled from their homes offer compelling evidence that some Serbian forces in the city are reneging on a promise to end the practice known as "ethnic cleansing." A1


Anti-Black Bias Still Found In Mortgage Applications
Blacks and other minorities continue to be rejected for mortgage loans far more frequently than whites of similar income, according to data compiled by many banks and other analysts.
In one study covering 46 banks in 13 cities, nearly one in four mortgage applications from middle-income blacks was denied, compared with a denial rate for middle-income white applicants of about one in 11.
For all income levels, 26.7 percent of black applications were turned down, compared with 10.5 percent of whites, according to the study prepared by the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now.


Review/Film; Hockey That Transcends Mere Winning
"The Mighty Ducks," a family-minded comedy about a reluctant coach and a rotten hockey team, is certainly better than its title.
But it's not in a league with "The Bad News Bears," an obvious model for this story of how one surly grown-up (Emilio Estevez) and a bunch of poorly behaved kids can help build one another's character, and also -- not so coincidentally -- embark on a winning streak.
Part of the impetus behind "The Mighty Ducks" is to show how Gordon Bombay, the obnoxious yuppie lawyer played by Mr.
Estevez, abandons the victory-crazy attitude that has given him a vanity license plate reading "JUSTWIN." After Gordon is arrested for driving under the influence, he is sentenced to do community service with peewee hockey players.
He then undergoes the predictable change of heart.
Adopting a philosophy best described as McZen ("concentration, not strength," he advises his players, prompting one of them to mention "The Karate Kid"), Gordon renounces the cutthroat thinking of his courtroom days.


Couch Potato Alert! Couch Potato Alert! Couch . . .
Tomorrow is the kind of fall afternoon ABC plans for, but can rarely hope to get: the four top-ranked college football powers -- according to the Associated Press poll -- will play crucial games on the network.
At noon, No. 2 Miami will face No. 3 Florida State.
At 3:30 P.M., 80 percent of the country, including New York, will see No. 1 Washington versus Southern Cal while the remainder will watch No. 4 Michigan versus Iowa at 3:30 P.M.


Political Debut For 9-Year-Old
When Ross Perot held up a snapshot of 9-year-old Adriane Caggiano on live television yesterday, she missed it.
The girl from Augusta, Kan., said she had run to the kitchen to tell her mother, "He's going to run!"
In Mr.
Perot's announcement of his return to the Presidential race, he read a letter the fifth-grader had written three weeks ago urging him to run again.


No Headline
"Not only is government a mess, politics is also a mess. The way political campaigns are run is a mess. The people want a new political climate where the system does not attract ego-driven, power-hungry people." -- ROSS PEROT.  [ A20:1. ]


Art in Review
Jackie Winsor Paula Cooper Gallery 149 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This show of six small sculptures completed by Jackie Winsor in the last year offers a kind of coda to the fine traveling retrospective of her work, which is now at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (through Nov. 1).


Extension for O.&amp; Y.
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Toronto-based real estate developer, yesterday received an extension until Dec. 8 to file an exclusive plan for a bankruptcy reorganization.
Judge James Garrity of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan approved the request.
Olympia's lawyers said the company needed the extension because it had not yet filed a restructuring plan with the Canadian bankruptcy court.
The deadline for filing the plan in Canada is Nov. 30.
The judge granted the extension over the objection of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, which holds a secured claim of $155 million on Aetna Canada Center, an Olympia building in Toronto.


CHRONICLE
The National Gallery of Art held a big party Wednesday night to greet its new director, EARL A. (RUSTY) POWELL 3D, say goodbye to his predecessor, J. CARTER BROWN and at the same time put a little zip into a Washington social scene that has seemed a little quiet lately, perhaps because of the economy or perhaps because of the company town's preoccupation with the election.
Mr.
Powell had been a curator at the National Gallery from 1976 until 1980, when he became director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
He returns, white haired at age 48, which led him to tell a staff meeting: "Some of you may remember me from the days when I had reason to be called Rusty. I wanted to assure you that I didn't become a blond in L.A."


Hard Times Change Many Minds
Union officials at General Motors' Willow Run assembly plant here have long complained about growing political apathy among the rank and file.
But not this year.
Their plant has been scheduled for closing, and the workers blame George Bush (along with the chairman of G.M., whose selection they don't get to vote on).
Bill Clinton wasn't the union local's first choice for President (Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa was) or even its second (Edmund G. Brown Jr. from California was).
But workers have been registering to vote in record numbers just so they can back the Democrat in November.


U.S. Missiles Hit Turkish Ship, Killing 5
At least 5 Turkish sailors were killed and 15 injured early today when a United States warship accidentally fired two missiles and hit a Turkish destroyer during a NATO exercise in the Aegean Sea, the Pentagon said tonight.
At least one and maybe both missiles, believed to have been fired from the anti-air missile batteries of the aircraft carrier Saratoga, hit the Turkish destroyer Muavenet, setting the ship ablaze, officials in Washington said.


Books of The Times; How to Turn an Imperfect Life Into a Perfect One
Foley's Luck Stories By Tom Chiarella 181 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
Dan Foley, the hero of these overlapping stories by Tom Chiarella, is a compulsive liar.
His lies aren't terribly big or grandiose lies; they're little, self-aggrandizing ones.
He lies about being able to scuba dive, he lies about being a boxer and he lies about knowing how to play pool.
He selectively edits his memories of his ne'er-do-well big brother, Hank, and he embroiders his own memories of childhood.
He embellishes his parents' drab, blue-collar lives, and he romanticizes his own humdrum youth by telling phony stories about how he used to steal cars.


Shifts at Business Week
Business Week announced yesterday that Mark Morrison, an assistant managing editor, would become managing editor.
He will succeed John A. Dierdorff, who will retire on his 65th birthday in February after 36 years with the McGraw-Hill magazine.
As managing editor, Mr.
Morrison will report to Stephen B. Shepard, the magazine's editor in chief.
In addition, Sarah Bartlett, a business reporter at The New York Times for four years, will return to Business Week in December as an assistant managing editor.
She first joined Business Week in 1983 and worked as a writer and editor in the international business and finance departments before becoming an associate editor.


Topics of The Times; Voter Registration Alert
Citizens of New York City are seldom shy about voicing an opinion on this year's Presidential election.
But the opinions won't count for much if those expressing them don't register to vote.
Currently, more a third of the city's eligible voters are unregistered -- a dismal record that can be attributed only in part to the state's cumbersome election procedures.
Neither the inconvenience of obtaining the official voter registration form, nor disenchantment with the candidates, can excuse anyone from ducking a basic civic responsibility.


Service for Harold Humes
A memorial service for Harold L. Humes, author and co-founder of The Paris Review, has been scheduled for 2 P.M. on Oct. 9 in the St.
James Chapel at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, at 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan.
Mr.
Humes, who was 66 years old, died on Sept. 10.


A FASTER CREDIT-CARD AUTHORIZATION SYSTEM
A group of major local telephone companies, including Nynex in New York and Pacific Bell in California, said that they planned to offer a service to merchants that could cut the time for authorizing credit-card and other transactions by as much as 80 percent.
The service, called TSTS Virtual Private Line, would reduce credit-card authorizations at retail sales counters to five to seven seconds.


Critic's Notebook; To Praise Video, Not Bury It
DO film makers really think video means the end of civilization, or are they just pretending?
The nasty effects of video culture are everywhere on screen at this year's New York Film Festival.
The Austrian film "Benny's Video" and the Belgian "Man Bites Dog" both depict videotaped murders, glibly assuming that video and homicide are directly related.
"Autumn Moon," from Hong Kong and Japan, is a more thoughtful, delicate film, but in it, too, a young man's barren emotional life is connected to the way he views the world through the lens of his video camera.
Video keeps turning up on the screen at Alice Tully Hall like some black-sheep cousin, untrustworthy and bound to come to no good.


Congressional Roundup; Backing Abortion Counseling, Senate Votes to Override a Veto
The Senate voted today to override President Bush's veto of legislation that would lift his Administration's ban on abortion counseling at federally financed family-planning clinics.
The 73-to-26 vote to overturn the regulation, which its foes dubbed a "gag rule," sent the issue to the House, where supporters of the bill conceded today that they were unlikely to muster the two-thirds majority required to override a veto.
The House is expected to vote on Friday.


Increase in Jobless Claims Sours Outlook for Economy
First-time claims for state unemployment benefits jumped 15,000, to 429,000, in the week ended Sept. 19, the fifth consecutive increase, the Labor Department reported today.
From Arizona, meanwhile, the National Association of Purchasing Management said its index of manufacturing activity fell below 50, indicating contraction, for the first time since February.
The reports, both of which were weaker than expected, came as the economic and political worlds braced for publication Friday of monthly payroll and other labor-market data for September.
This will be the final reading of this pre-eminent gauge of economic health before Election Day, with most analysts anticipating a further loss of jobs and perhaps an uptick in the jobless rate.


In the Yankees' Book, Perez Is a 20-Gamer
After the Indians defeated the Yankees Tuesday to strengthen their grasp on fourth place, Cleveland infielder Carlos Baerga leaped high into the air to celebrate and reacted as if the games still mean something.
To the Indians, they do.
Fourth place is their pennant chase.
While the Yankees dawdle their way through the end of the season and irritate Manager Buck Showalter, the enthusiastic Indians have stormed their way into fourth by one and a half games and are zooming toward one of the more memorable turnarounds in their history.
Before tonight's series finale with the Yankees, the Indians were a respectable 75-82 and already had 21 more victories than last season.
And since July 19, they are 12 games over .500.


Issues of Race, in Talk and Tragedy
None of the panelists on "The Issue Is Race: A Crisis in Black and White" are happy about the state of relations between white and black Americans, but they are not happy about one another either.
Tonight's two-hour free-for-all, provoked by Phil Donahue, is marked by the differences in approach and style of the black participants, who, for once, are in the majority.
Starting with what might roughly be considered the left, they include: Sister Souljah, the rap performer who was taken to task by Gov.
Bill Clinton for seeming to justify the black youths who helped burn and loot Los Angeles; Dhoruba Bin Wahad, a former Black Panther now described as an activist; Anna Deavere Smith, who wrote and performed a one-woman show about the 1991 race riots in Crown Heights, Brooklyn; Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly of Washington, and Alan Keyes, the Republican candidate for the Senate from Maryland.


Mortgage Unit Regulations
A four- way compromise Wednesday night has given a green light to legislation that would for the first time regulate in detail the two Government-created companies that dominate home mortgage finance.
The final legislation, drafted today by House and Senate staff members and expected to pass before Congress adjourns early next week, comes after a fiery lobbying battle that pitted the politically powerful Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, against the Treasury Department and members of the House and Senate.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady endorsed the compromise tonight..


It's Official: Stein Is Running N.H.L.
GIL STEIN officially became president of the National Hockey League yesterday.


Panel Acts to Censure Judge Over Anti-Arab Comments
The State Commission on Judicial Conduct has recommended that a Nassau County judge be censured for anti-Arab remarks and "a series of biased and abusive actions" directed at a lawyer of Syrian ancestry during an off-the-record conference in the judge's robing room two years ago.
In findings released today, the commission said Acting Justice Stuart L. Ain of State Supreme Court, who is Jewish, told the lawyer, Paul Saqqal of Manhattan, "You're our sworn enemies," upon learning of Mr.
Saqqal's ethnic background, and then extended a middle finger twice toward him, saying, "You know what this is, don't you?"


Duran, at 41, Still Wants More
The 41-year-old ROBERTO DURAN wants a shot at IRAN BARKLEY 's International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight crown soon because he doesn't "want to go in the ring for that title with a cane."
But an electrician turned boxer, TONY BIGLEN , the man Duran defeated in an uninamous decision on Wednesday night in Buffalo, isn't sure Duran (87-9) is ready to step up to that level.


Assembly Official Gives Up His State Car
Seeking to deflect a growing storm of criticism, Assemblyman Vincent J. Graber, who has received state travel reimbursement for trips that he did not take in a New York State car, said yesterday that he had given up the car.
Mr.
Graber, the Assembly Speaker Pro-Tem, said he was relinquishing the perquisite because the reimbursement has become the focus of attention from news organizations in his Western New York district following its disclosure in a New York Times Magazine article on Sunday.


N.C.A.A. Calls a Two-Year Foul on Syracuse
Syracuse University's men's basketball program, traditionally a national powerhouse, was placed on two years of probation yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for widespread violations involving recruits and student athletes.
Syracuse becomes the first member of the Big East Conference to be placed on probation since the conference was started in 1979.
In announcing the sanctions, which stem from a two-year investigation, the N.C.A.A. also cited violations in football, women's basketball, men's lacrosse and wrestling.


Restaurants
Fans of Aquavit, the theatrically designed, urbane Scandinavian restaurant on West 54th Street, might be pleased with Snaps, its smaller, less rigid sibling on Park Avenue.
Moreover, much of the food at Snaps is similar, but at gentler prices.
The first time I visited Snaps, about two weeks after it opened in July, the kitchen seemed to be still in dress rehearsal.
And service was as frenzied as the rush-hour traffic visible through the dining room's 18-foot-high windows.


A Precious Gesture To Magic From Boss
Magic Johnson continued an eventful week yesterday by signing a $14.6 million one-year contract extension with the Los Angeles Lakers.
Johnson will receive that salary in the 1994-95 season, the largest single-season salary in team sports.
The figure surpasses the $9.4 million average annual salary that Patrick Ewing will earn with the Knicks during the 1995-96 and 1996-97 seasons.


AIDS and Unafflicted
To the Editor:
A front-page story Sept. 8 chronicles the Rev.
Scott Allen's sojourn through the Baptist church with his AIDS-afflicted family.
The article points to a larger societal struggle, that of balancing emotional issues with enlightenment.
While funding is fought over for various health issues like AIDS to both prevent and cure, little is being done to equip the nonaffected to respond, not to diseases, but to people who are diseased.


Easy Diner's Road Map to the Hudson Valley
IN the 1954 film "The Wild One," Marlon Brando, the leader of a rowdy motorcycle gang, roars into a small town, takes a shine to a cafe waitress, eventually smashes up the place and terrorizes the citizens, then high-tails it out of town.
In my less confrontational 1992 fantasy, I bomb into small towns in a gang of one, drop into restaurants with nerdy helmet-flattened hair and wind-blown clothes (no cafe Casanova, to be sure), eat as much as possible while surreptitiously scribbling notes, then careen down the road considerably heavier than I arrived.
Hardly movie fodder, but it's great fun.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Announcement; Perot Sticks to His Unorthodox Campaign Style
In many ways Ross Perot's eagerly anticipated news conference today was a microcosm of his unorthodox campaign.
It was testy, at times contradictory, a bit trite, adversarial and in two parts.
Backed by his sister, Bette Perot, three of his children and with his wife, Margot, standing by his side, Mr.
Perot began by reading a statement declaring that he was once again a candidate.
It was a statement replete with Reaganesque features like a letter from a 9-year-old Kansas girl whose picture he placed on the lectern, and one from a veteran from Wilmington, Del., who had sent him his Purple Heart.


Historical Society Names Leader
Norman Pearlstine, the former executive editor of The Wall Street Journal, has been named interim president of the New-York Historical Society, the society announced yesterday.
Mr.
Pearlstine, who has been chairman of the Historical Society since April 1989, is to head a search committee to replace Dr.
Barbara Knowles Debs, who retired yesterday after four years as president.
Dr.
Debs will remain a trustee.


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Wednesday about a venture involving GE Capital Computer Leasing referred incorrectly to the company's assets.
It is the parent company, GE Capital, not the leasing company, that has assets of more than $80 billion.


London Journal; Suffer Germans Gladly? Not These East Enders
It's been half a century since World War II, but for some the memories are as jagged and unforgiving as broken glass.
Here, among the tangled streets and walk-up flats of East London, the very mention of Germany can still incite anger and suspicion and argument.
"The Germans are trying to do the same thing now they did back then -- take us over," Frank Galea, a 67-year-old native of Malta, said as he stood alongside a curb in London's East End, across the street from a housing block that took a direct hit in 1945 from a German V-2 rocket.
"I don't trust them."


U.S. Accuses Company of Bias In Reassigning Pregnant Worker
The Federal Government has filed a class action against Sundstrand Corporation, a Rockford, Ill., aerospace manufacturer, asserting that the company had a policy of excluding pregnant women from certain jobs and that the policy was a form of sex discrimination outlawed by the Supreme Court in 1991.
A company spokesman denied that Sundstrand has such a policy.


Congressional Panel Trims '93 Military Budget by 9%
Voicing concerns about cutting military programs too deeply in a recessionary election year, House and Senate negotiators today approved a $274.3 billion military budget for the 1993 fiscal year that includes many weapons designed for the cold war era.
The compromise bill for the year that begins today represents a 9 percent decline, adjusted for inflation, from the $291 billion military budget for the previous year but cuts only $6.5 billion from President Bush's request.
Lawmakers made no additional troop cuts beyond the Pentagon's recommendations and canceled few weapons programs.


Forfeit Is Criticized
Two weeks after a Philippine team was stripped of its Little League World Series title for gross violations of player eligibility rules, the Philippine Bar Association has condemned infringements of fair play and sportsmanship, but not those committed by the Philippine officials who admitted stacking the team with ringers.
Instead, the lawyer's group accused Little League adminstrators in Williamsport, Pa., of depriving the Philippine team of due process by awarding its title to a team from Long Beach, Calif., without a hearing.


EO INC. DESCRIBES 'PERSONAL COMMUNICATOR' DEVICE


Market Place; A Stable Quarter To Be in Stocks
BY all rights, the stock market during the last few months should have been a place for only the steeliest investors.
An international currency crisis, a market break in Japan, a topsy-turvy Presidential election and an economy stuck in low gear are not exactly the ingredients of a sound, stable equity market.
But for the third quarter just ended, the overall market was more than stable -- it was downright boring, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index gaining about 9 points in the period.
In the quarter, almost three-fifths of the stocks in the S.&amp; P. were plus or minus only 10 percent in value, bringing few profits -- or losses -- to many investors.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about Microsoft's Windows NT operating system described the origin of the system incorrectly.
It was developed solely by Microsoft; it is not based on Unix.


A Reminder Needed Every Day


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; PEROT RE-ENTERS THE CAMPAIGN, SAYING BUSH AND CLINTON FAIL TO ADDRESS GOVERNMENT 'MESS'
Ross Perot jumped back into the race for the Presidency today, instantly creating new risks, opportunities and uncertainties for Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush in the final 33 days before Election Day.
Mr.
Perot, who bolted from the race in July, asserted he was reactivating his independent campaign at the plea of his supporters.
"I thought that both political parties would address the problems that face the nation," he said.
"We gave them a chance. They didn't do it."


Traffic Alert &lt;LP TOMORROW  Park Avenue between 29th and 56th Streets will be closed from 9 to 11 A.M. for the Corporate Challenge race. Greenwich Avenue between the Avenue of the Americas and Eighth Avenue will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the gay and lesbian fair.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Bush: Attacking Clinton's Tax Proposal
The Bush campaign began broadcasting a new 30-second commercial yesterday.
The campaign said it would get national exposure but would not be specific.
ON THE SCREEN -- Opens with a black screen that fades into the legend, "Here's what Clinton economics could mean to you." The announcer says Mr.
Clinton has promised to raise taxes only on the rich but that the real story is different.
In a departure for campaign ads, the announcer is a woman.
The camera then cuts to quick shots of taxpayers, showing their name, occupation and the amount the Bush campaign says their taxes would go up under Mr.
Clinton.
The ad ends with the new Bush slogan about a Clinton Presidency: "It's wrong for America."
TELEVISION SCRIPT -- Announcer: "Bill Clinton says he'll only tax the rich to pay for his campaign promises. But here's what Clinton economics could mean to you. (John Canes, steam fitter) $1,088 more in taxes. (Lori Huntoon, scientist) $2,072 more in taxes.
"One-hundred leading economists say his plan means higher taxes . . . and bigger deficits. (Julie and Gary Schwartz, sales representatives) $1,191 more in taxes. (Wyman Winston, housing lender), $2,072 more in taxes.
"You can't trust Clinton economics. It's wrong for you. It's wrong for America."
ACCURACY -- Mr. Clinton's promise to tax only the rich is faithfully repeated.
But the estimated tax burdens for the five people mentioned in the commercial are based on economic proposals for which Mr.
Clinton has not provided enough information for such detailed analysis or on figures that do not always follow Mr.
Clinton's proposals.
The Bush team says Mr.
Clinton's estimates of how much he would raise by taxing the richest Americans are wrong.
They say that to pay for his programs, people earning somewhere between $20,000 and $30,000 a year will have to pay the higher rate.
But the Bush campaign uses figures that cannot be reconciled with Mr.
Clinton's figures.
Bush aides acknowledged that they were making a leap of logic: that Mr.
Clinton would not have enough money to keep his campaign promises and will therefore tax the middle class rather than revising his plans.
The ad makes no mention of Mr.
Clinton's proposal for a $60 billion tax cut for the middle class.
SCORECARD -- As it fine-tunes its attack on Mr.
Clinton, the Bush campaign is trying to paint him as a tax-and-spend liberal.
The spot also tries to portray Mr.
Bush as the protector of the middle class, which the Democrats say has been badly burt by 12 years of Republican leadership in the White House.
The use of the steam fitter seems intended to identify Mr.
Bush with the concerns of blue-collar workers and the overall tone of the ad fits neatly into the appeal to suburban voters that is central to Mr.
Bush's electoral strategy.


Paul Jabara, 44, Actor, Singer And Disco Songwriter, Is Dead
Paul Jabara, a songwriter, singer and actor who won an Academy Award in 1979 for writing the disco hit "Last Dance," died on Tuesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 44 years old.
He died after a long illness, a spokesman for Kaleidoscope Films said.


Art in Review
Justen Ladda Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Justen Ladda's latest lament of consumerism is a genuine coup de theatre, an installation that at first looks like a tractor marked with random iridescent blue lines.
Move a little sideways and the lines come together to form the ancient figures of Eros and Chiron.
Walk around the tractor and the whole thing magically dissolves, like other of Mr.
Ladda's sculptures, into a pile of garbage.
Fluorescent lights pick out the names of several products in the garbage, among them Tide and Trend, which in this context inevitably take on ironic connotations.


Carmelo Pomodoro, 37, Designer Who Led New York Fashion Firm
Carmelo Pomodoro, a rising talent as an international designer in the fashion industry, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 37 years old and lived in Cornwall, Conn.
He died of AIDS-related pneumonia, said an announcement from his company, Carmelo Pomodoro, Ltd.


Topics of The Times; Dancers III
A really big show -- "Henri Matisse: A Retrospective" -- opened at the Museum of Modern Art last week.
It'll be there until early January.
By that time, one footsore veteran of the advance-sale line figures, it will have been seen by more people than dropped in on Bruce Springsteen's last concert.
Talk about your hot tickets!
The veteran had no idea of what awaited her -- to wit, two hours in line -- when she went to get her ticket, so she arrived unprepared.
Were she to do it over again, however, this is what she'd do.
And what she suggests every purchaser should do.


Louis Simon Labor Leader, 97
Louis Simon, a longtime New York union leader who helped to organize the city's laundry workers during the Depression in 1937, died on Wednesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 97 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a yearlong illness, said Dr. William Schneider, a family friend.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Bush and Clinton Camps Agree on Debate Details
After 16 hours of talks, Democratic and Republican negotiators agreed late tonight to have three Presidential debates and one Vice Presidential debate, officials in both camps said.
The negotiators for President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton announced that they reached a tentative agreement shortly before 11 P.M. but refused to disclose the dates of the debates or any other details.
And they would not say how the renewed candidacy of Ross Perot fits into their plans.


The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING, Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A staged reading of Charlotte Bronte's "Jane Eyre" by Lisa Hayes, an actress, who also did the adaptation.
Sunday at 5 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Reservations: (212) 777-1089.
POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
Readings by Ruben Martinez, a journalist and poet, and Steve Cannon, a novelist.
Tonight at 10:30.
Part of the Poetry Project.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.


Lois Campaign On Stock Options
The Options Industry Council, an organization of the nation's options exchanges, said it would sponsor a three-year, $6 million advertising campaign to acquaint individual investors with listed stock options.


Extension for O.&amp; Y.
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Toronto-based real estate developer, yesterday received an extension until Dec. 8 to file an exclusive plan for a bankruptcy reorganization.
Judge James Garrity of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan approved the request.
Olympia's lawyers said the company needed the extension because it had not yet filed a restructuring plan with the Canadian bankruptcy court.
The deadline for filing the plan in Canada is Nov. 30.
The judge granted the extension over the objection of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, which holds a secured claim of $155 million on Aetna Canada Center, an Olympia building in Toronto.


Thanks for the Memories, Or to Mets, It's No Thanks
You can close your eyes to reality, the saying goes, but not to memories.
The Mets, then, are in for a haunted off season.
There were defeats and accidents, embarrassments and comedy, omens and symbols.
And everybody on the Mets has his own frozen frame of reference, his picture worth a thousand words of regret.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  POLICE BOARD AND VALLONE
The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, is trying to play the role of mediator in the bitter fight between Mayor Dinkins and the police union over establishing a independent board to review police misconduct.
Whether Mr.
Vallone will succeed in shaping a compromise remains to be seen, but the Speaker's prominence in such a volatile debate seems to reflect a new willingness to tackle explosive issues.
B3.
WITNESSES DESCRIBE BUILDING PAYOFFS
Paying off New York City building inspectors became so routine in recent years that some builders gave cash to inspectors without even being asked, according to testimony in the Federal trial of eight inspectors accused of racketeering and corruption.
More often, inspectors indicated the amount of cash that they wanted, said witnesses in the trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
B3.


Review/Film; Lessons In Baseball (And Life) In Japan
When the former New York Yankee slugger Jack Elliot (Tom Selleck) first arrives in Japan, his body language says it all.
A head taller than anyone he meets, Jack has to duck constantly, which does not always save him from walking into doorjambs.
He also has to wince a lot when confronted by local customs he finds baffling, or when discovering how creatively his words are being translated into Japanese.
When Jack gives a newspaper interview and speaks of his new coach in typically surly style, his words come out: "I will gladly strive to shed all my old disgusting ways of laziness and become my best under his guidance."
The character of Jack, whose being sent to Japan is the impetus for "Mr. Baseball," provides Mr.
Selleck with something unusual: a movie role that actually suits his talents.
Mr.
Selleck's easygoing, self-deprecating manner works particularly well when he lets himself look silly, as he often does here. (One early scene, in the United States, finds him waking up in what looks like a sorority house with a baby-blue stuffed animal over his head.) And the plot of "Mr. Baseball" prevents this genial actor from seeming colorless, since it gives him a great deal to react to once Jack reaches Japan.


Tee Time on the Hudson


INSIDE
Trial in Iraq Loan Case
Facing criticism of the inquiry into illegal loans to Iraq, Federal prosecutors reversed themselves and agreed to bring the case to trial.
Page A6.
Bush May Sign Cable TV Bill
President Bush may reverse himself and sign a bill regulating cable television prices.
Page D1.
Bias Persists in Mortgages


Art in Review
Toshiko Takaezu Charles Cowles Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
This exceptional debut introduces an artist who seems to be have exhibited everywhere in the United States except New York City.
Born 70 years ago in Hawaii to Japanese parents and educated at the Cranbrook Academy in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., Toshiko Takaezu is well established in ceramics circles and has taught at Princeton University since 1967.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Raising the Secrecy Curtain On a Bush 'Backgrounder'
Here's how the system works:
President Bush says Gov.
Bill Clinton wants to raise taxes on people who make as little as $20,000 a year.


BUSH BACKS A BAN ON COMBAT FLIGHTS IN BOSNIA AIRSPACE
President Bush has decided to support a ban on Serbian combat flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior Administration officials said tonight.
The issue of prohibiting combat flights over Bosnia has been strenuously debated within the Administration, with Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, publicly questioning the need for a ban and State Department and White House officials privately asserting the need for action.
But officials said Mr.
Bush decided to support the ban today after meeting with top Administration officials.


Don West, 86, Dies; Fought for the Poor, Workers and Blacks
Don West, a labor organizer and civil-rights advocate who helped found the Highlander Folk School for poor children of the Tennessee mountains in 1932, died Tuesday at Charleston Area Medical Center in Charleston, W.Va.
He was 86 years old and lived in Cabin Creek, W.Va.
Heart disease forced him into retirement several years ago.


Diner's Journal
Brasserie des Theatres
The Broadway theater district finally has an authentic French brasserie that serves from breakfast through late supper.
Called Brasserie des Theatres, in the Paramount Hotel, it is the creation of Max Bernard, Jean-Michel Diot and Philippe Lajaunie, the partners who own Park Bistro and Les Halles, both in Manhattan.
The space has a distinctly Parisian feel, right down to the ocher walls, chocolate-colored banquettes, gold-framed mirrors, squat marble columns and service staff in long white aprons.


Medical Care America Hit by New Stock Drop
The selling wave that swamped the shares of Medical Care America last Friday gathered new strength today on a report that the company planned sharp new pricing discounts to recover lost market share in the home-care medical business.
The company's share price fell $4 today, to $20.375, on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the most active issue, with 4.4 million shares traded.
The decline extended a stunning retreat begun last Friday when Medical Care America's shares lost $33, to $25.


Miscellany
*
Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, Atlanta, changed its name to the Joey Reiman Agency, and opened a public relations division headed by Leanne Hand.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reaction; . . .As Clinton Refocuses Attack
The Democrats today began planning a strategy to undermine Ross Perot's economic plan.
Mr.
Clinton and his aides sketched a plan for the final weeks of the campaign that they hope will keep their team on track.
They hope to capitalize on the weaknesses polls have identified in Mr.
Perot's base of support while continuing the attack on President Bush.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising, normally found in Weekend, appear today on pages B14-15.


Judge Upsets Law Banning Street Begging
In the first step of what could be a long legal battle, a New York State law prohibiting begging on the streets has been declared unconstitutional by a Federal District Court judge.
The judge, Robert W. Sweet, ruled in a decision handed down on Wednesday in Manhattan that the law was in violation of the First Amendment guarantees of free speech.
While the Government has a "valid interest" in preserving public order, Judge Sweet wrote, "the interest in permitting free speech and the message that begging sends about our society predominates."


Art in Review
David Dupuis Rubenstein/Diacono 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Nov. 3
David Dupuis gets credit for minding his own business, that is, for sticking with a distinct, somewhat eccentric painting method and making it fuller and more flexible.
He no longer limits himself to predominantly white paintings, having branched off into striking all-red works and one multicolored effort.
His stepped, labyrinthine geometries made by pasting narrow strips of paper on canvas are more intricate and obsessive but also looser; they give out, in the paintings' upper and lower reaches, to softer pentimenti, larger and less finicky patterns and even undulating freehand lines.


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about the opening of a new unit at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center referred incorrectly to services that it provides.
The unit consolidates services related to preventing, diagnosing and treating breast cancer.
Although it does not provide radiation therapy for the treatment of cancer, it does offer mammograms and CAT scans.


STREAMLINED NAVY RETHINKS ITS ROLE
Moving away from a five-decade reliance on aircraft carriers as the heart of American naval power, the Navy is planning a more flexible, expeditionary-style force that depends increasingly on amphibious Marine forces and missile-firing ships and submarines.
The shift represents a redefinition of the military missions for the Navy and the Marine Corps in the post-cold-war era, but it also reflects the political reality that Congress is likely to order deeper cuts than the Bush Administration has so far proposed.


Science, Morality and the V-2
After Hitler watched his first rocket-engine test, in March 1939, he raised a glass of mineral water and barked, "Es war doch gewaltig," which more or less means, "That was something else!"
His tour guide that day, a 27-year-old military researcher named Wernher von Braun -- Junker scion, quintessential Aryan and rather crazed about space travel for a grown-up -- spent several hours trying to explain the basics of rocketry to the unimpressed Fuhrer, who did not feel the need for anything so futuristic in order to conquer Europe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; The Center of Attention
What makes Ross run?
Fundamentally, the answer does not seem to be the reason most people seek office, to win it.
Rather, the point is to gain attention.


PENNZOIL HAS RIGHTS TO AZERBAIJANI FIELD IN CASPIAN SEA
The Pennzoil Company said it had obtained exclusive rights from the Republic of Azerbaijan to develop the Guneshli field in the southern Caspian Sea.
The field is approximately one-third developed, with daily production of 130,000 barrels of oil.
Pennzoil said it planned to install several new offshore platforms and other equipment to increase natural-gas output.
The pact follows by a day a Pennzoil deal with the Chevron Corporation that will sharply increase Pennzoil's revenues from reserves in the United States.


At the Bar; Testament to a life cut short brings together worlds of literature and courtrooms.
In the last few weeks, there have been two unveilings for Jay Wishingrad.
One was of his tombstone.
The other was of a more enduring testament to his life and work: a collection of short stories on law and lawyers titled "Legal Fictions."
Eight months passed between the time Mr.
Wishingrad, a New York lawyer specializing in entertainment law and intellectual property, was told he had leukemia and the time when he died, in October 1991, at 42 years of age.


Balance Shifts as Firms Enjoy Buyer's Job Market
The last of the fall season's recruiters left the University of Pennsylvania law school today, their brief cases filled with resumes.
Demand for their time was brisk, they said, and more earnest than it was a few years ago.
A tight job market for law students, even those at the nation's most prestigious law schools, has done the trick.
When the law school's placement director, Lyn Davis, talks about the 80's, she looks skyward and says, "That all seems very long ago."


Where the Drug Culture Rules
When a citywide blackout and ensuing riots left much of Bushwick in ruins in 1977, one area that survived was a block of small businesses on Knickerbocker Avenues and three-story wood and brick houses nearby.
That survival, however, sealed its doom.


For Children
'International Children's Television Festival'  Museum of Television and Radio  25 West 52d Street  Midtown  (212) 621-6800  Recommended ages: 3 to 9  Through March 28
Imaginative and enlightening children's television programs do exist, and some of the best have been gathered from 23 countries for a festival sure to delight youngsters, and undoubtedly adults.


Jets Call on an 'Expert' To Remodel Pass Rush
Dennis Byrd has his right arm in a sling that is wrapped tightly around his torso to keep his dislocated shoulder snugly in place.
He is on injured reserve and his recovery could take six weeks.
Jeff Lageman, who had reconstructive knee surgery last Thursday, has a brace that goes the length of his right leg and he gets about on crutches now as he embarks on a yearlong rehabilitation schedule.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the drop in Computervision's stock price misidentified Harvey Wagner.
He is the company's chief financial officer.


Official's Use Of Seizure Law Is Questioned
As Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson has control over millions of dollars in assets seized from criminals.
Among them is the BMW that he drives in place of a county car.
Mr.
Catterson insists that the law gives him discretion to use those assets as he pleases, without any public accounting.
He said there was nothing improper about his use of the BMW or other funds from the forfeiture account.
But county officials, who say they knew nothing about his handling of the account until they learned of it in Newsday this week, disagree.
Question of Accountability
Today, Herbert Davis, the chairman of the County Legislature's Public Safety Committee, proposed a measure that would require Mr.
Catterson to submit his forfeiture account for an annual audit by the county comptroller.
The findings would then be made available to the Legislature.


Lydia Joel Memorial
A memorial service for Lydia Joel, the former director of the dance program at the Fiorella H. La Guardia High School for the Performing Arts and editor of Dance Magazine, will be held at 5 P.M. on Monday at the high school, 108 Amsterdam Avenue, at 64th Street, Upper West Side.
Among those who are to pay tribute in words or performance are Eddie J. Shellman of Dance Theater of Harlem, Jonathan Reisling of the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company, Haiwan Tomlinson of Boston Ballet and Jacqulyn Buglisi and Donlin Foreman of the Martha Graham Dance Company.


Merit Selection of Judges Translates to Politics as Usual
To the Editor:
On Sept. 12 you editorialized that the current selection process for the judiciary in the general election was so flawed by politics that it was time for nonpartisan merit selection.


CHRONICLE
Honors will go to RANDOLPH GUGGENHEIMER on Monday night for quietly championing the cause of North General Hospital in Harlem, the nonprofit community hospital that was founded in 1979.
After difficult financial times in its early years, the hospital is now doing well and has created about 3,500 jobs in the community.
The United Hospital Fund, a nonprofit research and philanthropic organization concerned with health-care issues, will present Mr.
Guggenheimer with the Distinguished Community Service Award at the its annual dinner-dance at the Plaza.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Hillary Clinton; Talking Up To Children On Politics
Hillary Clinton fielded a few tough questions yesterday from some of the children she has said she will speak for if her husband is elected President.
After delivering a speech on education reform at the Bank Street College, Mrs.
Clinton visited an eighth-grade government class in the adjoining Bank Street School for Children, where students asked whether the family-leave bill supported by her husband, Gov.
Bill Clinton, would hurt businesses, whether children should be allowed to divorce their parents and what she would do to improve public education.
In detailed responses, Mrs. Clinton did not talk down to her audience.


Russians Getting Share Vouchers but Ruble Falls
As Russia began to hand out privatization vouchers to each of its 150 million citizens today, giving them a small share of the national wealth, the ruble lost 21.6 percent of its value against the dollar.
It was a small picture of the contradictions of economic change as Russia tries to build a functioning capitalist economy and a convertible currency out of the wreckage of 70 years of Communism.


On Stage, and Off
Steps Forward, Steps Back
The paucity of openings on Broadway this fall is a nerve-racking circumstance, more acutely felt, perhaps, for coming on the heels of a smashing spring.
This week the news was only partly good.
"Solitary Confinement," a murder mystery by Rupert Holmes ("The Mystery of Edwin Drood") and starring Stacy Keach, will reopen the Nederlander Theater on Dec. 8.


Kicker's Complaint: A Muscle Is the Measure of Landeta's Short Punts
Since 1985, when the Giants signed him out of the United States Football League, Sean Landeta has been one of professional football's most consistent players.
He ranks ninth on the National Football League career punting list with a gross average of 43.4 yards.
He has punted in two Pro Bowls.
But this season has been a disaster for him.
Of the 23 N.F.L. punters who have kicked enough to qualify for the weekly statistical ranking, he ranks last in gross average (38.3 yards) and net average (28.1).
Seven of his 15 punts have gone fewer than 40 yards.
Against the Dallas Cowboys on Sept. 13, one punt was blocked and one was deflected.


Standards for Nuclear Waste
The energy bill that emerged from the House-Senate conference committee seeks to speed establishment of a nuclear waste dump with a new way to set performance standards, presumably looser ones.
The provision, written by Bennett Johnston, the chairman of the Senate Energy Committee, establishes a presumption that the site will be cared for in perpetuity by the Secretary of Energy.
This would remove from the licensing process the nagging question of how to protect the repository in the future, say, in 1,000 years.


Virdon Is Interviewed for Marlins' Job
BILL VIRDON interviewed for the Florida Marlins' managerial job yesterday, and sources said he would be invited for a second visit.
The Marlins have decided to hire someone with experience as a big league manager, eliminating such candidates as CHRIS CHAMBLISS and TONY MUSER .


Two Top Posts Filled at American Ballet Theater
Kevin McKenzie has been named the new artistic director of American Ballet Theater and Gary Dunning has been appointed the company's executive director.
The announcement was made by Stephen J. Friedman, chairman of the governing trustees of Ballet Theater Foundation, after several months of uncertainty about the company's financial and artistic future.
Mr.
McKenzie, who is 38 years old, was a principal dancer with Ballet Theater for 12 years.
Mr.
Dunning, also 38, joined the staff as assistant to the general manager in 1978 and was the general manager from 1984 to 1986, when he left to become executive director of the Houston Ballet.


TV Weekend; Portrait of an Art Historian and Spy
Public television's "Masterpiece Theater" is thrust into a hall of mirrors this Sunday with a presentation that includes not only the Alan Bennett play "A Question of Attribution" but also an afterword that includes, among other things, Alistair Cooke taking exception to certain Bennett statements.
Written as a stage companion piece for Mr.
Bennett's play "An Englishman Abroad," which was originally a television drama based on a real-life anecdote involving the British spy Anthony Burgess, "A Question of Attribution" offers a portrait of Sir Anthony Blunt.
He was the art adviser to Queen Elizabeth II who in 1979 was revealed to be the fourth man in the Burgess-Maclean-Philby spy ring; he was subsequently stripped of his knighthood.
As Blunt, portrayed with unassailably prim propriety by James Fox, investigates the authenticity of a Titian at Buckingham Palace, he discovers that British Intelligence is closing in on him for more spy information, with the warning that six years earlier he had been promised immunity, not anonymity.


100 of Hartmarx's Stores To Be Closed by End of Year
The HSSA Group Ltd., the investment group that acquired the Hartmarx Corporation's specialty stores last week, will close 100 of the 187 stores by the end of the year, Harvey A. Weinberg, HSSA's president and chief executive, said in an interview yesterday.
Contrary to a report in The Daily News Record, a trade publication, Mr.
Weinberg said HSSA would keep 13 of its 16 Wallachs stores open, including the Fifth Avenue flagship.


Short-Handed Flyers Trade for a Goalie
Philadelphia Flyers obtained goaltender STEPHANE BEAUREGARD from the Winnipeg Jets yesterday for future considerations.


President Set to Veto Cable Bill
Bush Administration officials said tonight that President Bush would veto a bill to regulate cable television prices on Saturday.
But highly placed Republicans on Capitol Hill said they did not know if they had the votes to sustain the President's veto.


Looming Indictments Unnerve L.I. Town Officials
With thousands of acres of pine barrens and fallow potato fields, Brookhaven, a town larger than all of Nassau County, was seen a decade ago as the final frontier for the city's suburban sprawl.
It was the fastest-growing township on Long Island, a boom town in Suffolk County with an unfettered optimism about its potential for growth.


Antley Facing a Ban
CHRIS ANTLEY, one of the most successful and aggressive jockeys in New York, faced another suspension yesterday after he was charged with interference in the third race at Belmont Park and his mount, the 3-5 favorite, was disqualified and demoted from first place to seventh.
Antley has already been suspended four times this year for a total of 34 days for careless or reckless riding.
Another suspension could keep him from riding in next week's series of seven stakes on Belmont's Super Saturday II, although he could delay the penalty by filing an appeal.
But he would then have to worry that a delayed suspension might remove him from the Breeders' Cup championships on Oct. 31.


Food Facts Just a Phone Call Away
People are worried about what they're eating. (Is it fattening? Polluted? Carcinogenic? How about
poisoned
?) And in response, a growing number of toll-free telephone numbers are being set up to offer advice about food safety and nutrition.
Indeed, dozens of companies, including Land O'Lakes Inc., have followed the lead of the Butterball Turkey Company, which 12 years ago established the Butterball Turkey Talk-Line to give recipes and general advice on handling and cooking turkey.
The Land O'Lakes Holiday Bake-Line, at (800) 782-9606, will take calls daily from Nov. 1 to Dec. 24; the Butterball Turkey Talk-Line, at (800) 323-4848, will take calls Monday through Friday from Nov. 2 to Dec. 23, and on the weekend of Nov. 21-22; hearing-impaired people can call (800) 833-3848.


After Court Victory, Impeached Judge Sets Sights on Congress
Two weeks ago, when a Federal judge ruled that the United States Senate had improperly removed Alcee L. Hastings as a judge on a United States District Court, Mr.
Hastings was in the midst of a bruising primary campaign for Congress.
Mr.
Hastings, who was impeached in 1989 on charges of bribery and perjury, hailed the ruling as vindication.


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nuclear Plants Held Hostage to Old Fuel
The long delay in finding a place to dispose of nuclear wastes is about to collide with the accelerated pace at which the reactors are being retired.
Owners of several aging nuclear complexes are already keeping parts of their plants running for lack of a place to dump the highly radioactive spent fuel, and many more are likely to follow.
The cost of doing so could go up to $20 million a year each if the Government cannot keep its promise to take old fuel by 1998.


Evansville Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Registration Of Voters Is Intensifying
George T. Younger Sr. figures he has registered about 50 people to vote in the last 10 days, all while selling his "soul dogs" from a street-corner stand here.
He has nabbed customers, people waiting for the downtown bus near his cart, and those, like 21-year-old Al-Qumar Lindsay, just passing by.
"I ask everyone who goes by if they're registered," said the 24-year-old entrepreneur, as he guided Ms.
Lindsay through the form.
"A lot of them just walk by. Others say it won't make a difference. I tell them it will."


Top Police Job in Suffolk May Go to Acting Chief
County Executive Robert J. Gaffney reached into the troubled ranks of the Suffolk Police Department today to pick a 26-year veteran as his third police commissioner in five months.
Mr.
Gaffney named Peter F. Cosgrove, who joined the department in 1966 and worked his way through the ranks to acting chief of patrol.
He would succeed Robert Creighton, who two weeks ago announced his resignation, which becomes effective Oct. 30.
Commissioner Creighton expressed bitter disappointment over his lack of influence on budget matters and a reorganization plan that he said was being forced upon him by Mr.
Gaffney's office.


Few Bright Spots in Last Job Report Prior to Election
In the last chance for an improved job report that could help President Bush's re-election chances, the Government said today that the United States lost 57,000 more jobs in September and that the unemployment rate posted a statistically insignificant one-tenth point decline, to 7.5 percent.
The figures, the most comprehensive measure of the economy's performance last month, were greeted with some relief by economic analysts, most of whom had expected job losses twice as high along with a possible uptick in the unemployment rate.


Classical Music in Review
Roscoe Mitchell Merkin Concert Hall


Kovalev Contract: Tick, Tick,
If rookie Aleksei Kovalev does not receive an acceptable contract from the Rangers this weekend, he will return to Russia to sort out his military obligations and consider his future.
Martin Heller, the agent for Kovalev, met with General Manager Neil Smith yesterday, but reported no progress in talks.
"Negotiations are cordial, but we're still not close," Heller said.
"Both sides are trying."


Flights of Fancy in the Skies Over the Bronx


Classical Music in Review
Parnassus Plays Wolpe Ethical Culture Society Auditorium


Bush: The Two Faces of Clinton
The Bush campaign began broadcasting a commercial Thursday jthat attacks Gov Bill Clinto for the first time on the draft and other issues.
Campaign officials said the 30-second advertisement was placed in several markets around the country but they would not be specific.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with split screen of two candidates (both in jackets: one with a red tie and the other with a dark blue tie) speaking, gesturing, their faces obscured by gray dots.
By the end of the ad, the dots disappear to show that both candidates are Mr.
Clinton.


Student Stabbed in Disrupted High School
A cafeteria fight disrupted a Brooklyn high school yesterday, with as many as 300 students roaming the hallways as a 16-year-old student was stabbed in the head, the police said.
The fight, involving two to four students, broke out in a crowded cafeteria at the school, Eastern District High School in Williamsburg.
Nine police officers and five school safety officers broke it up, said Capt.
Albert Girimonte, the commanding officer of the 90th Precinct.
He said a crowd of students left the cafeteria, with some roaming the halls and others leaving the school.


Russian Court in Party Trial Curbs Travel by Gorbachev
The Russian Constitutional Court barred Mikhail S. Gorbachev today from leaving the country until he agreed to testify in the trial of the Communist Party, thus shaping a fateful challenge for Russia's transition to the rule of law.
The court, a creation of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, took the action after Mr.
Gorbachev, the last President of the Soviet Union, published an open letter to the court on Wednesday refusing in uncompromising terms to take part "in a political trial, which can have only negative results."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article on page B9 yesterday, under the headline "In the Yankees' Book, Perez Is a 20-Gamer," was replaced in some copies by a reprinted article from Thursday's issue.


Edward H. Gottesman, Artist, 41
Edward H. Gottesman, an artist and designer, died on Monday at the Kaiser Permanente Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
He was 41 years old and lived in nearby Berkeley.
He died of an AIDS-related illness, his family said.


INSIDE
New Leader Jolts Brazilians
Taking over as Acting President, Itamar Augusto Franco startled Brazil by naming an obscure tax lawyer as Finance Minister.
Page 3.


Brewers Stay Alive For Another Fateful Day
Down to their final three outs and their last chance to stay afloat in the American League East, the Milwaukee Brewers rallied to beat the Oakland Athletics tonight, 3-2, tying the game in the ninth inning and winning it in the 11th on an unearned run.
The victory extended the Brewers' season another day.
The Toronto Blue Jays defeated the Detroit Tigers, 8-7, earlier tonight, assuring themselves of at least a tie.
The Brewers still have to win both of their remaining games against the A's and hope that the Blue Jays lose to Detroit to force a one-game playoff.


Classical Music in Review
'The Tragedy of Carmen' DiCapo Opera St. Jean Baptiste Church


Review/Film Festival; Spectral Meditation on Old Russia
"Stone" isn't the best way to get to know Aleksandr Sokurov, a Russian director still comparatively new to American audiences.
"Stone" is best seen as a kind of footnote to "Save and Protect," his 1989 Siberian variation on "Madame Bovary," and the other films presented in the Sokurov retrospective at the Walter Reade Theater in January.
The new film, which will be shown at the New York Film Festival today at 3:45 P.M., is a severely obscure meditation on pre-revolutionary Russia in the form of an encounter between a ghost from the past and the ghost's present-day guardian.
In fact, the two characters seem to be the shade of Anton Chekhov and the young man who tends a Chekhov museum in the Crimea, though that is never made explicit.


Improving African Farming Is a Two-Part Job; World Bank's Role
To the Editor:
Richard Critchfield in his Sept. 14 Op-Ed article grossly distorts the nature of World Bank assistance to African agriculture.
For example, he says World Bank-supported "structural adjustment" programs in Africa go "wrong in practice." On the contrary, farmers are almost always better off as a result of structural adjustment because it frees agricultural prices, eliminates costly government marketing boards and allows farmers to make a living income.
African countries undertaking economic reform are performing significantly better than nonreforming countries
,
particularly Ghana, Tanzania, Togo, Burkina Faso and Nigeria.


No Headline
It won't be like going to an occasional movie or the theater, and then you can let it lie for a couple of weeks.
This will be a nine-day soap opera. -- CECELIA TICHI of Vanderbilt University, on the Presidential debate plan.  [ 9:1. ]


Yanks Contemplating Changes (Gasp!)
Although the Yankees had played 160 games and the final weekend of the season was upon them after tonight's 6-3 victory over the Red Sox, they were still occasionally showing signs of an organization without direction.
The latest flash involves the coaching staff and two of their front-line players.
There has been speculation over the last month that the Yankees would make at least two changes among their coaches and renounce the rights to outfielder Mel Hall.
It has also become clear in the last few weeks that they would probably buy out pitcher Scott Sanderson's contract for $250,000, instead of bringing him back next season at $2.5 million.


Improving African Farming Is a Two-Part Job; The Health Cost
To the Editor:
Richard Critchfield overlooks some serious consequences of Green Revolution technology as a solution to famine.
Has he forgotten the devastation caused by these technologies?
Expensive fertilizers and pesticides poison ground water and leave cancer-causing residues on farm workers and the produce that people eat.


John A. Weed Investment Executive, 52
John A. Weed, a vice president of Salomon Brothers Asset Management, died on Thursday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 52 years old.
He died of abdominal cancer, his wife, Elizabeth, said.


N.H.L. Team in Hartford Receiving $4 Million Loan
In their latest venture in investing in local companies to save jobs in Connecticut, state economic officials have made loans and loan guarantees to Connecticut's sole major-league sports team, the Hartford Whalers, to keep it from leaving Hartford.
The loan agreement, announced Thursday by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., gives the state the right to buy the team if its owner, Richard H. Gordon, a Hartford developer, offers it for sale during the seven-year term of a $4 million loan from the state.
In practice, Mr.
Weicker said, the state would use that right to arrange another buyer within Connecticut.


Religion Notes
Conflict on Ordaining Women
A popular auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Baltimore, Bishop P. Francis Murphy, has joined a handful of Roman Catholic prelates in declaring that he is in favor of the ordination of women.
"Justice demands it," Bishop Murphy wrote in the current issue of Commonweal, a biweekly magazine edited by Catholic lay people.
"The pastoral needs of the church require it."


Thousands of Israel's Arab Prisoners Staging a Fast
In one of the more widespread protests of its kind in recent years, several thousand Palestinian prisoners have been on a hunger strike all this week at eight prisons in Israel and the occupied territories.
Human rights groups both inside and outside Israel have often criticized prison conditions here, and their attacks are now being echoed by the protesters and their families.
They complain, among other things, about reduced food rations, inadequate health care, beatings and other harsh measures, including what they call an excessive reliance on solitary confinement.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 AN AIR SHIELD FOR BOSNIA
President Bush said the United States was ready to use its military forces to impose a ban on Serbian combat flights in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Such a step could introduce American air power into the Balkan war for the first time.  1  MUSLIMS RECOUNT RAPE BY SERBS
At least 150 Muslim women and girls who have reached the Bosnian capital in recent weeks are said to be in advanced stages of pregnancy after being raped by Serbian forces.
They say they were imprisoned so they could not have abortions.  5  ACTING PRESIDENT JOLTS BRAZIL
Itamar Augusto Franco assumed presidential powers and immediately created an uproar by appointing a little-known tax lawyer to Brazil's most powerful economic post.  3  U.N.
VOTES TO SEIZE IRAQI ASSETS
The United Nations Security Council voted to take control of hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of frozen Iraqi assets.
The money would be used to compensate victims of the invasion of Kuwait and to pay United Nations expenses inside Iraq.  2  INQUIRY INTO MISFIRED MISSILES
Investigators said a maintenance error or a simulated launch gone haywire were the most likely causes of a U.S. carrier's firing of two missiles at a Turkish warship.  2  COURT BARS TRIP BY GORBACHEV
A Russian court barred Mikhail Gorbachev from leaving the country until he agreed to testify in the trial of the Communist Party.  3  PALESTINIAN PRISON PROTEST
In one of the widest protests of its kind in recent years, several thousand Palestinians have been on a hunger strike at prisons in Israel and the occupied territories.  3  Angola's governing party leads as elections returns trickle in.  3  Prague Journal: Young Americans are drawn to an "unspoiled" city.  4  National 6-10  AGREEMENT REACHED ON DEBATES
The Republican and Democratic Presidential campaigns agreed on holding three Presidential debates and one Vice Presidential debate.  1  RESELLING THE PEROT BRAND
Ross Perot has a new advertising firm, and because he is not accepting Federal election funds, he can spend as much money as he wants.
But media experts doubt he has much of a chance.  1  PEROT'S EFFECT LOCALLY
The Clinton campaign in New York and Connecticut is largely discounting the impact of Ross Perot's return.
But in New Jersey, Mr.
Perot's re-entry offers an opportunity to President Bush, analysts say.  9  PEROT GIVES A BUDGET SCHEDULE
Ross Perot said that his economic program to balance the Federal budget would not be put in place until a year after his inauguration.  9  CLINTON ASSAILS BUSH ECONOMICS
Governor Clinton traveled to economically depressed areas the Midwest, areas President Bush bypassed on his trip last week, to attack his economic record.  9  LITTLE SUPPORT IN DETROIT
In the harsh urban landscape where the Detroit riots occurred a generation ago, some see utter irrelevance in the Presidential campaign.  10  JOBLESS RATE DIPS SLIGHTLY
The nation lost 57,000 more jobs in September, the Government said, and the unemployment rate fell to 7.5 percent from 7.6 percent, a statistically insignificant decline.  1  NEW ACCUSATIONS IN QUAYLE CASE
A Senate report accused the nation's top prison official of punishing a prisoner for political reasons on the eve of the 1988 presidential election, after the convict said he had sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.  1  PILEUP AT NUCLEAR PLANTS
Several aging nuclear complexes are keeping parts of their plants running for lack of a place to dump highly radioactive spent fuel, and more are likely to follow if the Government cannot keep its promise to take old fuel by 1998.  6  THE FAMILY'S NEW LOOK
At the annual fund-raising festival at St.
Philip's parish in San Francisco, few of the families fit the mold of the traditional American family.  6  STRIP-MINING PLAN BLOCKED
House and Senate conferees blocked a proposal by the Bush Administration to open millions of acres of Federal land to strip mining for coal.  7  CRIME AND SCHOOLS BILLS KILLED
Congressional Roundup: Senate Republicans killed a measure to encourage educational change as well as an anti-crime measure.10  Religion Notes: A bishop supports ordaining women.  7  The President won his fight with Congress on abortion counseling.  10  Alcee Hastings has a good chance of winning a Congressional seat.  6  Metro Digest 25  MAYOR TRIES FENCE-MENDING
Two weeks after a bitter police demonstration at City Hall, Mayor Dinkins has begun an effort to repair relations with the Police Department and lower the oratory, including his own, over the racially charged issue of the Civilian Complaint Review Board.  1  HOLES IN THE SAFETY NET
Created 20 years ago, Supplemental Security Income was intended to guarantee a minimum income -- a safety net below all safety nets -- for those Americans considered most vulnerable: the elderly, the blind and the disabled.
But the program has come under fire as paying too little and discouraging friends and relatives from taking care of one another.  1  Business Digest 35  Consumer's World 11  For any tie that binds, there is a club to join.
How thieves try to horn in on your credit card accounts.
A body pouch to beat the chill in the stadium.
Arts/Entertainment 13-18  Filming a tribal war.  17  Film: "In the Soup." 13  Music: "Fidelio" in concert.  13  Dance: Ballet Folklorico.  13  Sports 30-34  Baseball: Blue Jays clinch a tie.  31  Basketball: Knicks sign Davis.  31  Column: Berkow on Magic.  31  Football: Another chance for Florida State against Miami.  31  Obituaries 12  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  For cities: some Christmas tree.
How to disarm Iraq.
Richard E. Mooney: Sousa.
Letters  Russell Baker: Un cortege a trois.
Paulette Mason: I'm 38 and running out of time.
Haley Barbour: Clinton, the Teflon candidate.
Horacio Verbitsky: Argentina retreats from democracy.


U.N. Council Votes to Use Iraqi Assets Frozen Abroad
The United Nations Security Council voted today to take control of hundreds of millions of dollars worth of Iraqi assets frozen outside the country.
The seized assets would be used to compensate victims of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and to pay United Nations expenses in Iraq.
The move means that Iraq will now begin using the proceeds of its huge oil reserves, believed to be the second largest in the world, to meet claims against it and to buy more foreign food and medicine for its people instead of relying on aid.


Pazienza Ready to Go
VINNY PAZIENZA, the World Boxing Association junior middleweight champion who suffered cracked vertebrae in an auto accident in his native Rhode Island last November, has been cleared to fight again.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Roundup; Tough Fight Seen Over Energy Bill
Senator J. Bennett Johnston, the Louisiana Democrat who is the lead sponsor of the energy bill before Congress, said today that he would refuse to alter the legislation in order to avert threats of a filibuster.
The energy bill is one measure that Senate and House leaders have said they want to pass before adjournment.
But Nevada's two Senators are insisting on the deletion of a provision they say would weaken safety at a proposed nuclear waste site in their state.


Reason Sought for Deadly Firing of Missiles at Turkish Ship


150 Muslims Say Serbs Raped Them in Bosnia
At least 150 Muslim women and teen-age girls who have crossed into Government-held areas of Sarajevo in recent weeks are said to be in advanced stages of pregnancy and have asserted that they became pregnant after being raped by Serbian nationalist fighters.
They also said they had been imprisoned for months afterward in an attempt to keep them from having abortions.
The accusations, some of them from girls as young as 14, were reported originally by the state commission for the investigation of war crimes, a Bosnian Government agency that is amassing evidence on a range of alleged abuses by Serbian forces in the six-month Bosnian war.
Doctors, lawyers and social workers who have talked with some of the women say that they believe that their accounts are credible.


Official Shifts At Chrysler
Robert A. Perkins, vice president for government relations at the Chrysler Corporation, will retire from the auto maker on Dec. 31 to take a similar post at the Economic Strategy Institute, a fledgling research center that Chrysler is helping to sponsor.
Robert G. Liberatore, 43 years old, who as Chrysler's executive director of public policy was a top assistant to Mr.
Perkins, will succeed him, the auto maker said Thursday.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Says It Will Take a Year to Enact 'Fair-Share Sacrifice' Plan
One day after he jarred the Presidential campaign with his announcement that he was re-entering the race, Ross Perot said today that, if he is elected, his plan to balance the Federal budget would not get started until a year after his inauguration.
Interviewed by Barbara Walters for the ABC News program "20/20," Mr.
Perot said it would take that long to secure Congressional approval of the legislation needed to implement his economic proposals.


CHRONICLE
Everybody seems to have a different view of Christopher Columbus, and a different opinion on who has the right to claim him as one of their own.
On Monday evening, Italian and Jewish leaders will have their say.
And kosher Italian wine will be served at an Italian-Jewish symposium to commemorate the quincentenary of Columbus's arrival in America.
A compromise most certainly has to be made, said RABBI MARC SCHNEIER, president of the Foundation for Ethnic Understanding, because many Italians recognize Columbus as a native son of Genoa and because a number of scholars maintain that Columbus may have been a Marrano, or a secret Jew.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Senate endorsement of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty referred incorrectly in some copies to the new lending approved by the Senate for the International Monetary Fund.
It was $12 billion.


Battle Lines Drawn in USAir Deal
In the lobbying game in Washington, the spoils often go to the side that can make its case the quickest, in the simplest terms and, in this political season, with the most voter appeal.
That may well put USAir and British Airways out in front of the major American carriers in one of the most heated lobbying battles in the aviation industry -- over whether the British carrier should be allowed to invest $750 million in the struggling American airline.


COMPANY NEWS
AMOCO OIL CO., a subsidiary of Amoco Corp., signed the first agreement by a Western company for conventional petroleum exploration rights in Poland.
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH Co., will enter the Italian consumer market early next year with telephones, answering systems and accesories approved by the Italian Ministry of Telecommunications.


Review/Film Festival; Durrenmatt Misanthropy in a New Setting
Anyone can be bought if the price is right.
That is the message of Friedrich Durrenmatt's viciously misanthropic drama "The Visit," in which a woman buys an entire town in order to wreak revenge on the lover who betrayed her decades earlier.
In "Hyenas," Djibril Diop Mambety's pungent film adaptation of the story, the setting has been moved from Europe to Africa.
Although the film by the Senegalese director keeps the outlines of the Durrenmatt play intact, the change of locale lends the tale a new political dimension.
The vengeance that the richest woman in the world brings to the dusty African village of her birth is an avalanche of irresistible Western paraphernalia that will certainly eradicate the area's tribal culture.


Patents; Improving the Soil Of Pitchers' Mounds
Hoping to make life easier for baseball pitchers, an independent inventor in Iowa this week patented a new soil composition for pitching mounds.
Invented by Boris Kviesitis of Des Moines, the mixture of sand, clay and plastic particles is designed for pitching mounds made of molded fiberglass covered with a clay mixture.


Devils and Stastny Making Goo-Goo Eyes Again
With the opener of the National Hockey League season drawing close, there were indications today that the Devils were drawing close to re-signing Peter Stastny.
Lou Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, said this afternoon he planned to call Stastny after tonight's exhibition game against the Rangers, which New York won, 4-3, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was New Jersey's final tuneup before its season opener with the Islanders next Tuesday night.


Park Electrochemical Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 30


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall


Steinbrenner Faces A Vocal Olympic Foe
George Steinbrenner might have won back his power base in baseball, but he is facing an impudent challenge within the Olympic movement.
Josiah Henson, Steinbrenner's most vocal opponent within the United States Olympic Committee, has decided to run against Steinbrenner and two other candidates for the three positions of executive vice president of the U.S.O.C.
The vote will take place Oct. 11 in Miami Beach at the annual board of directors meeting, but a public campaign has already begun.


From Art-Loving Gangster To a Menacing Hemophiliac
In his arch, furiously clever "In the Soup," Alexandre Rockwell tackles the subject most readily available to any up-and-coming film maker: the difficulty of getting a film made.
Beyond this, there is nothing pat or ordinary about "In the Soup," which won the prize for best dramatic feature at the Sundance Film Festival this year and a well-deserved best-actor award for Seymour Cassel.
Mr.
Cassel, in a hilarious turn as a mischievous, big-hearted gangster and potential movie producer, is less an actor here than a one-man show.
Mr.
Rockwell has transformed his potentially myopic subject into a wild grab bag of offbeat characters and deadpan comic effects, and in the process made a dryly funny film of exceptional visual beauty.
The crystal-clear black-and-white look of Phil Parmet's cinematography gives a helpfully austere look to scenes that otherwise might go over the top.


David T. Purtilo, 53, a Specialist In Disorders of the Immune System
Dr.
David T. Purtilo, a specialist in disorders of the immune system and chairman of the pathology-microbiology department at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, died Monday at the Naples, Fla., Community Center.
He was 53 years old.
Dr.
Purtilo, who lived in Omaha, was in Naples to deliver a scientific paper before the American Association for Cancer Research when he suffered a stroke, the university medical center said.
He had been a professor there since 1981.


Dr. David Caplovitz, an Authority On Spending Habits, Dies at 64
Dr.
David Caplovitz, a sociologist and an authority on American spending habits and misleading sales practices, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, his family said.


President's Strip-Mining Plan For National Parks Is Blocked
A proposal by the Bush Administration to open millions of acres of national parks and forests to strip mining for coal was blocked Thursday by House and Senate conferees.
The Administration's proposal, which the Department of the Interior planned to put in effect after the November election, would have made national parks and forests as well as millions of acres of private land in 24 states vulnerable to the ecologically destructive technology.


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Medical Data On Clifford
A court-appointed doctor has concluded that forcing Clark M. Clifford to stand trial in New York would greatly increase the risk that the prominent Washington lawyer, who has a history of heart trouble, would suffer a fatal heart attack.
The report by Allan Ross, director of the cardiology division at the George Washington University Medical Center, was submitted Thursday afternoon to a Federal judge in Washington.
Dr.
Ross is the fourth doctor to have warned that the stress of a trial poses a serious risk for Mr.
Clifford, 85 years old.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Three Tied for Lead at Southern Open  Jim Gallagher shot a 68 and Gary Hallberg a 69 to join Robert Friend atop the leader board after yesterday's second round of the Southern Open in Pine Mountain, Ga.
Friend, among the five players who shared the opening-round lead of 67, had a two-day score of seven-under-par 137 after a round of 70 over a Mountain View Golf Course.
John Daly, among the leading group on Thursday, had a one-under-par 71, his seventh consecutive sub-par round.
Joining him at 138 was Ed Humenik, another first-round leader. (AP) TENNIS Graf Defeats a Maleeva and Faces Another  Top-seeded Steffi Graf defeated Magdalena Maleeva, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday and will face another Maleeva in today's semifinals of the Volkswagen Grand Prix in Leipzig, Germany.
Seventh-seeded Katerina Maleeva, Magdalena's older sister, upset No. 3 Anke Huber, 1-6, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1.
In less of an upset, Helena Sukova beat No. 2 Conchita Martinez, a clay-court specialist, 3-6, 6-2, 6-2, on the indoor fast surface.
Sukova will face fourth-seeded Jana Novotna, who rallied past Sabine Applemans, 3-6, 6-1, 6-0. (AP) Korda vs.
Lendl: Top-seeded Petr Korda beat Cedric Pioline, 2-6, 6-3, 6-2, in the quarterfinals of the Swiss Indoors in Basel.
In today's semifinals, Korda will face third-seeded Ivan Lendl, who routed Andrei Chesnokov, 6-1, 6-2.
No. 2 Boris Becker needed 2 hours 35 minutes to defeat Amos Mansdorf, 7-6 (7-5), 6-7 (6-8), 6-3, and will face Marc Rosset, the hard-serving Swiss and local favorite.
Rosset beat Peter Lundgren, 6-2, 6-4. (AP) AUTO RACING Michael Andretti Wins Pole in a Record
Michael Andretti won the pole with a track record-setting time at the Pennsylvania International Raceway yesterday and made the Indy-car championship battle even tighter going into tomorrow's Bosch Spark Plug Grand Prix.
Andretti, who lives fewer than three miles from the Nazareth track, turned in a lap of 181.435 miles an hour, smashing the track record of 178.740, set last year by Rick Mears on the one-mile oval.
By winning the pole, Andretti now trails the Indy-car series leader, Al Unser Jr., by 10 points and Bobby Rahal by 9.
Emerson Fittipaldi earned the outside position on the front row with a lap of 181.129. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL Linden Spoils Elizabeth's Homecoming  Elizabeth (N.J.) High School's failure to convert two 2-point conversion passing attempts in the second half proved the difference last night as the Minutemen (1-1) dropped a 14-12 decision to rival Linden (2-1).
Two fumbles by Elizabeth freshman quarterback Al Hawkins led to touchdowns as the Tigers quieted the homecoming crowd by taking a 14-0 lead at the half.
Hawkins, making his first varsity start, responded with a 49-yard strike to receiver Ron Lee late in the third quarter to set up the touchdown that narrowed the deficit to 14-6.
Three plays later, Cliff Bogar recovered teammate Shon Hart's fumbled punt and raced 67 yards to the Tiger 3-yard line, setting up another Elizabeth score.


SBS Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Year to July 31


Irving Berlin's Musical Items To Go to Library of Congress
Irving Berlin's three daughters have donated the songwriter's musical collection of 750,000 items to the music archives of the Library of Congress.
The collection includes original scores, manuscripts, medals, scrapbooks, business records and photographs, all of which document the 60-year career of the composer of "God Bless America," "White Christmas" and countless other standards.
The collection also includes vocal scores for Berlin's 1946 musical "Annie Get Your Gun," lyric sheets for songs from the show -- among them "There's No Business Like Show Business" and "The Girl That I Marry" -- and 42 volumes of press clippings.
Berlin died in 1989 at the age of 101.


Panel to Reveal Testimony In Inquiry on Bomb Plant
A House subcommittee that has been questioning Federal prosecutors about why they did not seek convictions of Government and corporate officials for pollution crimes at the Rocky Flats bomb factory voted yesterday to make the testimony public.
The lawmakers, who are members of the Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, are examining how officials of the Rockwell International Corporation and the Department of Energy avoided prosecution in connection with their operation of the plant, which is near Denver.
Rockwell itself pleaded guilty to 10 counts and was fined $18.5 million, the first ever paid by a Department of Energy contractor.


How Thieves Try to Horn In On Your Credit-Card Accounts
Howard Greene, a New York executive, had reason to be livid earlier this year.
One of his credit cards had been rejected by a store clerk.
The next day, his wife, who had another credit card, received a letter from the issuer asking her to confirm that she had changed her address.
Both the Greenes were victims of fraud.
After many weeks of frustration, Mr.
Greene, who always pays his bills on time, discovered that the account on the first credit card was delinquent because a thief had persuaded the issuer to provide an additional card and to send all bills to another address.
A similar operation was under way with his wife's account, but it was unsuccessful because the issuer took the time and trouble to confirm the request before mailing a new card.


Executive Changes
AJ CONTRACTING CO.
INC., New York, named James F. Capalino executive vice president.
BELL &amp; HOWELL CO., Skokie, Ill., appointed Henry A. D'Ambrosio corporate vice president of administration.


First Team Sports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


NEC Planning to Market Low-Priced PC's
The American unit of the NEC Corporation of Japan will enter the crowded low-priced personal-computer market in an effort to bolster its sagging PC business in the United States.
Executives of NEC Technologies Inc., based in Boxboro, Mass., said that they would introduce a line of PCs, called Ready, that would be loaded with software packages aimed at home users and small businesses.


CHRONICLE
FREDERICK A. O. SCHWARZ JR., the former chairman of the New York City Charter Revision Committee, is turning his attention to the birds, the bees, the trees and toxic dumps.
This week Mr.
Schwarz, 57 years old, was elected chairman of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an advocacy group that mixes law and science in trying to preserve the environment.
He succeeds ADRIAN B. DEWIND, a lawyer who has been the organization's chairman for 12 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Roundup; Restriction Voted On Montana Area
The House voted today to restrict 1.5 million acres of Montana wilderness -- an area the size of Delaware -- from commercial development or park use after a contentious debate between conservationist and pro-development lawmakers.
The bill, which still must be reconciled with a less sweeping Senate measure, would also set aside an additional one million acres as wilderness study areas or recreation lands, where sports enthusiasts could ride dirt bikes and snowmobiles or hike on trails.
The measure passed by a vote of 282 to 183.


Trevino Withdraws
A thumb injury forced LEE TREVINO out of the Vantage Championship in Clemmons, N.C., in the first round yesterday and could sideline him for the rest of the year.
Trevino worried that the injury could also cost him Player of the Year honors on the Senior PGA Tour.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Roundup; Democrats Work On a Tax Bill
The Democratic chairmen of the House and Senate tax committees, Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, met today to work out a compromise tax bill that would satisfy both houses without provoking a Presidential veto.
Both houses have passed legislation that would, among other things, spur business investment in economically distressed neighborhoods, extend a number of expiring tax breaks, and pay for the expenditures with several tax increases.


Miller (Herman) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Plymouth Rubber Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Struck Pittsburgh Paper Put on Sale
The E. W. Scripps Company, exasperated by lack of progress in settling a 137-day strike, said today that it was putting The Pittsburgh Press up for sale.
The Cincinnati-based media conglomerate said it had hired the First Boston Corporation to find a buyer for the newspaper, which has been negotiating with the teamsters' union over a plan to eliminate jobs and make the paper's distribution system more efficient.


Bush Would Use Force to Ban Serbs' War Flights
President Bush said today that the United States was ready to use its military forces to impose a ban on combat flights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a step that could introduce American air power into the Balkan war for the first time.
In a written statement issued by the White House, Mr.
Bush said he was seeking a United Nations resolution banning all flights in Bosnian airspace except those authorized by the world body.
He said Serbian bombing attacks showed a "flagrant disregard for human life."  [ Excerpts, page 5. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Campaign Is a 'Fraud' to the Urban Underclass
The burned- out buildings have mellowed in the generation since the riots.
Like Yorick's skull, they lend an air of ghostly attentiveness as Kenneth Anderson talks about the far-off "perps," the Presidential candidates who have been skirting what he knows and cherishes and despairs of as America's underclass.
"You know, perps," he explained, "as in perpetrators of a fraud."


Dow Loses 53.76, in Worst Day Since April
Skittish investors, disappointed by the Federal Reserve's reluctance to cut interest rates and fearful that third-quarter earnings will be disappointing, poured sell orders into the stock market yesterday, fueling a broad retreat.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 53.76 points, or 1.65 percent, to 3,200.61.
The decline was the biggest since April 7, when the Dow lost 61.94, or 1.9 percent.


Two Banks Shut and Sold, In Newark and New Haven
The Howard Savings Bank of Newark and the First Constitution Bank of New Haven were closed yesterday and immediately sold to other banks.
There will be no loss to their depositors, including those with accounts over the $100,000 limit on Federal deposit insurance, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Filming a Tribe and Surviving a War
For the Australian documentary film makers Bob Connolly and Robin Anderson, the essence of their craft is maintaining a balance between taking control and, paradoxically, giving up control.
One element they try to control is time; they stay on location as long as necessary.
For their film "Black Harvest," they lived for a year among the Ganiga aboriginal tribe in the remote highlands of Papua New Guinea.
The film was shown Thursday and will be repeated today at 12:45 P.M. at the Margaret Mead Film and Video Festival at the American Museum of Natural History.


'Scared Silent' Was Call to Action on Abuse
To the Editor:
As executive producer and co-writer of the television program "Scared Silent: Exposing and Ending Child Abuse," I must respond to Walter Goodman's review (Weekend section, Sept. 4).
Perhaps if he had truly understood our film, he might have respected it more.
The film was not produced by any news organization, which is why "no responsibility is taken by network news departments." It was produced by Arnold Shapiro Productions, which the film makes clear.


Edith Sable, 82, League of Women Voters' Officer
Edith Sable, a longtime civic leader who fostered voter participation and recruited public officials and business leaders to debate New York City's problems and future, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 82 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
For four decades Mrs.
Sable was a League of Women Voters volunteer and officer.
She was the economic development director of its New York chapter and was also on the national board.


Review/Music; Maazel Conducts Pittsburgh Symphony In a Concert 'Fidelio'
Opera in concert is possibly, but not necessarily, an act of avoidance.
Expense and complication are, indeed, swept away, and if the piece is rare and complex, a seller's market prevails.
"This is not opera whole," the audience is told, "but be grateful for getting as much as you are."
"Fidelio," which the Pittsburgh Symphony brought to Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, is another story.
Beethoven, pure music's subtlest playwright, used sonata and variation forms to lead the ear along precisely designated paths of feeling: planting clues, retaining the ear's attention by the progressive condensation of repeated materials.


Improving African Farming Is a Two-Part Job; Complex Food Problem
To the Editor:
Richard Critchfield (Op-Ed, Sept. 14) is correct about the need for a Green Revolution in Africa.
He is incorrect to state that the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations have "phased out their agricultural programs." Five international agricultural research centers are headquartered in Africa, supported by USAID, the World Bank, other international assistance agencies and the foundations.
Collectively they commit over $100 million per year to research on African agriculture.


National Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ocean Optique Distributors reports earnings for Year June 30


Nets Sign Up Schintzius, Then Cross Their Fingers
The New Jersey Nets paused from their immediate problems at forward yesterday to sign a center who they hope will help in the future.
Granting a one-year guaranteed contract to the 7-foot-2-inch Dwayne Schintzius has no bearing on the Nets' intentions to re-sign the free-agent small forward, Chris Morris, or replace the recently departed substitute power forward, Terry Mills, according to Willis Reed, the team's senior vice president.


Classical Music in Review
Opening Night Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


For Cities: Some Christmas Tree
Want a challenge?
Try finding the urban aid in the urban aid bills just passed by the House and Senate.
The bills have little to do with cities and almost everything to do with rewarding powerful constituents.
Unless radically altered, the bills aren't worth passing.
After the Los Angeles riots in April, Congress pledged a swift response.
But then it dithered for months -- and finally proposed showering tens of billions on real estate investors, yacht buyers, oil and gas producers, even
rural
development.
Only a fraction is left for ghettos.
Of the $30 billion the Senate would spend over five years, only about $6 billion would go to blighted cities.


Americans Are in a Hole, and It's Not on the Green
Relishing the role of underdog and drawing energy from an inspired setting, Europe's best female golfers outplayed their more famous American counterparts today in the opening round of the Solheim Cup.
Led by the spectacular putting of Laura Davies of England, Europe won two of four matches and halved another to take a surprising 2 1/2-to-1 1/2 lead before a boisterous gallery of Scots at the rain-soaked Dalmahoy Golf and Country Club.


Dinkins, With Softer Words, Seeks to Repair Ties to Police
Two weeks after a bitter police demonstration at City Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins has begun an effort to repair relations with the Police Department and lower the oratory, including his own, over the racially charged issue of the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
In the last two days, he has met with police chaplains and members of the clergy from throughout the city, asking them to help him to reach out to the department's rank and file and to all New Yorkers to calm the racial divisions that the debate over his proposed board has aroused.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate slipped a notch to 7.5 percent in September, the Labor Department said in its last pre-election report.
Although it was markedly less negative than private economists and the White House had feared, the White House was hard put to find strong points in it, and Democrats were quick to attack.
American businesses cut their payrolls by 57,000, also a less severe result than predicted.
The Federal Reserve was not impelled to raise interest rates, as many had expected, although it could still do so.
The figures, the first comprehensive measure of the economy's performance last month, were greeted with some relief by economic analysts.  [ Page 1. ]
President Bush will veto a bill to regulate cable television prices on Saturday, Administration officials said.
But highly placed Republicans said they did not know if they had the votes to sustain the President's veto.
Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, said he did not expect a vote on overriding the veto until Monday.  [ 35. ] Markets
The Dow industrials plunged 53.76 points, or 1.65 percent, to 3,200.61.
Investors were disappointed at the Fed's reluctance to cut interest rates and fearful that earnings would slump.  [ 35. ]


LoJack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Faulty Income Safety Net: Breaking Rules to Survive
After 37 years of marriage, Abelardo and Amanda M. have told the Government that they have separated.
They are lying.
But, after decades of hard work, it is the only way, they say, that they can survive retirement.
By filling in fake addresses on a couple of forms, they scrape by, guiltily, with an extra $294 monthly from a Federal program called Supplemental Security Income.
Still, they run out of money at the end of each month, and search their cupboards for whatever food remains.


Correction
An editorial yesterday listed the wrong phone number for obtaining a voter registration form or information about local registration sites from the New York City Board of Elections.
The correct phone number is VOTE-NYC.
Registration forms are also available at post offices, libraries and state and city agencies.
In New York State, the deadline for mailing in registration forms for the election is next Friday.
Many polling places throughout the city will be open for last minute sign-ups next Thursday and Saturday from 1 P.M. to 9 P.M.


Corrections
A movie review in Weekend yesterday about "The Story of Qiu Ju" at the New York Film Festival rendered the name of the title character incorrectly in some references.
She is Qiu Ju.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  HOW SAFE A SAFETY NET?
Created 20 years ago, Supplemental Security Income was intended to guarantee a minimum income -- a safety net below all safety nets -- for those Americans considered most vulnerable: the elderly, blind and disabled.
But the program, which serves 470,000 people in New York State and 5.4 million people nationally, has come under fire as paying too little and discouraging relatives and friends from taking care of one another.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS TRIES TO MEND FENCES
Two weeks after a bitter police demonstration at City Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins has begun an effort to repair relations with the Police Department and lower the oratory, including his own, over the racially charged issue of the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
Page 1.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the imposition of sanctions on the athletic program at Syracuse University referred incorrectly to the sport for which the University of Michigan was placed on probation.
It is baseball, not basketball.


Television Technology reports earnings for Year June 26


Bridge
On this side of the Atlantic the normal procedure with a freakish hand is to bid as high as possible immediately.
In Europe some players prefer to lie in wait and back in later, a tricky tactic which worked well on the diagramed deal.
It was played at the new T.G.R. club in London, which may be the world's most luxurious bridge setting.
The declarer was Martin Barbour of London, who played in May in the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs in Manhattan.
After lying in wait he found himself in three spades doubled, and brought home a contract in which many would fail.


Utilities Lead Stock Funds' Modest Gains
Reflecting the performance of broad market averages, stock mutual funds registered unexciting gains during the third quarter.
Values of the average stock fund rose by 2.77 percent during the last three months, Lipper Analytical Services reported yesterday.
The gain outpaced the 0.63 percent decline in the Dow Jones industrial average and the 2.27 percent rise in the Russell 2000 index but narrowly trailed the 3.15 percent gain in the Standard &amp; Poors 500 index.


GOVERNING PARTY IS AHEAD IN ANGOLA
With nearly half the ballots counted in Angola's first free elections, President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and his governing party held a wide lead today over their nearest rivals, the former rebel group Unita and its leader, Jonas Savimbi.
Initial returns from the voting on Tuesday and Wednesday showed Mr. dos Santos with about 55 percent of the vote in the presidential race, the first multiparty contest in the country's history.
His lead had been slightly eroded by votes from rural areas for Mr.
Savimbi, who received about 25 percent.


NAVY SEEKS CAUSE OF ERRANT MISSILE
Investigators said today that a mistake during routine maintenance or a simulated missile launch gone haywire were the most likely causes of a United States aircraft carrier's firing of two missiles at a Turkish warship early this morning.
Five Turkish sailors were killed and 14 wounded in the incident, which took place during joint maneuvers in the Aegean Sea.


Van Slyke and Pirates Come Up Empty
Andy Van Slyke has always been a center of attention in the Pirates' clubhouse.
Mostly because he talks.
And talks, at length.
His favorite topic of late has been the Presidential race.
What drew people to Van Slyke yesterday, though, was a batting race, and his role in this weekend's Mets-Pirates series at Shea Stadium.
The Pirates clinched the division title on Sept. 26.
The Mets fell off the face of the earth long before that.
Last night's 6-3 Mets victory meant little more than the fact that the Mets kept themselves out of the division cellar for one more day.
After all, this series is, in effect, about nothing at all.


Editorial Notebook; Semper Sousa
Exactly 100 years after the Sousa Band made its debut in Plainfield, N.J., 12 concert bands assembled last weekend to pay tribute to the man known as the March King.
"If Johann Strauss is the Waltz King, then John Philip Sousa is the March King," said a turn-of-the century admirer, and the epithet stuck.
Sousa is properly famed for his wonderful marches. (He liked "Semper Fidelis" best.) But the all-day centennial concert at Plainfield High School celebrated a man of many talents -- a serious musician classically trained in the violin, a prolific composer of songs, waltzes and operettas in addition to those marches, and a tremendously successful entertainer dedicated to taking music to the masses.


Review/Dance; Columbus, From a Special Mexican Perspective
The men look lean and elegant in their black and silver costumes as they bend forward, hands locked behind their backs, huge sombreros hiding their faces.
The women in multihued skirts face them and respond to their partners' toe-first stamps with a flat-sole staccato.
Streamers fly toward the audience like comets and all onstage break into, yes, the Mexican Hat Dance.
The audience cheers.
As always, the Ballet Folklorico de Mexico is a colorful show and its latest program, repeated today at 2 and 8 P.M., fulfills all festive expectations.
Now celebrating the 40th anniversary of its founding by Amalia Hernandez, the Folklorico opened on Thursday night at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden (Seventh Avenue between 32d and 33d Streets) for a brief run.


How to Disarm Iraq
In an effort to step up pressure on Iraq, the United Nations Security Council has now voted to tap Baghdad's overseas assets to pay war compensation and U.N. administrative costs.
That's sound strategy: clearly defined pressure to achieve a clearly defined goal.
The same can no longer be said of the 26-month-long economic embargo against Iraq.
The embargo has been an impressive exercise in international solidarity, confounding skeptics who once predicted the effort would break down after just a few months.
Yet the strategy has begun to suffer from Washington's inflexibility.


Music and Film in Tribute to Milhaud
Merkin Concert Hall will open its 1992-93 season tomorrow with a three-part tribute to the French composer Darius Milhaud.
The event will feature piano, chamber and choral music, as well as the screening of a documentary about the composer, who was born 100 years ago and died in 1974.
Part 1, beginning at 2:30 P.M., will be piano and chamber music performed by the pianists Grant Johannesen and William Bolcom, the mezzo-soprano Joan Morris, the Dorian Wind Quartet and the Windham String Quartet.
Part 2, "Mirror on Milhaud," at 6 P.M., features the composer's widow, Madeleine, discussing her husband's work, and includes a screening of the documentary "A Visit With Darius Milhaud" and a panel discussion moderated by Nancy Shear.
The tribute concludes at 8 P.M. with a program entitled "Choral and Vocal Music on Jewish Themes" by the New York Concert Singers with the soprano Amy Burton, the baritone William Stone and others.
Tickets for Part 2 are $10; Parts 1 and 3 are $15 each.
Merkin Concert Hall is at 129 West 67th Street.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Perot to Unveil A Big Ad Pitch, But Will It Sell?
One day after Ross Perot announced that he would be running for President after all, he committed to spending almost $1 million next week to buy three half-hour blocks of advertising on network television.
An advertising firm, called the 270 Group, has been formed to produce shorter television and radio commercials for him.
And since the Texas billionaire is not accepting Federal election funds, he can spend as much money as he wants on advertising over the next four weeks.


Observer; Un Cortege A Trois
Bing Bigfoot moderated.
His opening question lasted 43 minutes.
Its brilliance, its wealth of historical references, which ranged from Hammurabi to Warren G. Harding, and its savagely polite insults to the intelligence of all three candidates made it clear why Bigfoot is acclaimed as the biggest bigfoot in the Washington bigfeet corps.
On being awakened, President Bush said he resented being introduced as President Bush.
Nor was he amused by Bing Bigfoot's calling him "Hor-gay Desi Perado." Barbara, adept at Spanish, had slipped him a note saying this was a sly way of calling him Jorge Desperado.


Clinton: Reminding Voters of a Promise
The Clinton campaign released a new 30-second commercial this week.
Campaign officials did not say where or how often it would run.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with "1988" in black letters on a white background.
Cut to Mr.
Bush at his 1988 nomination, saying "read my lips." Cut to words parroting the announcer, then to a repeat of Mr.
Bush's tax pledge.
More screens starkly print the announcer's charges.
Final words: "We can't afford four more years."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; In Depressed Middle West, Clinton Ridicules President on Economy
Gov.
Bill Clinton traveled today to the economically depressed areas of the Midwest that President Bush bypassed on his train trip last weekend to talk about his favorite themes: why George Bush is killing the economy and why George Bush will not tell the truth.
And this evening, campaign officials said that Mr.
Clinton, who had been criticized by Mr.
Bush over his refusal to take a position on the North American Free Trade Agreement, had decided to support the accord.


Judge Temporarily Blocks Layoffs Ordered by Florio
A judge on the New Jersey Supreme Court provided a reprieve -- at least briefly -- to hundreds of state employees who thought today would be their last day at work.
The decision by Judge Alan B. Handler capped a frantic day of legal action and set the stage for a constitutional showdown between the executive and legislative branches of state government over separation of powers.
Many of those with a more personal stake in the debate -- a job and a paycheck -- spent the day packing possessions into cardboard boxes or bidding farewell to colleagues.


Agencies' Compliance With Environmental Laws Is Criticized
New York State agencies fail to correct their own violations of environmental laws -- in some cases for years -- in nearly 1 out of every 10 cases, according to a report released at a State Assembly committee hearing here today.
For years, critics have said that New York State's own agencies are among the worst polluters in the state and that the Department of Environmental Conservation had a dual standard under which it was more lenient in enforcing environmental laws against state agencies than it was against members of the public.


Let Voice of America Emulate the BBC
To the Editor:
"Why Rush to Silence Democracy?" (editorial, Sept. 8) buys into the perdurable theory that the "Voice  [ of America ]  provides world coverage, while Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty provide local news
within
the listeners' own country." Even if this were true, why should listeners have to tune to two United States stations to get all the news? Why should taxpayers support several stations when one station can do a better job?


Clinton: The Swift Counterattack
Yesterday, one day after the Bush campaign began broadcasting an advertisement charging that Gov.
Bill Clinton would raise taxes for an array of average Americans, the Clinton campaign released its own commercial in response.
The 30-second ad will run in about 20 battleground states.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with a picture of four television screens, each featuring a clip from the Bush commercial.
At the top in a red band are the words "George Bush attack ad." The words " 'Misleading' -- The Washington Post, 10/2/92," appear superimposed over the screens.
Cut to quotation from The Wall Street Journal.
Cut to another red band reading "The Bush record," and a statement beneath: "The worst economic record of any president in 50 years." Cut to a photograph of Mr.
Bush.
Ends with black-on-white message: "Nothing could be more frightening than four more years."


Peters (J.M.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


7 Receive Life Terms in Racketeering Case
Seven members of a gang called the Green Dragons were sentenced to life in prison yesterday, after the brother of one of the gang's murder victims told the judge that the loss "just tears my heart and soul into thousands and thousands of pieces."
Prosecutors said the Green Dragons, a street gang of Asian youths operating in Queens, extorted tribute from dozens of restaurant owners in the Asian-American community, primarily in Elmhurst.
The defendants were convicted of racketeering charges that included the murders of seven people who were extortion targets, rival gang members or witnesses against the gang.


Deep Divisions on Policing the Police
While private negotiations continued yesterday on the shape of a new police review board, a second public hearing on the proposal exposed the deep racial and political divisions the issue has prompted.
All day and well into the evening, speakers on both sides testified before the City Council's Public Safety Committee on a bill that Mayor David N. Dinkins introduced two weeks ago to establish an independent agency to investigate police wrongdoing.


Patents; A Way to Cut Dosages of Harsh Drugs
A TEAM of scientists at Brown University and the University of Rhode Island has patented a compound that it says may reduce the toxic side effects of some drugs used to fight AIDS and cancer.
Though the compound has not yet been tested on humans, the scientists say laboratory results indicate that it could allow some cancer and AIDS patients to be treated with much smaller doses of medicine than is now possible.


Reading, Writing, Arithmetic and Arabic
Under the watchful eye of a burly Muslim security guard dressed in a white robe, 8-year-old Saeed Abdullah sat in a big orange chair in the lobby of the Clara Muhammad School in Queens last month, swinging his feet while his uncle spoke to school officials about enrolling the child in the third grade.
The boy had been attending a local public school, but the family said they were concerned about his moral as well as his physical well-being.
"The problems are so deeply entrenched," said the uncle, Hasan Abdullah, citing the urban school woes of drugs, alcohol, weapons and promiscuity.
"You can't expect to walk through the mud and remain clean."


Price Tag: For the Dog That Has Everything
Seat Belts - Pet Lovers Products, Reno Nev.: Adjustable harness connects to car seat belt and encircles dog's chest and torso.
Available in four sizes. $19.95 plus shipping.
Acting Lessons - Kamer Canine College, North Hollywood, Calif.: Eight-week course stresses stage presence, responsiveness to commands.
Teaches dogs to jump through hoops, roll over, stand on hind legs, "speak" (bark on command), shake hands and play dead.
Includes room and board, and videotapes of dog's progress. $4,150.
Mobile Grooming Service - Cip and Comb Mobile Pet Salon, Standardsville, Va.: Fully equipped trailer provides bath and beauty treatments at the dog's home. $32 for basic clip (includes bath, haircut, toenail trim, blow-dray and brush-out).
Bows and pompoms $3 to $5 each.
Portaits - Pet Portraits by Mary Clare Bromley, Atlanta: Oil paintings on canvas, from photographs.
Frame and shipping not included.
From $150 (11 by 14 inches) to $500 (20 by 30 inches). $100 additional for a second dog in one picture; $75 extra per dog for more than two.
Porcupine-Quill Removal - Bath-Brunswick Veterinary Associates, Bath, Me.: Quills pulled from dog, using sedation if necessary.
Higher fees are for treatment after hours or for sedatives, if used. $60 to $120 an hour.
Dog Psychotherapy - Animal Behavior Consultants, Brooklyn.
Counseling for dogs with phobias, including fear of loud noises (sirens, gunfire, thunder); anxiety disorders (obsessive chewing, separation anxiety) and behavior problems (aggression, disobedience, complusive howling). $250 to $300 for house call, diagnosis, recommendations.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Quiet Hecklers Receive Thanks From President
Thirty-two days and counting, and every expectation is that it's going to get nastier.
But take heart from this:
When President Bush was campaigning last week in Ohio, his appearances at Bowling Green and some other stops were marred by noisy supporters of Bill Clinton, some of them chanting, "Liar! Liar!" But at Columbus, a sizable pro-Clinton contingent was content to make its presence felt with only signs and stickers.
The catcalls and harassment were kept to a minimum.


When 2-18 Encounters 18-2
Rutgers, which roars into Giants Stadium with a three-game winning streak, could be expected to roar out with a fourth consecutive victory this evening if it wasn't for one detail.
The team the Scarlet Knights will be facing at 6 P.M. is Penn State.
Indeed, whatever their momentum, there is very little to be found in ancient history or current events to justify a victory by the Scarlet Knights.
Among other things, the Nittany Lions have won 18 of the 20 games in the series, including the last three.


For Any Tie That Binds, There Is a Club to Join
Whether as Elks or Edsel owners, Dracula devotees or diving dentists, Trekkies or Gumby fans, Americans seem drawn to enlisting in clubs -- no matter how eclectic, bizarre or, yes, mundane an organization's mission may be.
Consider the 555 Bobs of Bobs International (about 500 of whom are Americans), the 15,000 Mikes of America and the 1,580 members of the even more specialized Jim Smith Society, whose annual convention features a softball game that pits Democratic Jim Smiths against Republican Jim Smiths and this year inspired a prediction about the Presidential election.


Sanmark-Stardust Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Camco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The New York Region; Perot's Return May Hurt Clinton in New Jersey
Officials of Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign in New York and Connecticut are largely discounting the impact of Ross Perot's return to the race.
But in New Jersey, Mr.
Perot's return offers at least an opportunity for President Bush's flagging campaign to salvage the state and its 15 electoral votes, political analysts say.
New Jersey, which has voted Republican in recent Presidential races, is considered a must-win for Mr.
Bush.
But before Mr.
Perot's re-entry, Mr.
Clinton was running slightly ahead in public opinion polls.
The thin margin raises at least the possibility, say politicians and pollsters, that Mr.
Perot could lure away enough Clinton supporters to let Mr.
Bush squeak through.


Improving African Farming Is a Two-Part Job
To the Editor:
Richard Critchfield's Sept. 14 Op-Ed article, "Bring the Green Revolution to Africa," is a misleading and ultimately mischievous characterization of a very difficult situation.
By singling out the World Bank to bear the responsibility for the problems of African agriculture, he fails to recognize the complexity of modernizing agriculture on that continent, and chastises an organization that strives mightily to work with African nations to improve the well-being of their people.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.58
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.61
2.58
5.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.77
2.73
5.07
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.77
5.75
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.31
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.40
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.36
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Study Cites Politics In Prison Treatment Of Quayle Accuser
A Senate report made public today accuses the nation's senior prison official of punishing an inmate for political reasons on the eve of the 1988 Presidential election, after the convict maintained that he had repeatedly sold marijuana to Dan Quayle many years earlier.
The report reopens an embarrassing episode for the Justice Department that has survived only through the persistence of the prisoner, Brett C. Kimberlin.


After Volatile Day, Bonds End About Flat
A credit market selloff, which began when September's jobless figures were not so awful as expected, reversed itself yesterday once bond buyers took a deep breath and scented some prospects that the Federal Reserve would still ease credit.
The 30-year Treasury bond fell from 995/32 Thursday to 9820/32 yesterday immediately after the unemployment report came out in the morning.
By midafternoon, the market was almost flat, with the bond trading late in the day off 3/32 (about $1 for each $1,000 in face value) at 992/32 .
The yield edged up to 7.32 percent from 7.31 percent.


Respect Puts Hasty In a Lonely Position
Sometimes the best thing that can happen to a cornerback in the National Football League is to have nobody pay attention to him.
Just ask James Hasty, the Jets' third-round pick of 1988 and one of the club's most solid defenders over the last three seasons.
"Sometimes I wonder if people even consider me good or not, or it's just that they don't attempt to throw there," Hasty said.
"I don't give myself too much credit. I think sometimes they don't want to throw there because they don't want to throw there. I don't know why."


Correction
The 1992 Defense Department outlay in a chart on this page yesterday was incorrect.
The accurate figure is $289.17 billion.


For Greenpoint's Poles, an Uncertain Prosperity
AT Shanghai Lee's restaurant in Greenpoint, where the Chinese waiter took the orders in Polish, Andrzej Czeczot, an illustrator, was showing his latest satirical drawings to friends.
As an artist and, what is more to the point, as a perfectly legal immigrant, Mr.
Czeczot has no objection to seeing both his names in print, but at least two of the others were without green cards and so preferred to be called simply Jurek and Stas.
One of the drawings showed a street in the Brooklyn neighborhood with booths advertising different kinds of forged documents.
"Social Security Cards," said one, "Green Cards," said another, and the third offered "Asbestos School Diplomas." This referred to state licenses issued to graduates of a course qualifying them for dangerous and relatively high-paying work in asbestos removal.
A year ago the police broke a ring selling such counterfeit permits to Polish arrivals.


Occupational Medical Corp. of America reports earnings for Year June 30


Your Taxes; Welcome Mat Out For the Nonfilers
THE Internal Revenue Service has begun a nationwide effort to bring back into the taxpaying fold people who for one reason or another have not been filing.
And the agency says it plans to make the process as painless as possible for the wayward.
Some 10 million people failed to file 1990 tax returns, and the Government says that about a quarter of them are owed refunds.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Dueling Commercials; Clinton Squad Snaps Back Quickly at a Bush Ad
On Thursday Gov.
Bill Clinton saw a Bush campaign commercial on television that made him hopping mad.
Today, less than 24 hours later, the Clinton campaign was on the air in 20 states with its own biting rebuttal, accusing Mr.
Bush of having the "worst economic record of any President in 50 years."
It was the sort of hair-trigger counterpunch that is not uncommon in state and local politics but is almost unheard of in the layered, cautious bureaucracy of Presidential campaigning, and Mr.
Clinton and his staff were crowing about it today.


Prague Journal; A Flock of American 'Free Spirits' Nests in Czech Capital's Warm Heart
Right off Narodni Street in the heart of Prague, around the corner from where the Cuban Cultural Center delivered fiery blasts against American imperialism not long ago, Ron Stillman from Forest Hills, Queens, is drawing customers in droves to taste the infinite varieties at his New York Pizza.
Kathleen R. Burke from Washington, operating from the top floor of an ancient house in the Old Town overlooking Prague's liveliest fruit and vegetable street market, puts out the twice-a-month, slick-paper Czechoslovak Financial Review, financed by high-powered European and American banks and businesses.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about El Paso Electric's efforts to reduce its debt described a bankruptcy court action incorrectly in some copies.
The court barred Southwestern Public Service from sharing with regulators certain data involving El Paso.
It did not bar Southwestern's access to the data.


Interspec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bush Wins the Battle to Bar Abortion Counseling
President Bush won his fight with Congress to prohibit abortion counseling at federally financed family planning clinics today, keeping alive his unbroken string of 35 successful vetoes.
Nine of Mr. Bush's vetoes have concerned abortion.


Getting College Aid
To the Editor:
Claire L. Gaudiani, president of Connecticut College, unfairly equates Money magazine's straightforward advice to parents about how to get credit for debts they already have when applying for college financial aid with another magazine's endorsement of deceptive, if not illegal, moves to hide assets ("Dirty Tricks for Scholarships," Op-Ed, Aug. 26).
Money magazine has always deplored unethical tactics, and always will.
FRANK LALLI Managing Editor, Money Magazine New York, Sept. 18, 1992


Corrections
An article on Sept. 17 about a massacre in the Indonesian province of East Timor misidentified the American university where an army general was studying after being removed from his post as a result of the massacre.
It is Boston University.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Tom Copa, center.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Signed Dwayne Schintzius, center, to a one-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association  ALBANY PATROONS -- Announced they are changing their name to Capital Region Pontiacs.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Waived Chris Walsh, wide receiver, and signed him to the practice squad.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Travis McNeal, tight end.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Activated Tim Edwards, defensive end, from the practice squad.
Released Darren Anderson, cornerback.
TAMPA BAY BUCANEERS -- Signed James Brooks, running back.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; BUSH AND CLINTON AGREE ON DEBATES; PLAN TO ASK PEROT
The Republican and Democratic Presidential campaigns reached agreement today on staging three Presidential debates and one Vice-Presidential debate to be held in a remarkably compressed period of nine days.
The first Presidential debate is scheduled for Oct. 11, a week from Sunday, followed by debates on Oct. 15 and Oct. 19.
The Vice-Presidential debate is set for Oct. 13.
Officials close to the negotiations said each debate would last 90 minutes.


At Festival, a Smorgasbord of Families
The annual fund-raising festival at St.
Philip's parish here is a cherished relic, a weekend of cotton candy, games of chance, magic shows and Elvis impersonations.
Children eat too much and play too hard.
Mothers throw up their hands, helpless to contain them.
Fathers treat themselves to a drink and a hand of poker.
And the priest seems to be everywhere at once, his brogue thick and his eyes twinkling.


Sports of The Times; Unspoken Concerns About Magic
DESPITE the hoopla and beribboned acceptance attending the return of Magic Johnson to the players' roster of the National Basketball Association -- two days ago he signed a contract extension with the Lakers for $14.6 million -- questions remain about the propriety of it.
Questions that virtually no one in the N.B.A., still, will pose publicly.
At the otherwise festive New York City Basketball Hall of Fame dinner Thursday, some of the most prominent coaches, ex-coaches and former players in the N.B.A. spoke about this serious subject.


IBM Japan Names New President
IBM Japan Ltd., the Japanese unit of the American computer giant, named a new president Thursday, opening the way for the eventual retirement of its longtime leader, Takeo Shiina.
The new president, to assume office Jan. 1, will be Kakutaro Kitashiro, 48 years old, a vice president of IBM Japan and one of the company's youngest top officers.
Mr.
Shiina will become chairman of the board and retain his title as chief executive.


American Healthcorp Inc. reports earnings for Year Aug 31


Premier Choix Tvec reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ambar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Knicks Give a 4-Year Pact To a Future 3-Point Threat
Hubert Davis, the Knicks' top draft choice, agreed to a multiyear contract yesterday and will report to the team's training camp when it opens in Charleston, S.C., next Friday.
The Knicks did not disclose contract terms, but a member of the league office and a player agent, both of whom wished to remain unidentified, said Davis signed a four-year contract worth an estimated $3.1 million, with a fifth-year option.
Davis will earn an estimated $680,000 this season.
Davis, a 6-foot-5-inch shooting guard from North Carolina, was the 20th player selected in the June draft.


Eastern Air Creditors' Accord Is Approved
A ghost that has haunted the Eastern Airlines bankruptcy case was put to rest this week.
Judge Burton R. Lifland on Thursday night approved an agreement between Eastern creditors and Continental Airlines, compensating Eastern creditors for being shortchanged in a series of transactions when it was controlled by Frank Lorenzo and the Texas Air Corporation.


A Body Pouch To Beat the Chill In the Stadium
Sitting outdoors in a football stadium during fall and winter games can be a chilly way to spend several hours.
A blanket can help ward off the cold, of course.
But now there is another way people can stay warm: they can climb into a bag.
Marvel Putnam, a retired circus tent maker, has designed a stadium bag that he said works better than a blanket for a person sitting in the stands.
His invention, the Snug-L-Bun, is a nylon bag that slips over a person's feet, legs and lower chest.


Detective at Crown Hts. Trial Says He Heard Youth Confess
During questioning in a Brooklyn station house after his arrest on a Crown Heights street in August 1991, Lemerick Nelson Jr. admitted that he had joined a surging crowd of youths surrounding and hitting Yankel Rosenbaum and had then stabbed him once in the left side, a detective testified yesterday.
The detective, Edward Brown of the Brooklyn South Homicide Squad, testified that the interview with Mr.
Nelson, conducted several hours after the stabbing on a Crown Heights street, lasted about 15 minutes and that the youth said he had joined the crowd because "he was very excited and a bit high from beer."


D'Amato and Abrams Trade Debate Proposals
After two weeks of sparring in televised commercials, the New York Senate campaign erupted yesterday into a debate over televised debates, with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato proposing five appearances -- but only two on television -- and State Attorney General Robert Abrams holding out for a total of six televised debates.
Both camps had already agreed in principle to debate, but a meeting between their campaign managers yesterday morning foundered on specifics.
In midafternoon, Mr.
D'Amato's aides tried to seize the initiative, issuing a statement that he had agreed to five appearances -- two on television, two on radio, and one not to be broadcast at all -- and challenging Mr.
Abrams to join him.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Roundup; Key Democratic Bills Killed in Senate
Senate Republicans used parliamentary procedures to kill two major Democratic bills today: an $800 million measure to encourage educational change, and an anti-crime measure with modest gun-control elements and an expansion of the death penalty.
On both issues, debate on the substance of the bills was cursory as each side charged the other with base political motives.
For example, Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, called the first measure "a political dare to Republicans to oppose an education bill four weeks before an election."


Protesters Silence Anti-Abortion Talk
Gov.
Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania, who was not allowed to give his anti-abortion views at the Democratic national convention in July, fared no better last night in Manhattan at a talk co-sponsored by The Village Voice and Cooper Union.
Knots of demonstrators in the college's Great Hall, where Abraham Lincoln spoke on slavery in 1860, prevented Governor Casey from delivering his speech, "Can a Liberal Be Pro-Life?" at the Cooper Union School of Architecture.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Park Avenue between 29th and 56th Streets will be closed from 9 to 11 A.M. for the Corporate Challenge race.
Greenwich Avenue between the Avenue of the Americas and Eighth Avenue will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the gay and lesbian fair.
Sullivan Street between Washington Square South and Bleecker will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for a fair.
Washington Square North and Waverly Place between University Place and Broadway will be closed from 11 A.M. and 6 P.M. for the Washington Square Block Association street fair.
TOMORROW Fifth Avenue between 26th and 52d Streets will be closed from noon to 2 P.M. for the Pulaski Day Parade.
Madison Avenue between 86th and 96th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Madison Avenue street fair.
Second Avenue between 42d and 53d Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Second Avenue street fair.
In Brooklyn, Atlantic Avenue between Fourth Avenue and Furman Street will be closed from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Atlantic Antic fair.


Suspending or Revoking a N.Y. License Both Mean No Driving
To the Editor:
Recent reports on the tow-truck driver with 51 license suspensions who was involved in a fatal crash prompt me to clarify the Department of Motor Vehicles's role.
While the D.M.V. has administrative power to remove driving privileges and record these actions on our computer, it hasn't the authority to actually remove the driver from behind the wheel.


Act II: Can Florida State Boot Miami?
They have studied each other on film until their eyes see double.
They have scoured for the smallest tendency, the tiniest edge.
The players and coaches from Miami and Florida State have wondered how their meeting early Saturday afternoon in the Orange Bowl will be won or lost, and as a result, how their seasons may be defined.
The answer may well rest in a place the coaches can't examine, regardless of how hard they try: underneath each helmet.


Clinton: The Teflon Candidate
Long before the official Presidential campaign began, before the first candidate kissed the first baby in New Hampshire, an echo of elections past began to fill the air.
This sound, which gained strength and power over the months, was the sound of Democrats crying "foul!"
While every recent Democratic Presidential hopeful has made liberal use of the charge that Republicans rely on dirty tricks during campaigns, none mastered it as early or as well as Bill Clinton.
At the first whiff of criticism or even a recitation of facts from his record, the Clinton camp immediately went on the attack, accusing the Republicans of dirty tricks.


Clinton: Leadership in Arkansas
The Clinton campaign released its fifth television advertisement today, a 30-second spot officials say will run for about a week in about 20 states.
ON THE SCREEN With somber music in the background, Mr.
Clinton, looking Presidential, sits at a pool table of a desk, working the phone.
Cut to several screens of words, black on white, that parrot the narrative.


Brazil's New Chief Ignites Uproar With Choice of Finance Minister
Itamar Augusto Franco assumed presidential powers today and immediately created an uproar by appointing a little-known tax lawyer to Brazil's most powerful economic post, Finance Minister.
After the appointment of Gustavo Crause, a Congressman from a poor northeastern state, the key Sao Paulo stock market index dropped 3,711 points, or about 8 percent.
And doubts spread about the new Government headed by Mr.
Franco, the former Vice President and reclusive politician who today became Brazil's acting President.


Mayor Backs Bid to House Mentally Ill
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday vetoed a City Council bill that would have blocked a plan to create housing for homeless mentally ill people on the Upper West Side.
Overruling the Council for the first time on a land-use issue, the Mayor said the plan for 20 studio apartments on West 98th Street would help to provide "vital housing and human services to some of New York's neediest residents."
But Councilman Adam Clayton Powell, whose district includes the site, argued that the neighborhood was already saturated with housing for the homeless and drug treatment centers.
He vowed that the Council would override the Mayor's veto and kill the plan.
The Council last week rejected the proposal, by the Post Graduate Center for Mental Health, to rehabilitate a vacant five-story building at 201 West 98th Street between Amsterdam Avenue and Broadway.
Thirty-six of the 51 Council members voted against the plan, indicating enough support to provide the two-thirds margin needed for an override.
Opposing Views
"The Manhattan Valley area of the West Side has been used as a dumping ground for facilities that the rest of the West Side does not want," Mr.
Powell said.
"Nothing is ever proposed south of 96th Street. Why can't we have facilities in those areas?"
But Vera Hasner, of the Alliance for the Mentally Ill of New York State and chairwoman of the New York Housing Committee, said in an interview that the neighborhood was flooded with homeless people wandering the streets.
As an example, she cited the case of Larry Hogue, a mentally ill homeless man who neighborhood residents say has terrorized them for years.
"So many mentally ill are destitute and homeless because the state and the city have failed to provide housing and support services," Ms.
Hasner said.
"If you walk up and down Broadway in that neighborhood, all you will see are homeless people with bags all over the street."
Rents in the development, which would have 24-hour supervision for residents, would be paid with state and Federal money.
The Post Graduate Center, a national nonprofit group, would receive $2.2 million in state and Federal money to renovate the building.


Boycott Urged at Brooklyn School Stung by Violence
In the wake of a fight and a stabbing on Friday at Eastern District High School, the P.T.A. has called for students to boycott classes tomorrow and for parents to set up a picket line demanding solutions to overcrowding and safety problems at the school.
The latest disturbances were a setback to the school, in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, which had been heralded for its improvements in safety in the last few years.
In 1990, students violently rampaged through the halls one day, and a few months later, several brawls and attacks occurred..


Corrections
An article on Sept. 20 about political mudslinging gave an incorrect date for a reference by Harry S. Truman to an affair between Dwight D. Eisenhower and Kay Summersby.
The remark was from a biography of Mr.
Truman published in 1973; Mr.
Truman died in 1972.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
OUTSIDE THE LINES
Twenty years ago, art classes for children at the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan hewed to a theory that coloring books suppressed rather than inspired creativity.


Kathleen Tait and Craig Brown
Kathleen Mavis Tait, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric V. Tait Jr. of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was married yesterday to Craig LeRoy Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton A. Brown of Atlanta.
The Rev.
David Haywood, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at Reid Castle on the campus of Manhattanville College, in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Tait-Brown graduated magna cum laude from Spelman College.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is the president and the chief executive of E.V.T.
Productions, a media consulting and production company in New York.
Her mother, Emily Tait, is the director of early childhood programs at the Eastchester Child Development Center in Tuckahoe, N.Y., a division of the Family Consultation Service of Eastchester Inc. in Eastchester, N.Y.


Florida Builders Gird for Lawsuits Over Homes Damaged in Storm
A month after homeowners in South Florida began putting their lives back together in the wake of Hurricane Andrew, home builders are bracing for a second storm, this one in the courtroom.
In the last two weeks, groups of homeowners have filed lawsuits against two large development companies charging that their houses were built so carelessly and with such poor materials that they virtually crumpled under the force of the high winds.
The homeowners accuse the builders of fraud and breach of contract and seek damages that would be in the millions of dollars.


Too Much Pep or Just Too Many Fumbles?
Al Hawkins was the only freshman invited to Friday afternoon's pep rally, an event that the principal later thought was the first big mistake of Elizabeth High School's Homecoming Game.
So much emotion was spilled out on the gym floor.
Coach Jerry Moore shouted the names of his varsity over the stomping and cheering of 3,000 students as the players jogged across the shiny hardwood to high-five each other.
How could it get better than this?
Hawkins, a lanky, 6-foot-2-inch 14-year-old, answered his name with that wolfish lope (the moving equivalent of a drawl, so loose and easy and controlled), and that zoney smile, both of which are rarely seen among any but the certifiably goofy or the athletically gifted, our children of another dimension.


Chase Reynolds, Charles R. Ewald
Mr. and Mrs.
Russell S. Reynolds Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter, Deborah Chase Reynolds, and Charles Ross Ewald, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Bragg Ewald Jr., also of Greenwich.
Ms.
Reynolds, who is 29 years old and is known as Chase, is a freelance writer and photographer in Cody, Wyo., and director of the Breteche Creek Ranch, a private educational center there.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father founded and heads Russell Reynolds Associates, an executive-recruiting company in New York.


Cristine Meredith, Shawn P. Miele
Cristine Rollyn Meredith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Meredith of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Shawn Patrick Miele, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Patrick Miele of Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr., an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Church.
Mrs.
Miele, 23 years old, graduated from Middlebury College, as did her husband.
She will begin studying for a master's degree in international relations at Columbia University in January.
Her father is the chairman of Meredith, Martin &amp; Kaye, an investment advisory firm in New York.


INSIDE
Airlift to Sarajevo Resumed
In a step toward averting disaster, an American plane delivered food to people trapped in Sarajevo.
Page 12.
Angolan Assails Vote Count
Still trailing in election returns, a former Angolan rebel leader accused the ruling party of fraud.
Page 15.
Shades of Gray
The old in New York are getting older, creating generational divides among the elderly.
Page 37.


Ross Perot or Superstoe? Science Fiction Got There First
SCIENCE-FICTION writers are the Kilroys of politics, the bane of candidates who try to fashion novel ideas -- only to learn that a novelist was there first.
In 1969, in "Bug Jack Barron," Norman Spinrad created the talk-show host as powerful public-opinion maker: Jack Barron, a kind of souped-up Larry King with a touch of Ted Koppel through whom political movers and shakers are forced to move and shake.
And in 1975, John Brunner depicted in "The Shockwave Rider" a plugged-in America whose citizens rely on an electronic web of computers to register opinions and transact business.
The Federal Government controls the electorate by amassing data on every user and manipulating the flow of electronic information.


Years Later, Questions Remain About Bush's Role in the Iran-Contra Affair
George Bush has always contended that as Vice President he was excluded from decision-making in the Iran-contra affair.
But a re-examination of his comments in light of new revelations shows gaps, inconsistencies and conflicts between what he has said and the mounting body of evidence in the scandal.
Mr.
Bush once said he wanted the truth to come out, but he has never provided a detailed account of how much he knew and what he did.
Instead he has often dodged questioners on the subject, insisting, as he did in an interview last week, that he has already "leveled with the American people."


On the Road


Carrie D. Rymer, Glendon Elliott 2d
Caroline Dunning Rymer, an associate at the Boston law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray, was married yesterday to Glendon Mandeville Elliott 2d, the president of the Rhode Island Textile Company in Pawtucket, R.I.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke officiated at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church in Providence, R.I.
Mrs.
Elliott, who is 29 years old and is known as Carrie, graduated from Colby College and received a law degree from Suffolk University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Rymer of Providence.
Her father is a lawyer there.


American Rustic
Furniture seems headed into the north woods these days, inspired by the television shows "Twin Peaks" and "Northern Exposure." " 'Twin Peaks' started the lodge look," says Carl Levine, senior vice president of home furnishings at Bloomingdale's.
"It's all part of the move away from fancy European formalism." The fact that Montana and Wyoming have become chic wilderness outposts populated by celebrities has also put the spotlight on Western-style decor.
Buyers, manufacturers and interior designers will encounter the rustic trend this month at the International Home Furnishings Market Design Preview in High Point, N.C.
The category encompasses Adirondack, Shaker, cowboy, country, primitive and arts-and-crafts styles.
The "American Country West" collection by Mary Emmerling for Lexington Furniture will make its debut at High Point, along with "The America Collection" by the Museum of American Folk Art for Lane.
Meanwhile, Bloomingdale's will be scouting for its cowboy-themed home-furnishings promotion, scheduled for next spring.
Though stylistically diverse, the furniture in this category represents comfort and the appeal of the simple life.
If the furniture looks handmade or even slightly worn -- as if it had been in the family for a spell -- so much the better.


The Executive Life; After the Hurricane, Burger King Changes
There's a slow way to overhaul an organization to give employees more power and make it more responsive to their needs.
It often begins by calling in the consultants.
But, as the Burger King Corporation is learning, there is also a fast way: let a hurricane do it.
Barry Gibbons, the chief executive and chairman of Burger King, initiated sweeping changes overnight after the company's glass and pink-tile headquarters in Miami was ruined by Hurricane Andrew on Aug. 24, suffering $10 million in damages.
About 300 of the 700 corporate employees lost their homes as well.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Aberdeen 164,000
28 Warren Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; h/w floors, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,092.
Berkeley Heights 352,000
44 Highland Circle  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; 2-tier deck, fireplace, professionally landscaped; taxes $6,856.
Freehold 131,000
27 Waverly Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; c/a, 1-car garage, all appliances included; taxes $2,967.
Jackson 125,000
8 Salem Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old brick bi-level; 2-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,143.
Middletown 142,000
16 Argonne Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; fireplace, pool, central vacuum; taxes $2,803.
Millington 268,000
58 Rolling Hill Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; game room, fireplace, two-car garage, deck; taxes $4,309.
OTHER AREAS  New Canaan, Conn. 1.4 Million
545 West Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 210-year-old historic colonial; swimming pool, barn, stable, 3.6 acres; taxes $8,132.
Bronxville, N.Y. 585,000
15 Sussex Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 61-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, sun room, formal dining room, 2 porches, playroom, wet bar; taxes $10,706.
Amityville, L.I. 240,000
27 Meadow Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car attached garage, 100-by-125-foot waterfront property; taxes $6,900.


N.H.L. Finally Puts Lindros on Center Ice
Although he lives in northern New Jersey, Luch Servodio wore a Philadelphia Flyers shirt when he attended a recent Devils-Flyers exhibition game at Byrne Arena.
The back of Servodio's orange jersey said, "LINDROS, 88," which drew a few friendly taunts from Devils' fans.
"It cost me $200," Servodio said of the shirt.
"But I like him and he's a very talented player."


UP AND COMING: Craig Sheffer; Off Streets, Into Movies
Back in 1980, Craig Sheffer was encouraged by a girlfriend, a New Jersey native, to move to New York from East Stroudsburg, Pa., where they were attending college.
But soon the young would-be actor had lost the girl and a job, and landed on the streets for three months.
"I actually really enjoyed it," says Mr.
Sheffer, who has subsequently landed on his feet as the star of Robert Redford's latest directorial effort, "A River Runs Through It," which opens on Friday.
"At night I had to sleep on my suitcases so that they wouldn't be stolen. Things happened that were scary, but I just wanted to go out there and experience the world and its dark side."


Mitchell-Lamas Going on Sale
FOR King and Nadine Lenoir one of the pleasures of living in Fairfield Towers in Brooklyn is the afternoons spent relaxing on the balcony reading or dining at the umbrella table.
"We feel secure here," said Mrs.
Lenoir, as she and her husband, a retired chauffeur, sat in the living room of their two-bedroom apartment.
"The place is safe and clean and many of the people here are old friends. This is our home now."


The Gallery Is the Message
The Soho art dealer Lisa Spellman is having a lot less trouble finding things these days.
When she wants to show a client a photograph or painting, she can quickly extract it from among the artworks piled against one another in 303, her gallery on Greene Street.
Admittedly, it's a casual arrangement, but Ms.
Spellman says it beats rummaging through the gallery's small, crowded storage rooms.
At Postmasters Gallery, half a block down Greene Street, Magda Sawon is operating with similar ease.
If someone wants to buy a big poster for Silvia Kolbowski's current exhibition, Ms.
Sawon simply takes one from the thick fresh-from-the-printer piles in the middle of the gallery floor, rolls it up and puts it in one of the cardboard mailing tubes tied in bundles nearby.


Of Me I Sing: Whitman in His Time
OF all American writers', Walt Whitman's life has been perhaps the most carefully scrutinized.
It is a century now since Whitman died, and several fine biographies have appeared.
What demands closer attention, however, is the relationship between the poet and the times in which he lived.
"In estimating my volumes," he wrote, "the world's current times and deeds, and their spirit, must be first profoundly estimated." The poet fails, he wrote, "if he does not flood himself with the immediate age as with vast oceanic tides . . . and if he be not himself the age transfigured."
That age had surprising similarities to our own.
We tend to think of Whitman's expansive optimism as a relic of a far simpler time.
Actually, his was very much a willed optimism, a triumphant poetic statement in the face of calamitous social realities.


How Many Great American Operas? One for Sure
If it were possible to settle on a single "great American opera," Marc Blitzstein's 1949 "Regina," a highly charged, musically inventive setting of Lillian Hellman's 1939 play "The Little Foxes," would have to be a strong candidate.
For one thing, there are not that many works to consider (though there are more than one might suppose, looking over schedules of American opera companies).
And few American works for the lyric stage have been more influential.
Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim are clearly indebted to Blitzstein, who considered "Regina" his masterpiece.
Blitzstein's account of the corrupt wheeling and dealing of the greedy, soulless Hubbard family will be seen in a new production at the New York City Opera on Friday evening.
It is as tautly suspenseful a piece of theater as the Hellman original and at the same time a more serious and complex musical work than some early 20th-century operas that have established themselves in the repertory.
As a result, "Regina" has been seen as falling between two stools: too operatic for the legitimate stage yet, until recently, too accessible -- perhaps even too American -- for success in the opera house.
Though it has not suffered total neglect since its first presentation, neither has it become a repertory staple.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."
MONDAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.)
TUESDAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.)
FRIDAY: 8:30 A.M., ABC "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.)  Adm.
James Stockdale
TODAY: 11:30 A.M., C-Span, call-in interview.
MONDAY: 5:30 P.M., ABC, "World News Tonight with Peter Jennings." (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton
MONDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."  Senator Al Gore
MONDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."  Ross Perot
MONDAY: 7:09 A.M., NBC "Today," interview. (Channel 4 in New York.)


Seattle Zoo Opens a Rain Forest
When they enter the building, visitors to the Tropical Rain Forest that opened at Seattle's Woodland Park Zoo last month probably feel as if they're in the tropics.
Inside the nearly 2.5-acre exhibit the climate is hot, with 95 percent humidity.
A wooden boardwalk meanders along a damp, dark forest floor and over streams, through foliage, past 700 plant species and glassed-in reptile and insect displays.
Climbing upward past emerald tree boas and red-billed toucans, the walkway emerges above the treetops to an aviary where 15 species of birds fly overhead.
Outside, visitors stroll beside a stream in an African environment.
On an island, debrazza monkeys leap from branches and duiker antelope graze.
A safe distance away, endangered lowland gorillas forage for food.
The exhibit cost $9.2 million.


In the New Russia, Children Are Born Fighting the Odds
"IS It Easy to Be Young?" was a film that came out in Moscow in the mid 1980's, causing one of glasnost's early sensations with its stark portrait of wan and listless youth.
Since then, from the once tight-lipped government ministries has come a mountain of data showing the condition of many of Russia's 40 million children to be not only difficult but deeply troubling.
It is as if the old Communist regime had left behind a poison pill for the next generation -- a decaying environment that damaged their mothers' health, a rising level of alcoholism that increases their risk of birth defects, a health care system unable to cope and a society that has lost its bearings.
Add to that an uncertain economic climate, and it is understandable why fewer parents in Russia consider themselves capable of bringing up children.
The birth rate in Russia, with a population of 150 million, is falling sharply, from almost 2 million births in 1990 to 1.8 million in 1991.


Big East Rivals Achieve Every Goal Except One
Boston College was intent on proving that it could dominate on the road as well as at home; West Virginia wanted to show the nation that this year's team was truly special.
In the end, each team proved its point, but the ultimate goal of proving which is the better team remains.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Crisis in Brazil; Democracy Is Working, But the Economy Isn't
The dethroning of Brazil's President, Fernando Collor de Mello, last week seemed to jump out of a high school textbook on the workings of democracy.
A skeptical press revealed a massive corruption scandal.
An independent Congress conducted an investigation.
Millions of Brazilians expressed their outrage without spilling a drop of blood.
An independent judiciary set the ground rules, the Chamber of Deputies voted to impeach and the President gamely accepted the result.
Breaking with a century-old tradition in Brazil, none of the players called for the Army.
Now Brazilians need to open a textbook on economics.
During Mr.
Collor's 30-month reign, consumer prices increased 10,722 percent.


CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
As a 25-year resident of our nation's capital, I read Lee's description of women, men and life in Washington with utter bewilderment.
Almost none of the purportedly humorous generalizations offered up by Lee rang true.
Men eat meat, drink Scotch and smoke?
Washington is the most health-and-fitness-conscious town in America; everyone eats grilled chicken, sips white wine and gave up smoking years ago.
Women dress like girls?
There are more female power suits per square foot on K Street than on any patch of ground south of New York City.
Perfume and after-shave are "politically correct"?
Not in the Govenment offices I have frequented.
JAMES WORTHEN
Cambridge, Mass.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THREE BLIND MICE: How the TV Networks Lost Their Way, by Ken Auletta. (Vintage, $14.) ABC, CBS and NBC aren't what they used to be, either in corporate power or in their sway over the American imagination.
Ken Auletta analyzes the takeovers that transformed the networks' identities, frequently acting as a fly on the wall.
"Often the fly is on the right wall at the right time," Todd Gitlin said here last year.
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett Columbine, $12.) The land can forge bonds as intense as those created by blood.
This novel examines both, describing the tempestuous aftermath of an Iowa farmer's decision to turn over his life's work -- his 1,000-acre farm -- to his three daughters.
Comparisons to "King Lear" are inevitable, observed our reviewer, Jay Parini, "but this powerful and poignant book doesn't lean against Lear for support. Jane Smiley takes the truths therein and lights them up her way." Last year he predicted that the book, which went on to win both a Pulitzer Prize and a National Book Critics Circle Award, "will finally earn  [ Ms. Smiley ]  the wider audience she deserves."


Smoothing the Way For Storm Windows
ALUMINUM-FRAME storm windows are standard features on many houses.
Because they require little upkeep, most owners pay slight attention to them.
But some maintenance is advisable, and minor repairs can often avert major annoyances.
To rid aluminum window frames and sashes of corrosion, which roughens their surfaces, rub them with fine steel wool.
Afterward, to forestall new corrosion, wipe the metal with a cloth dipped in paste wax.


No Argument With Einstein
To the Editor:
Mr.
Rothstein suggests that John Cage and Albert Einstein would be opposites on the issue of chance.
Einstein's objection to chance in the "laws of nature" involved his difficulties with the probabilities in quantum mechanics, and not with the role of chance in evolution, as in the chance changes of DNA in heredity.
I think Einstein and Cage would agree on Darwin.
The claim that Cage "played with loaded dice" exhibits ignorance of his work, which was stochastic.
A sequence of events is said to be stochastic if it combines a random component with a selective process so that only certain of the random outcomes are allowed to endure.
In Cage's method, as in evolution, the new is accessed through the random, and selection insures survival of certain content.


All About/Franchising; Hamburgers or Home Decorating? Businesses That Sell
Though the harsh economic climate has battered many major corporations, franchisors, the companies that license their names and expertise to entrepreneurs eager for a lucrative piece of the American Dream, have as a group seen increasing gains in both ownership and sales.
In fact, part of that lift has come because of the recession, as companies cut back by dismissing workers with severance pay and offering sometimes-generous buyout plans.
Many former executives, managers and employees have turned to buying franchises.


Shedding Some Light On Course of Recession
THE patient is sick and the prognosis for a quick recovery is not good.
That was the assessment of the economic health of the New York City region that Rosemary Scanlon, the chief economist for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, gave to 125 Westchester business leaders at the seventh yearly fall economic symposium late last month at the Westchester Marriott Hotel here.
"On the regional level, this is the strongest, deepest recession we have experienced since World War II -- of two years and three months' duration in Westchester," Ms.
Scanlon said.
"To date, 700,000 jobs have been lost in the metropolitan area. The only section of the country that is worse off than we are is New England."


Convicted Marine's Legal Advice to Be Reviewed
The Court of Military Appeals has ordered a lower court to look into whether a Marine sergeant convicted of espionage may have been misled by his lawyer, William J. Kunstler, resulting in an excessive sentence.
In the opinion, issued Tuesday, the appeals court, the court of last resort in the military justice system, also upheld the conviction of the sergeant, Clayton J. Lonetree, for his role in disclosing secrets about the United States Embassy in Moscow.
The court said Mr.
Kunstler may have given Mr.
Lonetree "bizarre and untenable" advice not to consider a plea bargain.


Data Bank/October 4, 1992


Nassau Stalled by Deficit As Services Are Slashed
Only a few weeks away from tackling next year's budget, Nassau County lawmakers remain at odds over how to solve this year's record $130 million budget deficit, which has forced the layoff of 2,500 county workers and crippled county services over the last nine months.
A bitter dispute between Republicans and Democrats is forcing almost weekly emergency meetings of the Board of Supervisors to resolve basic cash-flow problems to keep the remaining basic government services going.


Republicans Play Fast and Loose With Clinton's Fiscal Record; Good at Numbers
To the Editor:
How appropriate that Fred Malek, the general manager of the Bush-Quayle campaign, has chosen to raise once again the spurious "128 Clinton fees and taxes" (Op-Ed, Sept. 23).
Mr.
Malek always has been good at numbers.


Of Mugwumps And Regular, Unserial Moms
Carolyne Roehm Kravis may not be putting her vote where her money is.
Mrs.
Kravis, a designer who closed her fashion company a year ago and is now planning a comeback, contributed $2,000 to President Bush's re-election campaign,, according to documents filed with the Federal Election Commission.
Her husband, Henry Kravis (shown with her above), is also a major Republican fund-raiser.
Nevertheless, she was recently spotted at a party wearing a button for Gov.
Bill Clinton.
She declined to comment.


New Haven Football At First and Cloud 9
OVER the years, students at the University of New Haven have grown accustomed to some of the confusion about the school's identity.
"Often when I'm home in Wilton and mention that I go to U.N.H., people will say, 'Oh, how are things in New Hampshire?,' " said Jason Mumbach, the president of the Day Student Government at the university.


Cats With 10 Lives
The seams have split in their spandex cat suits.
Their cat wigs have shed yak hair.
They have suffered sudden and unexpected taillessness.
They have been meowed at by thousands of theatergoers, one of whom once came on stage to hand them Kit-Kat bars.
They have been petted by the audience.
They are Marlene Danielle and Susan Powers, the only remaining cast members from the original Broadway company of "Cats." On Wednesday, the Andrew Lloyd Webber-T.
S.
Eliot extravaganza, the first of the British megamusicals, will celebrate its 10th anniversary at the Winter Garden Theater.


New Clashes in Germany as Politicians Voice Alarm
Germany celebrated the second anniversary of national unification today under the shadow of spreading violence against foreigners and growing frustration in eastern states.
Police officers in several cities clashed with groups of leftist and rightist demonstrators, and arrested more than 65.
In the eastern town of Schwerin, a band of several dozen leftists tossed eggs at Chancellor Helmut Kohl, but he was not hit.
The Chancellor was also bumped by a spectator, but the police denied reports that the spectator had punched him.


The Painter and the Sitter
NAME: Brian D'Amato.
OCCUPATION: Painter and novelist whose first book, "Beauty" (Delacorte Press; $20), is about an artist/plastic surgeon.


Q and A
Co-op Assessments  Question: In our co-op, about half the residents own parking spaces in the garage.
Yet all of us are being assessed to cover a $500,000 garage renovation that will benefit only the garage space owners.
This seems blatantly unfair.
Do we have any recourse in avoiding this payment? . . .
Renata Dmytrowski, the Bronx Answer: No.
Stephen P. Roland, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, said the board was within its rights in assessing all shareholders for the costs.


Voters See What's Behind 'Family Values'
To the Editor:
I believe Maggie Gallagher is missing the point regarding Vice President Quayle's comments about "Murphy Brown," because what Mr.
Quayle was criticizing was the morality, in his view, of choosing the single-parent life style -- this view, presumably, as a part of the "family values" campaign theme of the Republican Party ("An Unwed Mother for Quayle," Op-Ed, Sept. 24).


For Her, Goodbye Car, Hello Hassle
THE last time Barbara Glitzer saw her gray Toyota Cressida, it was nestled in a parking spot on the Upper East Side of New York.
And she was telling me her sad/funny tale because she had read a recent column on what women want when they set out to buy a car.
She and her husband had come to Manhattan from their home in New Jersey, she said, planning to have dinner with friends.
"My husband said to put the car in a garage," she said.
"But you know how when you find a space in New York you're so thrilled? So I said no."


In Philadelphia, a Showcase of Abandoned Hopes
It was the largest building in America, and reputedly the most expensive.
Its bold, original design influenced architecture internationally.
Tocqueville came from France to study it; Dickens declared it (along with Niagara Falls) one of the two sights he hoped to see on his 1842 American tour.
Today, the Eastern State Penitentiary is something of an embarrassment, an abandoned ruin overgrown with weeds.
But this gloomy landmark is still worthy of wide public attention.
Few buildings shed a more penetrating light on modern democracy and its discontents.
Located just a few blocks from the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Eastern State is also a museum, a showcase of lost hopes.
Empty since the last prisoners departed in 1970, the prison's stone-walled cells are haunting tableaux of a failed experiment in utopian social planning.
Designed in 1821 by the Philadelphia architect John Haviland, Eastern State was born from the fusion of Quaker social conscience with the Enlightenment's faith in reason.
Its innovative form arose from humanitarian concern for the treatment of prisoners and from philosophical speculation about the cause and cure of crime.


Congress Set to Rein In Foreign Aid Agency
Responding to accusations that the Federal Government's embattled foreign aid agency has been subsidizing the export of American jobs, a House-Senate conference committee decided late Friday night to restrict the agency's future operations.
The prohibition, added to the $14 billion foreign aid bill, orders the Agency for International Development not to finance any overseas projects that could result in further job losses.
The ban follows the release of a two-year investigation by labor unions into the support that the agency has provided for investment promotion boards in Central America and the Caribbean.


A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
Homeopathic medicines are prepared mostly from natural sources and are used at a very low concentration.
It has been shown that, at lower concentrations, antibiotics exhibit different effects than at high concentrations and that these effects are, in some situations, beneficial for patients.


Beverly Bruckmann and Charles Place
Beverly Cookson Bruckmann, a daughter of Mrs.
E.
Bronson Lyon of Savannah, Ga., and the late William A. Bruckmann Jr., was married yesterday to Charles William Place, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Place of Pittsford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Foster C. Wilson performed the ceremony at the Rumson Presbyterian Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Place, 29 years old, is a showroom saleswoman at Marion Kent Ltd., representatives of textile companies in Washington.
She graduated from the University of South Carolina in Columbia.
Her father was an insurance agent in East Orange, N.J.
Her stepfather retired as a buyer for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company in Chicago.


Complementary Noises
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's assessment of John Cage's contributions to 20th-century music  [ "Cage Played His Anarchy by the Rules," Sept. 20 ] , although refreshing in its refusal to accept the Cage myth on its own terms, makes the mistake of seeing contradiction where none exists.
Cage's acceptance of rules for composition does not reveal him as a closet totalitarian, but simply extends his creative power into the realms of order and form.
Cage's adoption of rules was not monolithic.
Each creation of new sound was also a creation of rules, part of a continual breaking of commandments.


Pulitzer for 'Roots' Goes for $50,000 at Haley Sale
A poignant chapter in the story of the late Alex Haley neared an end today with the auctioning of his Pulitzer Prize for the triumphant best-seller "Roots" to help pay the debts of his estate.
In a three-day auction that began here on Thursday with the sale of manuscripts, the prize was sold over the phone for $50,000 to a San Francisco foundation that plans to exhibit it at Mr.
Haley's boyhood home.
Still to be auctioned is Mr.
Haley's 127-acre farm in nearby Norris, with its four guest houses.
A bid of $850,000 has been received for the farm, but at least $950,000 is being sought.


CLINTON COUNTRY
I am one of those Arkansans who grew up in the Little Rock of the 1950's and 1960's.
Like Bill Clinton, I was a page in the House of Representatives.
Roy Reed's excellent article "Clinton Country" (Sept. 6), on the state's only partly deserved reputation for redneck politics, is long overdue.
However, he inexplicably omits mention of the Congressman for whom I worked -- Brooks Hays.
Hays left an unmistakable imprint of moderation upon the politics of Arkansas and of the South during a time of extraordinary turbulence.
RICHARD L. HUFF
Ukiah, Calif.


A Second-Hand Store Upgrades to First Class
PAUL H. CRANFORD browsed through a few of the dozens of men's suits on a rack and liked what he saw.
"Here's an Yves Saint Laurent," he said.
"And a Faberge, hand-tailored in Paris.  And a Hickey-Freeman! All very vogue."
He also liked the prices because they should appeal to shoppers.
One suit was marked $15, another $20; the highest priced, $30.
"We try to get 10 percent of the original prices," he said.


Blueprint For Negotiations
To the Sports Editor:
Because the disparity between rich and poor National Football League clubs is small by virtue of television-revenue sharing, I don't believe free agency is of much importance to the average professional player, although I concede that a minority of players would make out well.
Since the average player's professional life lasts a little over three years, free agency after four years means little to most; immediate income and a decent pension are more important.
I suggest that the parties now negotiate around the following parameters:


POSTINGS: Oct. 14 Auction; For Sale: Pieces of the City
While the region's economic woes have been a drag on property values here, land in New York City still comes pretty dear.
But later this month the city will be selling pieces of New York for just a few thousand dollars.
On Oct. 14, 130 city-owned buildings and parcels will be put up for sale at a public auction where bidding for a few parcels will start as low as $1,000.
The cheapest lots are not, mind you, building sites, just slivers of land.
One parcel, for example, is a 10-by-96-foot Staten Island lot on South Railroad Avenue between Bache and Jacques Avenues.
But officials with the Department of General Services, the agency holding the auction, say these slivers often are bought for their value as parking spaces or private gardens.


Berkeley Bayne, John M. Soper
Berkeley Garnette Bayne, the daughter of Robert H. Bayne Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., and Mrs.
Philip M. Ake of Church Hill, Md., was married yesterday to John Maxwell Soper, a son of John W. Soper of Old Saybrook, Conn., and Mrs.
Charles G. Arnold of Fishers Island, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Crocker Jr. officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Mrs.
Soper graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is a real estate developer in New Canaan.
Her mother, Berkeley Ake, raises thoroughbred race horses and emus in Church Hill.


Autumn and Asters (Not Always Just Mums)
BOOKS for children are illustrated with a wonderful method to teach them the alphabet.
Each letter is drawn in a large size with an object selected whose first letter matches the letter in the alphabet, such as A is for animal, B is for bird, etc.
Gardeners can learn this way, too.
A is for autumn, apples and asters.
Let's pick asters.
By growing a selection from this huge tribe of plants, the fun can begin.
Tribe is the right word.
Asters belong to the plant family called Composites.
There are so many Composites, botanists have divided the family into tribes, 12 or 13 of them depending on which book you read.
In the aster tribe, for example, claims have been made that there are more than 100 genera.
Any gardener who has a daisylike flower in the border or sees one flowering in the woods at this time of year is almost safe to claim it as an aster.
The moist soil from summer's rains and the return of September sunshine has given these plants a special glory.


2 Jamaica Resorts Becoming One
Two beach resorts in Ocho Rios, the Ramada Mallards and the Americana, are being combined into Jamaica's largest hotel.
The yearlong renovation to create the Jamaica Grande-Renaissance Resort is scheduled to be completed in December.
Both hotels remain open as the work continues.
The Hong Kong-based Ramada International Hotels and Resorts, which will operate the Jamaica Grande, says it will have 720 rooms, all of which will be remodeled or improved.
It will also include a swimming pool complex with 26-foot-high waterfalls and swim-through grotto, a Club Mongoose children's activity and day-care center (with a nature study program), a new discotheque and five restaurants.
Other facilties include wind surfing and scuba diving, four tennis courts lighted for night play and a fitness center with aerobic exercise classes.


Those Dancing Feet Are at It Again
IT is theater lore, heard over and over.
Still, how can one recount the story without amazement, perhaps a tinge of disbelief?
And think of the new audiences attending "42d Street" -- now at Connecticut's Broadway Theater here for the second time in four years -- who never heard how it all happened.
It is the story about the musical that had such tryout trouble in Washington that word was it wouldn't get to Broadway, ever.
When it did, the producer, a flamboyant one-man publicity machine -- his name is David Merrick -- was wilier than ever.
Previews were on again, off again.
No display advertisements weeks in advance, as expected.
Only a smallish one just before what turned out to be an historic opening night.


Autumn and Asters (Not Always Just Mums)
BOOKS for children are illustrated with a wonderful method to teach them the alphabet.
Each letter is drawn in a large size with an object selected whose first letter matches the letter in the alphabet, such as A is for animal, B is for bird, etc.
Gardeners can learn this way, too.
A is for autumn, apples and asters.
Let's pick asters.
By growing a selection from this huge tribe of plants, the fun can begin.
Tribe is the right word.
Asters belong to the plant family called Composites.
There are so many Composites, botanists have divided the family into tribes, 12 or 13 of them depending on which book you read.
In the aster tribe, for example, claims have been made that there are more than 100 genera.
Any gardener who has a daisylike flower in the border or sees one flowering in the woods at this time of year is almost safe to claim it as an aster.
The moist soil from summer's rains and the return of September sunshine has given these plants a special glory.


Bermuda to Pay If Mercury Dips
In an effort to attract more tourists during Bermuda's mild winters, a group of hotels on the island is offering a 20 percent discount on accommodations on any day the temperature fails to reach 68 degrees from January through March.
During these months in Bermuda the average low temperature is 57 and the average high temperature 68.
The highest temperature recorded in January and February was 81 and the highest in March 84.
"There has been a perception that the weather is cold in Bermuda during the winter," said Gary Phillips, the subtropical island's director of tourism.
"The truth is, it's quite balmy, perfect for tennis and golf."


Closed Doors
To the Editor:
Regarding "Hard Times at Harvard's Tuscan Outpost"  [ Sept. 6 ] : when I was studying in Florence on a program with a different university, any trip to I Tatti was discouraged unless you knew someone in residence or had some other connection.
As I remember, it was also impossible to take advantage of its library.


Smoothing the Way For Storm Windows
ALUMINUM-FRAME storm windows are standard features on many houses.
Because they require little upkeep, most owners pay slight attention to them.
But some maintenance is advisable, and minor repairs can often avert major annoyances.
To rid aluminum window frames and sashes of corrosion, which roughens their surfaces, rub them with fine steel wool.
Afterward, to forestall new corrosion, wipe the metal with a cloth dipped in paste wax.


Casino for a Night
'Fete de Famille VII,' for New York Hospital's AIDS Care Center, Oct. 1.


Editors' Note
An article on page 7A in some copies of the New Jersey Weekly today describes the efforts of three groups of investors to bring minor league baseball to New Jersey and to build stadiums in Atlantic City, Trenton and Frankford Township in Sussex County.


Blue Jays Revisit Land of Opportunity
The Toronto Blue Jays have insisted all season long that 1992 marked a rebirth for the franchise, one that should ultimately make a difference when it comes to fulfilling their vast potential.
So perhaps it was fitting that, in the champagne-filled mist enveloping their celebration of a third American League East championship in four years, the Blue Jays broke out in song.
Not "Auld Lang Syne" or even "Happy Days Are Here, Again," but rather "Happy Birthday."
The immediate target of the off-key but sincere serenade was Dave Winfield, the 41-year-young spiritual leader of the American League East champions.
But as a soggy Winfield soaked up the sentiment and the champagne being spritzed on him, the touching salute reminded that the Jays were celebrating two creations of sorts, the second being a rebirth of opportunity.
For Toronto, on the strength of a 3-1 victory over Detroit, had survived a most grueling race to the wire against the relentless Milwaukee Brewers.
In the 161st game of their 162-game season, the Blue Jays finally clinched the East.


Making a Difference; For Novice Shareholders 'Adam Smith' in Russian
Goodness knows, the Russians need all the help they can get as they ease into the fast lane of free enterprise.
And who better to lend a hand than Adam Smith?
Of course, this "Adam Smith" is the nom de television of George J. W. Goodman, the host of the Public Broadcasting Service business program.
"In one big leap, the Russians have passed the United States in terms of individual shareholders," Mr.
Goodman said.
"Think about that." He was referring to the state vouchers that can be used to buy stock that every Russian citizen started receiving on Thursday.


'The Many Faces of Fiber' At the Garrison Art Center
"FIBER ARTS 1992: The Many Faces of Fiber," an exhibition scanning current directions in contemporary textile art, opened last week at the Garrison Art Center and will remain on view through next Sunday.
Although each of the 39 works by 28 artists in some way refers to the materials, construction or pliability of textiles, their diversity defies any single definition of fiber art.
The many facets of the field are revealed in objects ranging from wire sculpture to wire jewelry; from a comforter displayed on bed-like platforms to an art quilt embellished with forks; from a silk wedding canopy to sequinned evening bags.


Tracy Horton and Jon Leshay
INSTEAD of choosing traditional marches or hymns for their wedding, Tracy Horton and Jon Leshay, who both work in the promotions department at Elektra Records in New York, made a soundtrack.
They filled it with their favorite songs, as if they were taping tunes for a cross-country drive or a party in their apartment.
The tape played on the evening of Sept. 26 while 140 guests, wearing outfits like a tailcoat over blue jeans with lizard boots, or a black minidress with Spandex shorts underneath, took their seats in the Museum Club at Bridgewaters, a loft-like space on top of the Fulton Market Building in Manhattan.


Psychotherapy and Your Child
NINE-YEAR-OLD REBECCA HAS NEVer slept over at a friend's house.
She's too fearful.
Now, distraught because her class is going on an outing that includes an overnight stay, she refuses to go to school at all.
Rebecca suffers from a phobia.
Pete was 12 when his father left the family to live with another woman in a distant city.
Pete's reaction to his father's disappearance was anger: he picked fights at school, teased and baited his younger brother and sister and stole from his mother, denying it even when caught red-handed.
Pete is deeply depressed.


For a Much-Loved House and Garden
A dinner-dance to benefit Old Westbury Gardens, on Long Island, Sept. 26.


HUGGING LIFE
I read with a very personal interest Calvin Trillin's article "Hugging Life" (Sept. 6).
My niece, Anique, contracted AIDS through a contaminated blood transfusion she received two days after her birth, in 1980.
Naturally, her life centered around doctors, drugs, treatment, etc.
It wasn't until her first stay at the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp, in the summer of 1990, that she found a window of escape, albeit temporary, from her illness.


Conversations/Yasushi Akashi; A Japanese Envoy's Impossible Job: Keeping the Peace in Cambodia
YASUSHI AKASHI has been given the most difficult and important assignment in a long, distinguished career.
And for reasons that in the end may have little to do with his performance here, the 61-year-old Japanese diplomat could well fail.
As Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary General for Cambodia, Mr.
Akashi must oversee the largest, most expensive peacekeeping mission in the history of the United Nations.
But his assignment, to create conditions for a lasting peace in Cambodia, may have been impossible from the start.


BENEFITS
Gambling Benefit for AIDS
Tonight -- Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, which has raised and distributed more than $5.4 million since 1987, will hold a casino benefit at the Sheraton New York starting at 6:30 P.M.
There will be blackjack, roulette, craps, a wheel of fortune and raffles along with entertainment, an open bar and a buffet.
Tickets, $200, which includes $50 in gambling chips, at the door.
Dinner-Dance at the Whitney
Monday -- The Whitney Museum of American Art will hold a black-tie benefit at the museum starting with cocktails at 7 P.M. amid an exhibition of figurative works from the permanent collection.
Dinner, dancing and a performance by Buster Poindexter and His Banshees of Blue follow.
Tickets, $500, or $100 for dessert, dancing and entertainment, starting at 9 P.M., from (212) 570-3672.
Helping Many Hospitals
Monday -- The United Hospital Fund, which raises money for 46 voluntary hospitals and other health organizations in New York City, is opening its 114th fund-raising drive with a black-tie dinner and dance at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 645-2500.
Honoring Female Athletes
Monday -- The Women's Sports Foundation will honor more than 80 female athletes at its annual black-tie awards dinner to be held at the Marriott Marquis.
Arthur Ashe, Gregory Hines and Billie Jean King are to be among the presenters.
Roberta Flack will entertain.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.
Crisis Center in Tel Aviv
Monday -- Elem, an organization devoted to the rehabilitation of needy children in Israel, is raising funds for a crisis center in Tel Aviv for homeless and runaway children.
Sanford I. Weill, chairman and chief executive of the Primerica Corporation, and his wife, Joan, a leader of community organizations, will be honored at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Broadway Show for Dance
Monday -- A benefit for The Lawrence A. Wien Center for Dance and Theater, home to the Feld Ballets/N.Y. and the American Ballet Theater, will be held at the center, at 890 Broadway at 19th Street.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and a cabaret show with Liza Minelli, Billy Stritch, Gregory Hines, Betty Buckley and others, and performances by members of the two resident dance companies.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 475-2870.
Israel Cancer Fund-Raiser
Monday -- The Young Friends of the Israel Cancer Association will hold a benefit with cocktails, dinner and an auction of posters from 7:30 to 11:30 P.M. at Chop Suey Looey's Litchi Lounge, 1345 Avenue of the Americas at 55th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 935-5041, or $60 at the door.
Harbor Yacht Cruise
Thursday -- The World Yacht New Yorker will be the setting for a benefit for Citymeals-on-Wheels from 6:30 P.M. to midnight that will include a one-hour cruise of New York Harbor at 9 P.M.
There will be dinner, games of chance and an auction of items ranging from art to rare wines.
Boarding at Pier 62, at 23d Street at the Hudson River.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 687-1290.
Movie for Natural Resources
Thursday -- The New York premiere of Robert Redford's new movie, "A River Runs Through It," at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street, will benefit the Natural Resources Defense Council.
A dinner and dance at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, follows the 6:30 P.M. premiere.
Tickets, $175, or $75 for the movie alone, from (212) 727-4510.
Dance Party for MS
Thursday -- The New York branch of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society will have a party with dancing from 6 to 10 P.M. at the Country Club, 209 East 85th Street.
Tickets, $10, at the door.
Information: (212) 463-7787.
For a Children's Charity
Thursday -- Forward Face, which provides financial and emotional support for children born with craniofacial disorders and is associated with the Institute of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery at the New York University Medical Center, will hold a three-hour benefit cruise around New York Harbor.
The cruise will include dinner, entertainment and an auction of sports items.
Bruce Morrow, the disk jockey, will be the auctioneer.
Boarding the Spirit of New York is at 6:30 P.M. at Pier 9, at South Street at the foot of Wall Street.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 263-5205.
Hamlisch at the Pierre
Thursday -- The David Laser Memorial Fund of the Israel Cancer Research Fund will benefit from a cocktail buffet and performance by Marvin Hamlisch at the Pierre starting at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 969-9800.
Benefit for Play Schools
Friday -- Working through public schools, city shelters and other centers for the needy, the 75-year-old Play Schools Association conducts several programs for neglected children and abused women.
The 8 P.M. performance of Frank Sinatra and Shirley MacLaine at Radio City Music Hall, followed by a dinner at San Domenico, 240 Central Park South, will benefit the junior committee of the organization.
Tickets for the performance and dinner, limited to people 35 and younger, $125, or for all age groups for the performance alone, $100, from (212) 725-6540.
Cruise for Eugene O'Neill
Oct. 12 -- The Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn., will benefit from an evening cruise of cocktails, dinner and dancing aboard the Spirit of New York.
Boarding is at 6 P.M. at Pier 9, at South Street at the foot of Wall Street.
Boat leaves at 7 P.M. for a three-hour cruise around the harbor.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 370-7183.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 19  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area 705,000
20 East 20th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 13-ft. ceilings, 40-by-15-ft. skylight, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,025, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Greenwich Village 142,000
45 East 9th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, sunken living room, fireplace, 11-ft. ceilings, north exposure; maintenance $849, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  SoHo 235,000
122 Spring Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, co-op in a loft building; elevator, high-ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $650, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears-Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side 800,000
830 Park Avenue (76th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, original moldings and detail, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,600, 30% tax-deductible (Brokers: Sotheby's International Realty-Jean Marc LeVet &amp; Partners)  Upper West Side 229,000
299 Riverside Drive (102d St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft prewar co-op; part-time doorman, 10-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $715, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clarke Real Estate)  BRONX  Baychester 137,000
4163 Baychester Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 2-car garage, 18-by-102-ft. lot; taxes $1,635 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match)  Wakefield 175,000
4358 Bruner Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25-by-95-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Midwood 192,000
1460 East 15th Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, stained-glass windows, beamed-ceilings, 20-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  Park Slope 317,000
422 5th Street  2-family, 3-story, brownstone; 2 bedrooms, dining room, sun room in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, study in other; 1 bath in each; original moldings and detail, 16.8-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,057 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sea Gate 213,000
3907 Sea Gate Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached brick house; front parlor, dining room, oak trim and moldings, stained-glass windows, 2-car garage, 60-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Howard Beach 57,000
84-29 155th Avenue  (Everest)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated postwar building; L-shaped dining/living area, 2 exposures, common playground; maintenance $248, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  South Ozone Park 135,000
133-15 111th Street  2-family detached brick and wood-frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, private driveway, 31-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Graniteville 73,000
422 Lisk Avenue  (City West)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 785-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; dining area, sleeping loft with skylight, terrace; common charge $122, taxes $1,032 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Westerleigh 150,000
286 Clinton B. Fiske Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, stand-up attic, 40-by-75-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Wonica Realtors &amp; Appraisers Inc.)


Reading for Pleasure, Not Just for Tests
To the Editor:
As a public librarian I was struck by Ian Shoales's comment in "Mo'Hicans? No, Thanks" (Op-Ed, Sept. 27): "I have a hunch that 'The Leatherstocking Saga' and 'Silas Marner,' taken together, form the primary cause of both rising dropout rates and teen-age illiteracy." The key to creating avid readers is uncoerced pleasurable reading.


Lisa Ann Boyd, David O. Linton
Lisa Ann Boyd, the daughter of Linda K. Boyd of Rye Brook, N.Y., and James W. Boyd of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Onthank Linton, a son of Katherine O. Brown of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Donald L. Linton.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard Lichti performed the Protestant ceremony at the Reformed Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Linton is an architectural designer and space planner for Steve Wong &amp; Associates, a corporate-image and design concern in San Francisco.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father retired as a vice president for the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.
Her mother is a bookkeeper in Rye Brook.


Fla. State Remains Wide of Miami
The names change.
The people within the garnet and gold jerseys come and go.
But for the Florida State Seminoles, the overwhelming sense of bitter disappointment -- and the haunting words "wide right" -- just won't go away.
For the second consecutive season against the Miami Hurricanes, a Seminole kicker agonized as a last-second field-goal attempt sailed wide of the right upright.
Dan Mowrey grabbed his helmet with both hands and dropped to his knees on the Orange Bowl turf as his failed 39-yard attempt on the final play allowed Miami to preserve a brutal 19-16 victory.


Technology; Beyond the Solitary Fax Machine: an Electronic Mailbox
FAX machines have become part of the international business landscape.
They are convenient, but they are hardly perfect.
While one fax machine is receiving a document from another, it is unable to communicate with a third machine.
Moreover, most fax machines are not portable.
This year, these problems have been solved by a new type of service called fax mail, offered by several local and long distance telephone companies.
Similar to voice mail, which saves spoken telephone messages, fax mail allows documents to be collected in an electronic bin.
With the service, the sender is never frustrated by endless busy signals.
In addition, some fax-mail services allow senders to append voice messages at the same time they transmit their documents.


Assembly to Examine Youth Agency
AN investigation by the State Division of Youth and Family Services into the events surrounding the injury of a 2-year-old Edison boy has triggered a wide-ranging legislative examination of the division itself.
Assemblyman Jeff Warsh, Republican of Edison, said the case in his district had been the final straw that led him to call for hearings to look into the division's investigation procedures and the training of caseworkers.
He had already been concerned, he said, over "serious problems with the division in communities throughout the state."


A Prowler Stops Lunch In Midtown
Brooke Astor isn't one to let a cat get her tongue -- even if the cat is a Florida panther prowling the Grill Room of the Four Seasons during lunch.
"I didn't touch him, unfortunately," said Mrs.
Astor, the doyenne of New York society, who encountered the feline at the East 52nd Street restaurant a week and a half ago.


Setting One Visual Trap After Another
One of the most unforgettable shows of the past year was Robert Gober's exhibition last fall at the Jeu de Paume in Paris.
His work has a way of sticking in the mind, even when it's not clear precisely what it's doing there.
His sculptures can be almost unbearably painful to look at, as when he simulated with wax and human hair the lower half of a male figure whose legs and buttocks were pocked with huge sores shaped like flesh-colored drains.
But the work can also be effective when Mr.
Gober creates nothing more sensationalistic than a fixtureless sink.
Now 38, he has become one of the most talked-about artists of his generation, and the installation he has just completed at the Dia Center for the Arts, 548 West 22d Street, in Manhattan, has been one of the most eagerly anticipated events of the fall art season.
If there's something of Duane Hanson's hyper-realism in a number of Mr.
Gober's wax sculptures, there's a far stronger connection overall with an artist like Jasper Johns.
Mr.
Johns's 1972 "Untitled," with its own wax body parts, and his later "Perilous Night" and "In the Studio," with their spotted, severed arms, seem apropos.
One doesn't want to push the connection too far: Mr.
Gober's relationship to Minimalism and to the high theatricality of Surrealism, and his explicit concern for sexual and political issues, are among the qualities that separate him from his senior colleague.


Food Fight of the Week: Milk
People who say the public is often confused by the publication of conflicting health advice found new fodder last week when a group of doctors announced that children should not drink milk.
Of course, the other side counterattacked.
In the end, children could drink, with a caveat.
On hand Tuesday with members of the Physicians Committee on Responsible Medicine was Dr.
Benjamin Spock, the country's best-known pediatrician.
Dr.
Spock, the committee and many pediatric experts agree that cows' milk should not be the sole source of food for infants since it is low in iron.
Beyond that, the committee and Dr.
Spock part company.


Kathleen MacPhee, John McDermott
Kathleen Regina MacPhee, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Laurence E. MacPhee of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to John Fitzpatrick McDermott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. McDermott of Stuart, Fla.
Msgr.
William T. White officiated at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Scotch Plains, N.J.
Mrs.
McDermott, 27 years old, is a financial analyst at Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical company, in Rahway, N.J.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of English at Seton Hall University in West Orange, N.J.
Her mother, Regina M. MacPhee, is a supervisor of education for the Rahway Board of Education.


Debating The Merits Of Debate
While Bush and Clinton negotiators were debating the issue of Presidential debates this week, an even odder scenario was playing out in New York between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Comptroller Edward V. Regan.
Neither man is up for re-election this year, but Mr.
Regan wants to debate Mr.
Cuomo anyway, and this week threw down the gauntlet.
The ostensible topics would be an $800 million job-creation bond act that will be on the Nov. 3 ballot, along with what Mr.
Regan, a Republican, has called New York's "shabby" borrowing practices under the administration of Mr.
Cuomo, a Democrat.


New Realities Fight Old Images of Mother
The American mother -- that self-sacrificing, self-effacing, cookie-baking icon -- has been shoved into the center of a political morality play, one where stick-figure mothers battle in a debate that does not begin to suggest the complexity, diversity and confusion of being a mother in 1992.
Instead of Marilyn Quayle and Hillary Clinton, those emblems of stay-at-home and working mothers, talk to Toni Rumsey, who cried when her first child was born and realized she would have to keep her factory job at Gerber Baby Foods here in Fremont or face living in a trailer.


Eileen Roaman, Mark J. Catalano
Eileen Roaman, the daughter of Martin and Carol Roaman of New York, was married last evening to Mark Joseph Catalano, the son of Elizabeth Paterson of Portland, Conn., and Joseph Catalano of Santa Rosa, Calif.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at Robin's Nest, an ocean-front house in East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
George Wilson, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Catalano, 33 years old, graduated from the Parsons School of Design and is a candidate for a master's degree in fine arts at Hunter College.


There's a Moral in TV Cartoons: Be Resourceful
EDUCATION is where you find it.
Last week Americans learned that television stations around the nation have been finding it in programming previously thought to be the video equivalent of empty calories, message-free programming that conveniently fits the hazy specifications of the Children's Television Act.
This new Federal law, which was intended to raise the standards of children's programming and was passed in 1990 after five years' of debate, has made it possible for broadcasters to claim that "Super Mario Brothers" builds self-confidence and "Leave It to Beaver" offers moral tales.
No doubt about it: there's something instructive here.
Certainly there is much to be learned about the efficacy of vague legal wording, since this law also lets broadcasters argue that the cartoon rabbit Bucky O'Hare, in fighting off evil toads from another planet, is addressing "issues of social consciousness and responsibility." Those who study the motives of broadcasters seeking to redefine their usual Saturday morning fodder will surely learn a valuable lesson about resourcefulness, ketchup-is-a-vegetable style.
Delving Deeper
Aside from providing a prime example of creative reasoning, this argument on the part of broadcasters teaches us to avoid snap judgments.
Sure, a show like "The Jetsons" may not seem to have much substance, but it is important -- especially if the cartoon is a profitable part of one's morning lineup -- to delve deeper.
Upon close examination, "The Jetsons" may foster interest in new technology and provide budding scientists with inspiration. (Advice to future generations: think twice before boarding any spacecraft designed by aerophysicists who grew up watching "The Jetsons.")


Sanderson's Future Looks Pinstripe-Free
The Yankees decline to say how they will handle Scott Sanderson's contract situation after the season ends Sunday.
Sanderson does not know their plans.
But there was a definite sense that Sanderson was pitching his final game for the Yanks today when he strode to the mound against the Red Sox on a gorgeous afternoon at Fenway Park.
With the way he has pitched lately, Sanderson has not given the club much reason to think about investing $2.5 million in his right arm.
And the downward trend continued today.


Dispute Over Gulf Islands Worsens Iran-Arab Ties
A dispute over the control of three islands in the Persian Gulf has pushed Iranian-Arab relations to their lowest point since the Iran-Iraq war, Arab and Western diplomats say.
Senior Saudi and Bahraini officials said this week that members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, an alliance of Arabian Peninsula countries led by Saudi Arabia, may ask for a special meeting of the United Nations Security Council to discuss the dispute over the islands, Abu Musa and Greater and Lesser Tunb.


Lorenzo
To the Editor: Readers of Susan Lumsden's article on Florentine exhibitions devoted to Lorenzo the Magnificent ("Florence Recalls the Magnificent One," Sept. 6) may be happy to learn they need not travel to Italy to see original letters, manuscripts, or early printed editions of works by Lorenzo de' Medici, Machiavelli, Agnolo Poliziano, Pico della Mirandola, Marsilio Ficino, Michelangelo and Leon Battista Alberti.
They are all part of an exhibition, "Renaissance Florence: Arts and Letters," which complements the Morgan Library's current exhibition on drawings by Fra Bartolommeo.
The exhibition, here at 29 East 36th Street, continues through Nov. 29.
WILLIAM VOELKLE Curator of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts, Pierpont Morgan Library New York, N.Y.


24 States Attack Airline Proposals For Antitrust Suit
The attorneys general of 24 states are recommending the rejection of a settlement proposed by United States airlines in an antitrust class-action lawsuit.
The airlines plan to issue about $400 million worth of coupons to consumers who bought at least one domestic plane ticket between Jan. 1, 1988, and June 30, 1992, for a flight to or through at least one of 34 major airports.
The suit maintained that the airlines collaborated in fixing prices.
In a filing last month with the United States District Court in Atlanta, which is scheduled to rule on the settlement on Oct. 19, the attorneys general urged rejection of the proposal unless various objections were satisfied.
The filing said that the settlement was underfunded and that the amount allocated to the plaintiffs' lawyers was disproportionate to the total.


70's Icons You Can Wear
IF you are old enough to remember the Beatles on "The Ed Sullivan Show," you may be too old for Pop Icon.
The month-old clothing store on Seventh Avenue in Chelsea, with orange, mauve and green walls, "Man from U.N.C.L.E" background music, flower-print shirts and hip-hugger bell bottoms, has what its owner, Herbie Velez, called "an early 70's feel to it."


The Secret Aches of Broken Families
Hallie Foote has a long delicate nose, frightened blue eyes and a complexion the color of eggshells.
Every time she makes an appearance in "The Roads to Home" -- the affecting drama by her father, Horton Foote, at the Lamb's Little Theater Off Broadway -- you are half afraid that she will shatter.
Everyone connected with the production seems to feel this way, too.
There are no loud noises in the play.
No sudden movements.
I'm pretty sure Ms.
Foote would run and hide if there were.
As it is, the other actors are mindful not to raise their voices when they're addressing her.
They nod solicitously and pretend nothing's amiss, even when the actress, for no apparent reason, is singing "My Old Kentucky Home" in a faintly wavering schoolgirl soprano, or making her finger into a miniature pistol and going "pow, pow, pow," as if she were shooting the feathery tops off dandelion stems.


THE WORLD: Without the U.S.; China Envisions A New Order
IT was a memorable week in the Chinese capital, with a first visit from Roh Tae Woo, President of South Korea, a spectacular fireworks show to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the opening of relations with Japan and the installation of a new, ruddy-faced portrait of Mao on the Gate of Heavenly Peace.
But if this was part of an effort to show a new, proud and pragmatic China asserting itself in the post-cold war era, there was also a sour note: relations with the United States.
China and the United States have been threatening to retaliate against each other in bitter disputes over trade and American weapons sales to Taiwan.
And China was unimpressed when President Bush vetoed a bill last week to revoke China's favored access to the American market unless it eased its human rights policies and opened its economy more swiftly.
The Chinese felt the threat was unfair in the first place.


Wall Street; Nowhere to Go But Higher?
And now, a nice word for silver.
Paul Macrae Montgomery, an economist at Legg Mason Wood Walker, does not have anything against gold, but he says silver looks even better.
Better, that is, if you're a fearless bargain hunter.


Hope Hennessey, Rory D. G. Read
Hope Elizabeth Hennessey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Hennessey of Ipswich, Mass., was married yesterday to Rory David Gilbert Read, the son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
David Read of New York.
The Rev.
Edward French performed the Episcopal ceremony at Ascension Memorial Church in Ipswich.
Mrs.
Read, 23 years old, is a programming assistant in the television division of the National Geographic Society in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a sales representative in Ipswich for the Magid Glove and Safety Company, a Chicago manufacturer of industrial safety equipment.
Her mother, Heidi Hennessey, is a typesetter at The Ipswich Chronicle.


Glimpsing a Glittering Broadway
IT is theater lore, heard over and over.
Still, how can one recount the story without amazement, perhaps a tinge of disbelief?
And think of the new audiences attending "42d Street" -- now at Connecticut's Broadway Theater in Darien for the second time in four years -- who never heard how it all happened.
It's the story about the musical that had such tryout trouble in Washington, D.C., word was it wouldn't get to Broadway, ever.
When it did, the producer, a flamboyant one-man publicity machine -- his name is David Merrick -- was wilier than ever.
Previews were on again, off again.
No display advertisements weeks in advance, as expected.
Only a smallish one just before what turned out to be an historic opening night.


Nuggets Honor for David Thompson
DAVID THOMPSON, who played seven seasons with the Denver Nuggets, will return to the scene of many of his triumphs on Nov. 7 when his jersey No. 33 will be retired during a ceremony at the Nuggets' season opener.


Budapest Watches Statues Trundle In and Out of Exile
At the edge of City Park, three policemen, scattered pedestrians and people leaning out the windows of passing cars were witnessing a bit of history.
Men with drills and blow-torches moved into place around the pedestal of a statue of a muscular worker with a banner in his left hand and his right arm stretched out behind him as he leaned forward into a powerful stride.


Clayton to Return Against Bills
MARK CLAYTON, a vital link in the Dolphins' passing attack when they play at Buffalo today in a game between unbeaten teams in the Eastern Division of the American Football Conference, was taken off the injured reserve list yesterday and is scheduled to play. (AP)


On a Frontier of Hope, Building Homes for the Poor Proves Perilous
Security work was James Dyson's vocation, mission and metaphor.
He learned martial arts and taught them to teen-agers.
He worked as a private security guard.
His passion, his friends said, was to stretch the idea of self-defense into community defense against drugs and street violence.
And so last summer, he signed up as a security guard with Acorn, a grass-roots housing group that had been renovating two abandoned city buildings on a drug-infested block in East New York.
Mr.
Dyson, 6 foot 7 and nobody's fool, lasted three days.
At 3 A.M. on July 14, he was shot to death on the street outside the buildings he was guarding.


Leila Robin Yim, Richard J. Surratt
Leila Robin Yim, a daughter of S. Faith Yim of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
W.
Michael Yim, was married yesterday to Richard Johannes Surratt, a son of Sonja Kamunen of Littleton, Colo., and Lon Surratt of Trenton, Fla.
The Rev.
Wallace M. Alston Jr. performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Nassau Church in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Surratt, 27 years old, is an air-credit analyst with the Environmental Protection Agency in Dallas.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University, as did her husband.


Writer Who Is Suing Over Editing Is Told to Edit
A writer and teacher of writing, Gordon Lish, was given an editing assignment by a Federal judge on Friday: Trim by half his own 2,400-word letter in a way that, he believes, retains its integrity.
Mr.
Lish, in a case that has both raised the pique and peaked the amusement of New York's literary cognoscenti, has the distinction of having sued for libel over the wording of his own letter.


Nona K. Murphy, William Collin
Nona King Murphy, a daughter of Ann C. Vose of New York and the late Esmond K. Murphy, was married yesterday to William Elwell Collin, the son of Margaret M. Angevine and William W. Collin 3d, both of Sewickley, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Collin was until recently a real-estate broker with Brown, Harris, Stevens in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father was an investment counselor at E. W. Axe, an investment-advisory concern in Manhattan.
Her stepfather, Elliott E. Vose, retired as a senior vice president of Grumman International in Bethpage, L.I.


Kristin C. Ohms, W. D. McNamara
Kristin Cornelie Ohms, a clothier in Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to William Dennis McNamara, a first vice president of Prudential Securities in New York.
The Rev.
James Scovill performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Litchfield, Conn.
Mrs.
McNamara owns the Back Door, a discount store, and a retail consulting service in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan S. Ohms of Litchfield.


Don a Hat, Strike a Pose, Do the Meisel
Steven Meisel, the fashion photographer, recently shot more than 40 models, designers and friends wearing one of his trademark black hats.
"It's the big fur hat with the floppy ears," said Mr.
Meisel, who did the two-day photo shoot in mid-September for Italian Vogue.
"I've worn it on and off for 100 years. I just thought let's have fun with this stupid hat idea and put everyone in it."


Murray Hill
To the Editor:
Your article on July 26 about Murray Hill could have included in its comments about distinguished buildings and persons 113 East 36th Street, once the residence of Civil War Admiral David Farragut.
This small brownstone (now painted a horrid gray) was given to him by "grateful citizens of New York for his contribution to winning the war against the rebellious Southern States."  JOSEPH R. CARMICHAEL Manhattan


Political Dogma Fades. Social Awareness Remains.
Consider these signs of the times.
Dance Theater Workshop's current season at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, which runs through Dec. 21, features, among other choreographic attractions, a commentary on technology by David Hurwith, musings on Puerto Rican identity by Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio, and theatrical sketches about impoverished black women by Janine Williams.
Among the dancers and performance artists appearing this autumn at Performance Space 122 are Scott Heron and Tim Miller, both of whom will stage works on gay themes.
A 15-week series of productions by lesbian choreographers and performance artists gets under way on Oct. 22 at the Pyramid Club in the East Village.
And this fall's first dance program at the Judson Memorial Church, on Sept. 21, included a duet created by Sean Curran and Kathy Wildberger honoring two choreographers who died of AIDS.


Macedonia, in Fight Over a Name, Is Reeling From Trade Embargoes
Macedonia, the odd republic out in the Yugoslav conflict, is groaning under the weight of trade embargoes imposed by Greece in the south and Serbia in the north, officials here and in the Macedonian capital say.
The embargoes have blocked critically needed imports, especially of oil, two Macedonian officials told members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee late last month.


Claudia Emmet, Robert Williams
Claudia Christine Emmet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henri W. Emmet of New York, was married there yesterday to Robert Evan Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick C. Williams of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Ms.
Emmet, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a credit analyst at Bank One in Columbus.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the managing director of Servus Associates, a financial consulting concern in New York.


Hilary Bacon, Christopher Gabrieli
A.
Smoki Bacon and Richard F. Concannon of Boston have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Bacon's daughter Hilary Conant Bacon to Christopher Frater Oscar Gabrieli, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elmer R. Gabrieli of Buffalo.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Bacon is a tax lawyer at Deloitte &amp; Touche in Boston.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
She received a law degree from the University of Notre Dame and a master's degree in tax law from Boston University.
Her mother and stepfather founded Bacon-Concannon Associates, a Boston public relations firm for nonprofit organizations.
Miss Bacon is also a daughter of the late Edwin C. Bacon, who owned the Bacon Insurance Agency in Boston.


Cathryn Greenberg, Stanley Crownover
Cathryn Greenberg, a daughter of Daniel S. Greenberg and Polly H. Greenberg, both of Washington, was married yesterday to Stanley H. Crownover, a son of Ruth H. Crownover of Nashville and the late Robert N. S. Crownover.
The Rev.
Stuart Nunnally, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
Mrs.
Crownover, 33 years old, graduated from George Washington University.
She and her husband received master's degrees from the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, she in wildlife ecology and he in ecology.
She is a Ph.D. candidate in wildlife ecology at the University of Florida in Gainesville, where her husband received a Ph.D. in soil science and is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the department of soil science.


Maine's Showdown Over Workers' Comp
To the Editor:
M.
R.
Greenberg writes (Forum, Aug. 16) that workers' compensation insurance carriers have experienced losses because "workers file claims for injuries, real or imagined, that are unrelated to the workplace." He also says that such claims are often filed "with the encouragement of other parties." This is a scandalous, unspecific accusation.


Republicans Play Fast and Loose With Clinton's Fiscal Record; Whole Tax Picture
To the Editor:
In attempting to defend the Bush campaign's list of 128 Arkansas "tax increases," Fred Malek makes a very disturbing assertion ("Yes, 128 Clinton Fees and Taxes. Count Them," Op-Ed, Sept. 23).
He states that claims of low taxes in Arkansas are unjustified, because they mingle "local taxes, over which Bill Clinton has no control, with state taxes."


Making Offices Compatible With Flexible Schedules
WHILE planning its new offices at 1633 Broadway, Evernet Systems Inc., a computer service company, decided it did not really need dedicated desks for each of its 35 engineers, since they spent 90 percent of their time at clients' offices.
So in place of 35 desks, a 4,000-square-foot communal area has been set up.
Ten desks are available to engineers who happen to be in the building, near 51st Street, that day.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICAN LAW, 1870-1960 The Crisis of Legal Orthodoxy.
By Morton J. Horwitz.
Oxford University, $30.


SAVIMBI, TRAILING, HINTS AT NEW WAR
As voting returns continued to show Jonas Savimbi trailing in Angola's first democratic elections, the former guerrilla leader today accused the governing party of fraud and hinted of a resumption of the civil war if his party loses.
In a strongly-worded radio speech, Mr.
Savimbi accused the governing Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola of rigging the vote, and described the National Electoral Council, which is overseeing the polling, as nothing more than a puppet of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos's Government.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Good Health Magazine Part 2


On Sunday; Black Officer: Typical of City, Not of Force
Baron Marquis took the No. 2 subway to Church Street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, then strolled home on Friday.
The sidewalks were full of teachers, secretaries, laborers returning from work.
Every few stoops, someone waved.
He's well known in this black neighborhood, has owned a limestone on the street 20 years.
He said hi to his Aunt Bessie, went up to change his suit and put away his gun.
Detective Marquis is a typical New Yorker, black in a city that is 56 percent minority, (25 percent black; 24 percent Hispanic; 7 percent Asian).
He likes his city, was born in Bedford-Stuyvesant, educated in Harlem, dates a woman from the Upper West Side and voted for Mayor David N. Dinkins.
When he's sick, he goes to Kings County Hospital Center.
"There are cops who say, 'If I'm shot, don't take me to Kings County.' I don't feel that way." New York's his life.
"There's a chemistry in this city. I've been in the suburbs. The silence gets disturbing."


No One Best System to Train Teachers
To the Editor:
My research analyzing urban teacher preparation from 1960 to 1990, in a study to be published shortly by Teachers College Press, confirms the observations of Prof.
Richard J. Murnane of the Harvard Graduate School of Education about the need to develop a diversity of approaches in preparing teachers ("Would-Be Teachers Who Are Being Turned Away," front page, Sept. 9).


YOU ARE BALKANS
I was deeply moved by Slavenka Drakulic's article "You Are Balkans, the World Tells Us, Mythological, Wild, Dangerous" (Sept. 13).
One way to remove the label of "otherness" would be if we were all to put ourselves in the shoes of those who are victims of war -- to imagine what it would be like to see our neighbor killed by a grenade, our home blown up, to have to flee the place where our roots lie.
We all may suffer loss, pain and helplessness when life's circumstances turn against us.
We must not look at "others" without seeing ourselves.
TROY HAILPARN, M.D.
Mineola, L.I.


Still Unborn at 26
SHE NEEDED ME
By Walter Kirn. 227 pp. New York: Pocket Books. $20.


In Riverside, Specialties of North India
AN annex to a Howard Johnson's on U.S.1 in Riverside may seem an unlikely place to find an Indian restaurant, especially one with a Sikh in turban as a doorman.
But guests enter Taj Mahal (past the uniformed Sikh) via a long canopy-covered walkway, bordered by flowers in full bloom.
The spacious dining room is artfully separated into several areas, with generously spaced tables.
One table in the rear is isolated under an appliqued Gujerat canopy.
White wicker settees and chairs, brass Indian sculptures, puppets, wall hangings and taped Indian music all create an atmospheric backdrop for delicious North Indian specialties.
We began with bhel poori, a cold appetizer rarely found on Indian menus in the area.
It consisted of a melange of rice, peas, onions, chopped tomatoes and generous bits of fresh coriander laced with a sweet-sour tamarind sauce that tickled the palate as a starter should.
Almost as lively was dahi aloo poori, another salad-like cold dish of potato chunks and onions, with similar tamarind verve, in a tangy yogurt bath.


Nevada Senator Plans to Filibuster the Energy Bill
A proposal for a nuclear waste dump at Yucca Mountain, the hottest issue in Nevada politics for nearly a generation, may spell the death of the sweeping energy bill that was near final passage and President Bush's signature.
Senator Richard H. Bryan, the freshman Democrat of Nevada, has sworn to use a variety of delaying tactics to kill the bill because of a provision put into the measure in the final hours of a House-Senate energy conference on Wednesday by Senator J. Bennett Johnston, Democrat of Louisiana.
And his threatened filibuster grew stronger every hour as Tuesday, when the lawmakers hope to adjourn, approached.


Corrections
A report in the Night column of Styles of the Times on Sept. 20 about a Gianni Versace benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research omitted the sponsorship of the "Piazza Italia" exhibition at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, where the benefit was held.
The Italian Trade Council was the sponsor.
The sponsor was also omitted from a fashion report on Sept. 24 about a dinner marking the opening of "Valentino: 30 Years of Magic," also held at the exhibition site.


A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
Critics have argued that homeopathy cannot be taken seriously because there is no known "mechanism" by which its remedies can work: i.e., it doesn't work because it can't ("Take a Little Deadly Nightshade and You'll Feel Better," by James Gorman, Aug. 30).
This is a rather unscientific argument for those who claim to be schooled in the ways of science, especially since the exact mechanisms of action of a large variety of conventional drugs are unknown, including those of aspirin and steroids.
RICHARD J. WEINTRAUB, M.D.
Director of Psychiatry, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
Boston


Crime
Would a joke about Northrop Frye make you (a) laugh or (b) cringe?
Do you agree with the following statement: "Nowhere was a place more cold-blooded than a graduate English department"?
Have you ever wanted to strangle your (a) faculty adviser, (b) graduate assistant or (c) college-age child?
If you liked this little quiz, then have I got a book for you.
LOVE COOLS (Putnam, $19.95), W. Edward Blain's second campus mystery, after "Passion Play," delivers a devious murder plot that catches the conscience, or lack of it, of the summer faculty at the Stone Mountain Theater in Virginia's Shenandoah Valley.
Fierce professional rivalries break out among this cutthroat gang of teachers after an esteemed Shakespearean scholar dies in a fire.
Although her last manuscript was presumably destroyed, two thematically different versions surface, giving rise to grave charges of fraud.


Smoothing the Way For Storm Windows
ALUMINUM-FRAME storm windows are standard features on many houses.
Because they require little upkeep, most owners pay slight attention to them.
But some maintenance is advisable, and minor repairs can often avert major annoyances.
To rid aluminum window frames and sashes of corrosion, which roughens their surfaces, rub them with fine steel wool.
Afterward, to forestall new corrosion, wipe the metal with a cloth dipped in paste wax.


Letting God Do the Composing
To the Editor:
Mr.
Rothstein suggests that either Cage was confused in thinking that liberation could come from submission to law, or else he knowingly embraced a totalitarian ethic and esthetic.
It would take pages to address this serious charge in a thorough way.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Rothstein's essay should not go unchallenged.
What exactly Cage sought to be liberated
from
is a question Mr.
Rothstein never even raises.
He seems to assume that Cage strove for something like "absolute" liberation -- i.e., freedom from everything.
Correctly, Mr.
Rothstein recognizes that such total freedom would mean total lawlessness.
Cage is then faulted for two mutually incompatible sins: first, for thinking that total lawlessness would be a good way to produce art, and second, for ending up not with total lawlessness but with submission to some other law.
There are many problems in this web of confusion.
For one thing, Cage not only knew that absolute liberation was impossible, he did not see it as the goal of his life or work.
The most casual familiarity with his work should make it clear that what Cage sought liberation from was something very specific -- custom, let us say, or more narrowly the "laws," or dogmas, of the musical establishment.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Mid Sept. auto sales, millions, annual rate
6
5.7
Wednesday
Sept. wholesale trade, percent change
1
0.4
Thursday
Late Sept. jobless claims, thousands
429
435
Monday: European Community economic ministers meet  Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey of retail sales *
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting *
Bank of Japan news conference  Wednesday: Consumer credit figures released for late September *
Britain's Conservative party holds its convention  Friday Canadian unemployment report


A Surge of Interest In Affordable Housing
SIX months ago, when County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke offered 20 county-owned sites to municipalities interested in building affordable housing, the plan drew little response from politically sensitive municipal leaders.
Last week county planners reported after months of discussion and negotiation that they were now swamped with requests for assistance, advice and financing from 27 housing groups, nonprofit agencies and some communities interested in building owner-occupied and rental units.


Real Glamour
Isaac Mizrahi coined a 50's-style word -- "glamoureal" -- to describe the feeling of his 1992 spa-resort collection.
Mizrahi worked with the makeup artist Kevyn Aucoin and the hair stylist Lindy King to create hair and makeup looks as light, loose and easily elegant as his clothes.
"I'm tired of what 'beauty' is right now," Mizrahi says.
"Makeup has reached drag-queen proportions. It seems so heavy and artificial. It's time to turn it around. For the spa season, I wanted to create a real and glamorous look."


When Superman Gets Boring
The news that Superman is about to die has provoked anger and surprise, much of it from people who haven't read his comic book adventures in decades.
Closer readers may have suspected for quite some time that death was in the cards.
It's a logical outgrowth of a humanizing process that started in the 1980's.
For 50 years, the Man of Steel moved planets without breaking a sweat and survived Armageddon-like battles with nary a scratch and every hair in place.
But invulnerability became a bore.
It bored the writers and editors at D.C.
Comics.
It bored the readers who'd become accustomed to more mortal heroes, like Spiderman, who risk their lives in every adventure.
In other comic books, heroes had become morally ambiguous, at times even a little shady.
But Superman had remained very much a boy scout, in style and temperament.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 4, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
2
36
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
25
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
4
1
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $12.50.) The romance of a countess and a British soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
5
6
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
6
2
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
7
2
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
8
12
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
9
2
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
10 *
2
FAMILY MAN, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The plight of a woman who falls in love with her employer, known as the toughest of bosses.
11
6
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors.
12 *
2
WAR DRUMS, by John Vornholt. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
13
36
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
14
1
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) In the 23d century, astronauts contend with alien forces.
15 *
5
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is.
16 *
16
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
24
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
6
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
11
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
5
72
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6 *
64
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
7
7
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
8
465
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
15
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
10
20
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
60
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
89
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
108
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
3
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) The revised edition of a book offering counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Joan Barry, Daniel D'Aquila
Judge and Mrs.
David M. Barry of Manchester, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joan Marie Barry to Daniel Louis D'Aquila, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis C. D'Aquila of Darien, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barry, 30 years old, is a history and social studies teacher at Ellington High School in Ellington, Conn.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, from which she also received a master's degree in history.
Her father is a judge of Connecticut Superior Court in Hartford.


Playing the Art Game for High Stakes
Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza is pouring himself another drink in front of a Picasso on the living room wall of his Madrid mansion.
He is making the point that he has always been a tough businessman, the kind who won't let anything get in the way of a good deal.
"I remember about 20 years ago, the first time I went to the Soviet Union to work out an agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Trade," says the Baron, his gaze shifting to a Cezanne next to the Picasso.


Sound Bytes; Atop the World's Biggest Start-Up Company
Robert J. Corrigan is president of the newly formed IBM Personal Computer Company of Somers, N.Y., an independent operating unit of the International Business Machines Corporation.
Mr.
Corrigan joined I.B.M. in 1962 as an engineer and has served in a variety of managerial positions.
He now heads a "start-up company" with 10,000 employees and annual revenues of $7 billion.
Question: Describe your typical workday.


Pursuit


Sacrificing Material To Get Out of a Bind
IF you are ahead in material but having positional trouble, it makes sense to sacrifice something.
Otherwise, the opponent's bind can be the cause of your losing.
In the game between the Manhattan grandmaster Joel Benjamin and Rod Malpert of Ithaca, N.Y., from the third round of the New York State Championship in Saratoga over the Labor Day weekend, Benjamin, a pawn ahead but getting squeezed, gave back rook for bishop and pawn to take over positional superiority and remain with a small material advantage.


Miss McMahon, Sean R. Smith
Jacqueline Ann McMahon, a senior assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Sean Richard Smith, an associate at the New York law firm of Caulfield, Galvin, Heller, Harris &amp; Colligan.
The Rev.
Dennis Murphy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Peter in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
McMahon Smith, 31 years old, works in the law-enforcement investigations bureau of the district attorney's office.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from Albany Law School.


Jockeying On and Off Board, Fischer and Spassly Draw
Bobby Fischer, gingerly playing a defense that he had bobbled twice before, made a draw yesterday with Boris Spassky in Game 14 of their exhibition match in Belgrade.
The score, Fischer 5, Spassky 3, remains unchanged.
No one benefits from the draw; it still takes 10 victories to earn the winner's prize of $3.35 million.
But Fischer did just what Spassky had done to him in the previous encounter: he kept him from developing any kind of serious threat at all.
Thus, Spassky's Queen's Gambit will need reconditioning if it is to produce the victories he needs to get him back on even terms.


The Executive Computer; So the Computer Talks. Does Anyone Want to Listen?
The Apple Macintosh, Commodore Amiga, Atari and Next computers have had built-in sound abilities for years, but is anyone listening in corporate America?
To most executives, computer sound consists of beeps and whirs and the occasional grinding sound of a dying disk drive.
Audio, it is widely believed in the business world, is important mainly in games and entertainment software.


CLASSICAL BRIEFS
Schubert: 'Die Winterreise'
Jon Vickers, tenor; Peter Schaaf, piano.
VAI Audio 1007-2; two CD's. (VAI Audio, 158 Linwood Plaza, Fort Lee, N.J. 07024.)


Bonds Down Stretch Is Better Than Ever
Opponents of the Pittsburgh Pirates have played a game within a game this season.
While trying -- for the most part unsuccessfully -- to beat the Pirates, they tried to see how often they could walk Barry Bonds.
They have succeeded in walking him so often that, entering yesterday's game, Bonds had walked 127 times, which was more than 30 percent more often than the next busiest walker, Fred McGriff of San Diego with 96.
On 32 of those 127 occasions, Bonds had no chance to hit; they were intentional walks.


Cincinnati
This month Cincinnati celebrates its glory days as a major river port at a festival called Tallstacks '92, when 16 riverboats from across America will steam up and down the Ohio River to meet at the city's docks.
Cincinnati was settled in 1788, long before the steamboat era, by Col.
Benjamin Stites, who was so impressed with the beauty and natural advantages of the harbor and hills along the Ohio River that he decided to build there.


Karen E. Donald, John M. Andrews
Karen Elizabeth Donald, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Delmar Donald of Hilltown, Pa., was married yesterday to John Michael Andrews, the son of Mary S. Andrews of Montgomery, W.Va., and the late Stanley M. Andrews.
The Rev.
Theodore G. Hoskins performed the ceremony at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Andrews is a lawyer for Time Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a law degree from Temple University.
Her father is an internist in Hilltown.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
August 92
July 92
August 91
Nation
$ 104,400
102,700
$ 102,000
Northeast
142,000
141,100
142,300
Midwest
81,900
81,500
79,300
South
95,000
91,600
90,700
West
137,400
143,400
145,300
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.17
8.07
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.28
5.29
6.86
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.04
7.95
9.02
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.15
5.16
6.73
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.05
7.98
9.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.95
5.00
6.78
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.25
8.16
9.27
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.96
5.85
7.39
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.16
3.15
5.50
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.58
7.78
9.10
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Kelly M. Schulte, Gregory G. Maertz
Kelly Marie Schulte, a daughter of Joy Racanelli of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Milon D. Schulte of Las Vegas, Nev., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gregory George Maertz, the son of Eve K. Bedell of Mound, Minn.
Msgr.
Tom Hartman performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Church in Oyster Bay.
Mrs.
Maertz, 30 years old, is an associate manager at a Banana Republic store in Forest Hills, Queens.
She graduated from Nassau Community College, the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, who is retired, was a New York City Police sergeant in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Melville, L.I.
The bride's stepfather, John Racanelli, heads a real-estate development company in Hauppauge, L.I., and is the chairman of the Long Island Association, a business and civic group based in Commack, L.I.


Bush and Iran Deal: Gaps in His Account
George Bush has always said that as Vice President he was not involved in decision-making in the Iran-contra affair.
But an examination of the record reveals inconsistencies and conflicts between what he has said and the increasing amount of evidence in the case.
Article, page 34.


Hollywood Is Spoofed In Musical
A FEW years ago, "Hollywood Exposed!" had its premiere at the small Second Stage Theater of Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
Since then, its composer, lyricist and director, Michael Tester, has been writing and rewriting to hone the rough spots.
The result is an utterly charming new version of "Hollywood Exposed!" at the Victory Theater in Farmingville through Oct. 18.
The film industry has recently been exploring the effects of mingling cartoon characters with human characters to create an unusual blend of fiction and fantasy.
In "Hollywood Exposed!" Mr.
Tester is able to add more dimensions to those effects, because he is dealing with live actors.


The Most Happy College President: Leon Botstein of Bard
Few things in Leon Botstein's world are finer than to mix an odd German concoction of soda and beer, called a Radler, light up a big cigar, undo his fussy bow tie, lean back in a chair -- preferably a straight-backed one -- and then range widely in talk and thought over history, art, the 19th century, the standards of education and, above all else, the splendors of music.
He spends many nights this way at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., where he has been president for 17 catalytic years, and it doesn't matter what time it is.
Not to Botstein, anyway.
It might be after a faculty meeting, or an address to incoming freshmen, or a rehearsal for one of the orchestras that Botstein conducts.
By 1 or 2 in the morning, the graduate students, anxious professors, admiring staff or curious musicians might flag, but when it comes to ideas and emotions, Botstein (pronounced BOT-stine) thrives on the mixture, the crosscurrents that flow, like his soda and beer, into something that did not quite exist before.


The Reckoning; No Painless Way Out for the Next President
WHOEVER is elected President 30 days from now, the next few years will be rough.
Ross Perot touched on this last week when he got into the race for the final lap and called for "fair-shared sacrifice." But Mr.
Perot did not tell the full story, and George Bush and Bill Clinton have ducked it during their campaigns.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush, in Florida, Steps Up Personal Attack on Clinton
President Bush delivered his harshest personal attack yet on Gov.
Bill Clinton today, reminding voters of Mr.
Clinton's experimentation with marijuana 20 years ago, accusing him of plotting huge cuts in Medicare and calling him a weak-kneed waffler.
"This guy couldn't remember in detail that he didn't inhale 20 years ago, and he can't remember what came out of his mouth 20 minutes ago," Mr.
Bush said, describing a condition he called "Clintonesia" -- "weak knees, sweaty palms and an incredible desire to say anything on all sides of any issue, depending on who you're trying to please."


The Baltic
To the Editor: William E. Schmidt ("Transition in the Baltic," Aug. 30) seems to have been an unhappy camper in the Baltic countries.
In the opening scene of his article, he observes that two satellite phones sitting on the reception desk in the Hotel de Rome in Riga that are "the only working window on the world beyond Latvia." No sooner has he got there than he needs to make sure he can get out.


Robyn K. Farrell, David B. McCree
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Farrell of Bedford, N.Y., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Robyn Kay Farrell, and David Burgess McCree, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. McCree Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Miss Farrell, 28 years old, is an assistant vice president in the private banking division of Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father owns Richard Farrell Associates, a marketing communications concern in Bedford.


Megan V. Wiesen, Mark M. Dowley
Megan Victoria Wiesen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald G. Wiesen of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Michael Dowley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Dowley 3d of Birmingham, Mich.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan officiated at the Church of St.
Catherine of Siena.
Mrs.
Dowley is a broadcast associate in the Olympics unit of CBS in New York.
She graduated from the College of Wooster, as did her husband.
Her father retired as the vice chairman and chief financial officer of Chesebrough-Pond's, the consumer products company, in Greenwich.


QUICK SHUTDOWN AT NUCLEAR PLANT
Federal regulators allowed the Turkey Point 4 nuclear reactor in South Florida to be started up Thursday after damage from Hurricane Andrew was repaired.
But just hours later they ordered it to be shut down after the Federal Emergency Management Agency decided it needed to re-evaluate evacuation plans.
The plant, south of Miami, had reached 30 percent power when the operator, the Florida Power and Light Company, agreed to begin shutting it down.


Host Is Allowed To Defeat Guests
AT a children's birthday party, the host, already well laden with loot, is normally barred from winning the main prize.
This rule does not apply in bridge, which was just as well for Matthew Granovetter of Ballston Lake, N.Y., the editor of Bridge Today magazine.
He is the organizer of a series of all-star games in which top-ranked players compete in individual events for cash prizes.
At the fourth game, played Sept. 21 and 22, he competed himself, emerged the winner in a field of 20, and collected $4,000 out of a prize pool of $10,000.
Rolling Hills Club in Novato, Calif., near San Francisco, was the sponsor and the playing site.


Schembechler Headed to Court?
BO SCHEMBECHLER says he had an oral agreement with TOM MONAGHAN to stay 10 years as president of the Detroit Tigers.
Monaghan says he did not.
The matter may now be headed to court.
Lawyers representing Schembechler, who was fired in August shortly before Monaghan sold the Tigers, said Schembechler would file a lawsuit against Monaghan on Monday. (AP)


ITALY FINDS BREAK IN MAFIA'S ARMOR
Locked in their long-running war with the Sicilian Mafia, Italian investigators basked joyously this week in the light of a large international police roundup portrayed as a major victory in the war on drugs.
But beyond the drama of the operation with the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, the far less glittery arrest of a minor hoodlum in Sicily this week pointed to the grayer regions of the conflict: the shield of silence protecting the Mafia and the murky tangle of relationships and small-time gangsters that stand between investigators and the bosses running organized crime.


The 'Bizartful' Miss Miles
"THESE are not tchotchkes," Sylvia Miles said the other afternoon, her outstretched arms taking in the theatrical posters, autographs, photographs, paintings and assorted what-nots that blanket the walls and fill the shelves of her home.
"They are a mosaic of my life." The posters are of her theater and film appearances.
Most of the photos are of the actress with a curious cross-section of celebrities -- Tennessee Williams, Bob Dylan, Dick Cavett, Larry Rivers, Cyndi Lauper, Andy Warhol, Shelley Winters ("She's the fat one," Miss Miles said with a smile).
In the kitchen of the one-bedroom apartment in the Central Park South building that has been her home for 16 years, every nook is filled with miniature toys, Coney Island-type souvenirs, Campbell's soup drinking glasses, props from plays in which she has appeared, mementos of places she has been.
She has been to many.


3 Baltic Nations Ask U.N. to Help Get Troops Out
The newly independent Baltic states of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania have asked this year's General Assembly to help persuade Russia to remove the troops that remain in the tiny former Soviet states.
Saying their negotiations with Russia have so far failed to resolve the issue, diplomats from the three nations have proposed a draft resolution that calls for a swift removal of all Russian soldiers, relics of the Soviet empire that collapsed last year.
The resolution is scheduled to come before the General Assembly in the coming weeks unless a sudden breakthrough is achieved.


Lisa E. Kirmse, John C. Cullen
Lisa Edmondson Kirmse, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Kirmse of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married yesterday to John Connell Cullen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Cullen Jr. of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Linden J. De Bie, a Dutch Reformed minister, performed the ceremony at the Old Paramus Reformed Church in Ridgewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Cullen, 24 years old, graduated from Denison University.
She was until recently a sales assistant in the New York office of the Cambridge Dry Goods Company, a women's sportswear maker based in Newton, Mass.
Her father is a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Barbara D. Kirmse, is a sales representative for Marron &amp; Gildea Realtors in Ho-Ho-Kus.


Margaret L. Sand, J. L. Kronstadt
Margaret Louise Sand, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Leonard B. Sand of New York, was married yesterday evening to Jonathan Lee Kronstadt, the son of Harold Kronstadt of Golden Beach, Fla., and Lillian Kronstadt of Washington.
Rabbi Amy Schwartzman officiated at the Marie Trainier Gallery in Washington.
Ms.
Sand, who is 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a planner of affordable housing at the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, a private nonprofit regional planning organization.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in urban and regional planning from George Washington University.


Making a Difference; Amid Los Angeles's Ruins, An Opportunity
As Cathy A. Rodgers, an I.B.M. executive, was being driven last month around sections of Los Angeles burned out by rioting, she became irritated because she was sure she was not being shown the most devastated areas.
"I have a background in disaster preparedness, so I've seen the extremes of natural disasters," she said.
"But I need to know the spectrum and size of the problem."


Mutual Funds; Financial-Services Funds Rebound
The stock market continued its indecisive course in the third quarter of 1992, as the average equity mutual fund rose 1.4 percent.
For the year as a whole, stock funds have been almost motionless, dropping five-tenths of 1 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
While the average has been steady, the losers have outnumbered the gainers 14 to 9.
The worst performers include funds that invest in Japanese equities (down 18.5 percent), health and biotechnology funds (down 17.5 percent) and environmental funds (down 14.5 percent).


Jane E. Hewett, John Cooney Jr.
Jane Elizabeth Hewett, an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, was married in Rye, N.Y., yesterday to John Patrick Cooney Jr., a partner in the firm.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Cooney graduated from Cambridge University, from which she also received her law degree.
She is the daughter of Peter and Valerie Hewett of Westport, Conn.
Her father is the chairman and president of MB America, a packaging and financial-printing company in Westport.


POSTINGS: Renaissance Revival on West 79th; School Buildings for Sale
For nearly a century, the 1895 Renaissance Revival buildings at 168-170 West 79th Street in Manhattan filled roles that emphasized the teaching of religion and languages, first as the Notre Dame School, then as the Fleming School.
The final lessons, however, have been in economics.
The Fleming School, which for two decades had been at 10 and 35 East 62d Street, bought the buildings from the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York for $5.8 million in 1989 at the beginning of the real estate recession and then spent more than $4 million on renovations and construction of a new gymnasium linking the buildings.
Last November, though, the school filed for bankruptcy.


Additional Surgery for Flyers Goalie
TOMMY SODERSTON, the Philadelphia Flyer goaltender, underwent a second operation on Friday to correct an overly fast heartbeat discovered in a routine physical examination.


Free Speech, but They'd Prefer the 2 Cents
The one-legged man stood at the Seventh Avenue entrance of Pennsylvania Station.
Identifying himself only as Michael, he proffered an empty coffee cup and recalled the days when the change that passers-by tossed his way allowed him to live by himself in a hotel room.
Now he must share a room on 23d Street with a friend.


A la Carte; Helping to Put Indian Restaurants on the Map
INDIAN restaurants have not proliferated on Long Island.
Although Chinese, Japanese and, more recently, Thai eating places have grown increasingly popular, just five Indian outposts are in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
Their day has yet to come, but Sewa Arora, who was born in India, remains a believer.
Mr.
Arora, who owns Jhoola Cuisine of India at 9 East Main Street in Smithtown, the only Indian restaurant between Route 110 in Huntington and Montauk Point, has opened another.
Jhoola, at 36 Girard Street in Huntington (385-7956), is a takeout place that is scheduled to become a 50-seat restaurant.


In Diversity, Synchronicity
YOU are one of three teen-age female national Junior Olympic synchronized swimmers from Tonawanda, N.Y., who have been flown in by Vogue and Calvin Klein to perform at a pool party at the top of some fancy building by the East River on a Wednesday night.
You have just finished spinning and curling and extending your legs in the pool, which is surrounded by windows overlooking the city.
The guests who talked throughout your performance are smoking cigarettes, sipping cocktails and walking to the other room where the crowd is.
"Very nice," they say to you, without stopping.


For 'Cinderella' First Lady of Brazil, Midnight's Toll Is Scandal and Wrath
When a helicopter lifted off from the lawn of the Palace of High Plains on Friday, Brazilians waved goodbye to more than a discredited President.
They bid farewell to a First Lady who had also earned the people's wrath.
When Rosane Malta Collor first entered the presidential palace here alongside her husband on March 15, 1990, Brazil's press idolized her as the "Cinderella of Canapi." Born in a dirt-poor town of Brazil's rural Northeast, the 25-year-old bride of Fernando Collor de Mello was destined to frequent salons of the White House and of European palaces.


Q and A
Alaska on a Wheelchair
Q.
I am interested in a trip to Alaska by land and cruise ship.
I am wheelchair bound and interested in finding a travel agent that could direct me to arrangements that could accommodate me. -- Evelyn Pollack, Cranbury, N.J.


Amy B. Herer, Miles S. M. Morris
Amy Beth Herer, a daughter of Harvey L. Herer of Jupiter, Fla., and Marcia S. Fox of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Miles Stephen Martin Morris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Morris of Higher Ashton, Devon, England.
Rabbi Martin L. Goldberg officiated at the Westwood Country Club in Williamsville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Beryl Choi, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Morris, 28 years old, graduated from Simmons College.
Until recently, she was a head clerk in the bids department of Christie's East in New York.
She is a stepdaughter of Carolyn Herer and Richard A. Fox.


Cambridge Journal; M.I.T. Student's Killing Divides City Campuses
They were neighbors being introduced at the most somber of occasions, the 18 students from Cambridge Rindge and Latin High School and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who sat at microphones in City Hall chambers this week.
Mayor Kenneth Reeves brought the students together to talk about a killing: three students from the city's only public high school stand accused of stabbing a student at the prestigious university on Sept. 18.
Although the Mayor pressed them to come up with ways of preventing violence, their answers revealed a bitter rift.


The Truth About the Deficit
In 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson's Commission on Budget Concepts issued a report on how the budget deficit should be defined and presented.
At that time, the Government faced an $8 billion -- or $13 billion -- deficit, depending on how the budget was defined.
Today, when the deficit may exceed $400 billion, when Ross Perot argues that it is the country's most pressing problem and George Bush and Bill Clinton express concern, not one person in 10,000 -- including most members of Congress and professors of economics -- has the foggiest idea how the deficit is, or should be, defined.


The 2-Tiered Skirt
"EVERYONE wants long and I like short, so I put them together," Atil Kutoglu said, as if this was the most reasonable thing in the world.
There is a mixture of the exotic and the practical in the work of this 26-year-old designer who grew up in Istanbul and works in Vienna.
Many of his skirts are long in front and short in back.
Or the reverse.
He prefers the long-front styles.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Autumn in Sarajevo; For the Besieged, A Humanitarian Flight
For the 400,000 people trapped in Sarajevo, the United States military aircraft that landed here yesterday was, in a sense, a harbinger of winter.
The flight marked the resumption of a United Nations-sponsored airlift that was suspended Sept. 3 after an Italian military plane was shot down near Sarajevo with a ground-to-air missile.
But what got the American and western European air forces flying again was not the calculation that the forces who downed the Italian plane will henceforth hold their fire.
The spur came from the realization that not flying, a month before the snows begin to settle on the hillsides of Sarajevo, might be contributing to a disaster in the making.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Amityville 240,000
27 Meadow Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car attached garage, 100-by-125-foot waterfront property; taxes $6,900.
Bohemia 145,000
38 Nathan Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, basement, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,000.
Copiague 126,500
59 32d Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $2,500.
Lindenhurst 283,000
37 East Beach Promenade  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; fireplace, 1-car garage, 60-by-100-foot waterfront lot; taxes $5,500.
Massapequa 190,000
9 Linden Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, den, new kitchen, deck; taxes $4,200.
Sayville 200,000
10 Languth Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, basement, in-ground pool; taxes $5,700.
OTHER AREAS New Canaan, Conn. 1.4 Million
545 West Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 210-year-old historic colonial; swimming pool, barn, stable, 3.6 acres; taxes $8,132.
Bronxville, N.Y. 585,000
15 Sussex Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 61-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, sun room, formal dining room, 2 porches, playroom, wet bar; taxes $10,706.
Aberdeen, N.J. 164,000
28 Warren Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; h/w floors, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,092.


Marlene Carujo, Matthew Bigham
Dr.
Marlene Corujo, the daughter of Norma Corujo of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Matthew Hitchcock Bigham, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Darrel Bigham of Evansville, Ind.
The Rev.
Jordan McConway officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in New Haven.


Getaway Glamour
JUST AS AUTUMN IS SETTLING IN, American designers are getting ready to ship out clothes they envision as right for a tropical vacation.
Slim or full skirts both work; hemlines are a moot point.
Pants are essential, especially bell-bottoms or those cropped anywhere above the ankle.
Leather is now a year-round material, and leather-like stretchy fabrics, particularly in gold, are a way to dazzle, day or night.
And ultrafeminine clothes that look as if they were meant for the boudoir are now right for the street.


The 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton to Announce His Support of Free Trade Agreement


Sports of The Times; Jackson Deal Could Be a New Curse
SOMETHING is happening in New York that I have never seen in all my born days.
It is early October, very early October, and people are looking forward to the basketball season.
Frantic escapism is loose in New York.
People want to fast-forward themselves straight from the brutal wrecks of the Mets and Yankees, past the ominous beginnings of the Giants and Jets -- closing their eyes and holding their noses while they vote -- and hurtle themselves directly to the Knicks and the Nets, who commence in another month.


Candlestick The Culprit
To the Sports Editor:
In "Giants Were a Pawn in Games by Owners" (The Times, Sept. 13), Murray Chass writes that Bob Lurie, owner of the San Francisco Giants, wants to move the team to Tampa just for the financial benefits.
But I have the feeling that Lurie has based his decision on other factors.


Athleticism In a Passionflower
IT is not the vibrant colors that I miss most when summer passes.
It is the groping, encroaching ambition of the fast-growing season that I find so difficult to leave behind.
As a souvenir of summer's sheer energy, there is a passionflower twining athletically around our parlor window frame.
If the curtain rod is engulfed by tendrils, if the entire parlor will soon be lost to meandering greenery, then the passionflower is performing as planned.
It does a superb job of preoccupying a house-bound gardener; guiding new shoots and unwinding wayward tendrils scarcely leave a moment to mourn the season past.


Using Fresh Broccoli to Good Advantage
BROCCOLI is available all year round, yet there is a season for this most versatile vegetable.
Early fall is when the crop is harvested on farms in this region.
Farm stands and farmers' markets are brimming with fresh-picked broccoli now.
Look for bunches that have tight, gray-green flowerets and no signs of yellowing.
For a change of pace, try the purple broccoli that some farmers are growing.
When cooked, it loses its purple but stays a darker, almost bluish green.
Both the stems and the flowerets of broccoli can be used in many recipes.
If only the flowerets are needed for a particular dish, reserve the stems for another purpose.


Once More, a Grand Debut
Not just any benefit: opening night no. 102, Carnegie Hall, Sept. 30


Jean R. Baity, David W. Plant
Jean Robinson Baity, the director of special events at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, was married yesterday to David William Plant, a senior partner at the New York law firm of Fish &amp; Neave.
The Rev.
Dr.
David L. Uhl performed the ceremony at The Presbyterian Church in Rye, N.Y.


Lions Win With a Big 3d Quarter
It was close for a half, but Penn State scored 17 points in the third period tonight to pull away from Rutgers by 38-24, improve its record to 5-0 and set up a showdown next week with another unbeaten team, Miami.
Penn State cracked the Scarlet Knights' defense with quarterback John Sacca directing the attack before a crowd of 61,526 at Giants Stadium.
Rutgers fell to 3-2 on the season.


Tech Notes; The Ultimate in Tiny Cameras
As remotely monitored electronic security systems have proliferated, so have false alarms, which waste police officers' time and erode confidence in the systems.
Now a British company has developed a digital "camera on a chip" that can be integrated into these systems to provide an instant visual verification when an alarm is sounded.
The system, called TVX, was developed by Edinburgh University and is produced by Automated Security Holdings P.L.C.
It combines a camera and lens on one chip the size of a postage stamp.
As many as 24 chips can be retrofitted onto an existing alarm system, providing coverage of a broad area.
An infrared strobe light allows the cameras to function in darkness without alerting intruders.


Staying Safe On the Road
ON Sept. 8 a car theft in a Washington suburb resulted in the death of the driver, a mother taking her child in a BMW to preschool.
As two men comandeered the woman's auto at an intersection, they shoved her out, but one of her arms became entangled in the seat belt.
She was dragged a mile and a half, and died.
The child was found unharmed alongside the road in her safety seat.
The grisly crime focused headlines on carjacking, the theft of a car from a driver, often at gunpoint or knife point.
Auto safety experts cite various causes for what appears to be an upsurge in this crime, including the copycat effect, but they point mainly to the increasing sophistication of antitheft devices and alarms, which make it easier to seize a car from a driver than cross wires to start an empty vehicle in a parking lot.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
GAY CENTER BENEFIT
Ron Romanovsky and Paul Phillips, a gay singing-comedy duo who accompany themselves on acoustic guitar and piano, will be the principal performers in a benefit for the Westchester County Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, otherwise known as the Loft.
Leah Zicari, a folk singer and comedienne will open the show.


Results plus
RUNNING Conquering the Corporate Challenge
Mike Quinn of London won the Corporate Challenge five-kilometer run down Park Avenue yesterday in a time of 16 minutes 15 seconds.
Mike Connor of Chicago was second in 16:31, followed by Peter Tootel of England in 16:37.
In the women's division, Kim Kauls of Charlotte, N.C., was the winner in 20:06.
Allison Fletcher of London was next in 20:08, and Nicolle Mounty of London was third in 20:31.
A field of 1,354 runners from 15 American cities and London competed. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Record Is Set in 30-Kilometer Walk
Maurizio Damilano set a world record of 2 hours 1:44 minutes in the 30-kilometer walk yesterday at Cuneo, Italy, in what he said was his farewell to competition.
Damilano, who announced his retirement before the record attempt, cut 2:12 minutes off the mark set by Thierry Toutain of France in March 1991.
The 35-year-old Italian was fourth in the Barcelona Olympics. (AP) AUTO RACING  Fittipaldi Gets a Little Help
Two disputed calls by Indy-car officials helped Emerson Fittipaldi run away with the Marlboro Challenge all-star race yesterday at Pennsylvania International Speedway in Nazareth, Pa.
Both Bobby Rahal and Michael Andretti were assessed critical stop-and-go penalties for passing the pace car during the only caution period of the 100-lap event.
Neither agreed with the call.
Fittipaldi's Penske-Chevrolet drove off to leads of up to 19.26-seconds over Andretti before he eased up and won by a comfortable 10.59 seconds at an average speed of 156.127 miles an hour.
Andetti finished second.
Rahal was sixth. (AP) GOLF Hallberg Soaks Up a 1-Stroke Lead
Gary Hallberg sloshed his way to his second straight 69 yesterday and a one-stroke lead over Jim Gallagher after three rounds of the $700,000 Southern Open in Pine Mountain, Ga.
A steady rain pelted the Mountain View Golf Course at Callaway Gardens through the day, but it did not prevent Hallberg and 27 other golfers from shooting under-par rounds.
Gallagher shot a 70. (AP) Just Another 'Sunday' Outing: Sunday came a day early in the Vantage Championship in Clemmons, N.C., the richest event on the Senior PGA Tour.
"With last week so fresh in their minds and with the forecast, everybody played like it was Sunday," Jim Colbert said yesterday.
"Everybody came out smoking."
Colbert shot a five-under-par 67 that left him with a two-shot lead after 36 holes of the $1.35 million event.
The final round is scheduled for today, but whether it will be played is very much in doubt.
The weather forecast called for heavy overnight rains and a 70-percent chance of more rain today.
In the event the weather becomes too severe, or the course becomes unplayable, the tournament will be reduced to 36 holes -- just as it was last week in Atlanta -- and Colbert will be the winner for the second consecutive year. (AP) HARNESS RACING Easter Sun Hanna Ties World Mark
Easter Sun Hanna equaled the world record for 2-year-old pacing colts on a half-mile track, clocking 1:541/5 at Freehold Raceway yesterday in the $15,000 first division of the Lou Babic Memorial Pace.
The world record is now held by Easter Sun Hanna, Tooter Scooter and WRH. (AP)


Russians Get a Stake in an Uncertain Future


Navy to Deactivate All Sea Sparrow Missiles
The Navy today restricted use of the Sea Sparrow air-defense missiles throughout the fleet pending an investigation into the accidental attack on a Turkish warship on Friday.
Admiral Frank B. Kelso 2d, the chief of naval operations, today ordered the Naval Sea Systems Command to conduct a full review of the missile system, its maintenance and operating procedures and operator training.


Doors Open Wider as Buddhist Center Grows
THE state's only Buddhist center is inside a 19th-century farmhouse that rests on a grassy knoll in Bloomfield.
On a quiet Sunday morning the hydrangeas near the back foyer were in bloom and children played near a picnic table under an oak tree.
Several pairs of shoes bordered the back-porch doorway leading to the kitchen.


Smoothing the Way For Storm Windows
ALUMINUM-FRAME storm windows are standard features on many houses.
Because they require little upkeep, most owners pay slight attention to them.
But some maintenance is advisable, and minor repairs can often avert major annoyances.
To rid aluminum window frames and sashes of corrosion, which roughens their surfaces, rub them with fine steel wool.
Afterward, to forestall new corrosion, wipe the metal with a cloth dipped in paste wax.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ANTIQUITY STREET By Sonia Rami. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.


Neiman Marcus Joins Cancer-Detection Cause
THE dress collections at Neiman Marcus may be out of reach for many women, but the elegant department store itself is reaching out to all women to help prevent breast cancer.
This month, which is National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, the store's branch here will co-sponsor a series of programs aimed at early detection of the disease.
In cooperation with the Westchester division of the American Cancer Society, Neiman Marcus will hold free seminars in breast self-examination on Oct. 8 at 1:30 and 6:30 P.M., Oct. 9 at 9:30 A.M. and 2 P.M., and Oct. 10 at 11:30 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
The seminars are limited to 25 people each and will be held in the training room at Neiman Marcus.
Reservations are recommended and can be made by calling the store at 428-2000.


In the Footsteps of The Dodo
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE
By Edward O. Wilson.
Illustrated. 424 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press/ Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Kathleen Healy, Woodson Merrell
Kathleen Patricia Healy, a senior writer for Allure magazine, and Dr.
Woodson Charles Merrell, an internist, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Merrell graduated from Colgate University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Healy of Houston, where her father is the national marketing manager for Shell Oil.


Mary Mahoney, Richard Shipman
Mary Louisa Mahoney, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
J.
Daniel Mahoney of Milford, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard Glen Shipman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Shipman of Richardson, Tex.
The Rev.
Francis A. Laushway performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in New Haven.
Mrs.
Shipman, 27 years old, is a bartender at Pizzeria Uno in Forest Hills, Queens.
She graduated from Queens College.
Her father is a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Milford.


In Mamet's World, You Are How You Speak
Words, words, words.
In life they are the weapons of poets and con artists; in the plays and movies of David Mamet, they are measures of character too, replacing the high-mindedness and moral fiber by which heroes of fiction are customarily measured.
Heroic actions do not abound in the Mametian world, populated by hustlers trying to make a buck by their wits, where love-thy-neighbor is not high on anybody's agenda.
Here a man is judged by his spiel, and in none of Mr.
Mamet's works does language figure more resoundingly than in "Glengarry Glen Ross," the 1984 Pulitzer Prize-winning play that has now been turned into a movie, slyly subtitled "A Story for Everyone Who Works for a Living," with a screenplay by Mr.
Mamet.
The plot is skeletal: four peddlers of dubious properties in Florida and Arizona, under pressure from the unseen boss known collectively as Mitch and Murray, are scrambling for suckers.
None of these hustlers -- Ricky Roma, the star salesman (played by Al Pacino); Shelley Levene, a sometime star who has fallen on hard times (Jack Lemmon); the scheming Dave Moss (Ed Harris), or the dullish George Aaronow (Alan Arkin) -- are role models for the young.


Who Trusts Whom?
WHO DO YOU trust?" George Bush asks, changing the subject from the Democrats' "change." This is a slogan that reverberates in the souls of the slickness-averse, but it drags a piece of chalk along the blackboard with a loud squeak in the English classrooms of America.
"I don't trust any educated person who deliberately breaks the rule on pronoun case," writes Florence Withheld of Tallahassee, Fla. (a schoolteacher who has asked that her name be withheld).
"
Who
is a subject pronoun, but the subject in President Bush's question is not
who
but
you
."


CLINTON COUNTRY
Arkansas is a quirky state, and it seems to me that capsulizing its political tradition as "progressive" is pushing too hard.
Senator J. W. Fulbright was an inspiration for a state chronically low in self-esteem and he surely attracted a generation of idealistic young Arkansans to political life.
But describing Orval Faubus as a progressive is a howler.


Voters See What's Behind 'Family Values'; Not Cute or Trendy
To the Editor:
The thing that hit home most to me about Maggie Gallagher's powerful article was the sentence, "It is an even worse bargain for the children" ("An Unwed Mother for Quayle," Op-Ed, Sept. 24).


The 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Issues: Foreign Policy - Looking Abroad: Clinton  and Foreign Policy/A special report.; Clinton's Foreign-Policy Agenda Reaches Across Broad Spectrum
Under the pressure of a Presidential campaign, Gov.
Bill Clinton has been trying to outline his own unique foreign policy, while at the same time fending off criticism from the Bush White House that he is a closet dove masquerading as a hawk and that his experience in world affairs is limited to breakfast at the International House of Pancakes.
Although foreign policy has not been a big issue in this first campaign after the cold war, Mr.
Clinton has laid out his internationalist vision in four speeches over the last year, knowing that he cannot pass the Commander in Chief test without appearing credible in this area.


At Work; Celebrating Success by Giving
When Lynn Bignell and Janet Tweed, co-principals of an executive search firm, decided they wanted to celebrate their 20th anniversary in business by making a contribution to society, they did not reach for a batch of Rainforest Crunch.
Instead, they gathered several of the people who work for them at GilbertTweed Associates in Manhattan and started brainstorming.
How could the firm best use its resources to give something back to the people and organizations that helped it grow?
What Gilbert Tweed decided to do -- in late October or early November it will hold a lottery to give away more than $100,000 worth of search, consulting and training services to 20 nonprofit organizations -- represents what one expert has dubbed "philanthropic economics."


Yes, Abstinence. Yes, Condoms.
A fierce but foolish battle rages in New York City and other school districts between those who want to stress abstinence as the best way to avoid AIDS and those who emphasize condoms.
The truth is each method can contribute in a small way to preventing the spread of the virus.
The energies spent in bitter quarrel would be far better devoted to battling the epidemic, in every way.
The need for prevention programs is desperately clear.
AIDS cases among teen-agers and young adults (ages 13 through 24) reached almost 9,800 nationwide as of June 30.
And many times more are presumed infected but not yet sick.


Arms Makers' Latest Tune: 'Over There, Over There'
Hurt by dwindling Pentagon orders, United States military contractors are relying more heavily than ever on foreign sales.
The value of agreements to sell arms to foreign countries has nearly quadrupled in five years to $24.1 billion already this year, from $6.5 billion in all of 1987, according to the Pentagon.
Foreign orders should account for at least 25 percent of American arms production in the next few years, up from about 15 percent now, industry officials say.


Using Fresh Broccoli to Good Advantage
BROCCOLI is available all year round, yet there is a season for this most versatile vegetable.
Early fall is when the crop is harvested on farms in this region.
Farm stands and farmers' markets are brimming with fresh-picked broccoli now.
Look for bunches that have tight, gray-green flowerets and no signs of yellowing.
For a change of pace, try the purple broccoli that some farmers are growing.
When cooked, it loses its purple but stays a darker, almost bluish green.
Both the stems and the flowerets of broccoli can be used in many recipes.
If only the flowerets are needed for a particular dish, reserve the stems for another purpose.


Perspectives: Illegal Occupancy; Lessons From a Campaign for 'Possession'
OVER 10 years the issues have changed, says Arthur Zabarkes, full-time pursuer of illegal occupants in the Manhattan apartments of Peter Sharp &amp; Company.
In the 80's it was nonprimary occupancy.
People tried to cling to their occupancy rights to a regulated apartment, often in hope of cash from a co-op conversion sponsor eager to sell it vacant.
Now the main question is succession, or who has the right to inherit lease renewal rights when the tenant named on the lease moves out or dies.


Robin Detweiler, David W. Allen Jr.
Louise Roberts Detweiler, a daughter of Louise R. Johnston of Philadelphia and the late Lynn L. Detweiler Jr., was married Friday to David Wilford Allen Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen of Valley Forge, Pa.
The Rev.
Scott T. O'Brien performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields in Philadelphia.
The bride, who is 29 years old and is known as Robin, is studying interior design at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was an associate at the Philadelphia law firm of Ballard, Spahr, Andrews &amp; Ingersoll.
Her mother is a real-estate broker for the Emlen Wheeler Company, a Philadelphia realtor.
The bride's stepfather, Hugh McB.
Johnston 3d, is a vice president at the Provident National Bank in Philadelphia.


Sears and Less Company
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company conceded the bankruptcy of one of the grandest marketing visions of the 1980's last week, announcing that it would sell 20 percent of its Allstate Insurance Group to the public and shed most of its other financial service businesses entirely.


Russia Is Now Selling Spy Photos From Space
Russia, which has recently peddled submarines, fighter jets and nuclear bomb fuel around the world, is now offering what had once been ultrasecret: photographs from powerful space cameras meant for spying on earth.
Espionage photos of Washington show features like the Capitol, the White House and the Pentagon, presumably on a weekend.
A nearby parking lot has fewer cars than on a weekday.


Spring Bulbs
Now is the time to plant spring-flowering bulbs like crocuses, chiondoxas, scillas, fritillarias, hyacinths, lilies and narcissuses.
Hold off on tulips until November.
Plant bulbs for forcing indoors. Store potted bulbs in a basement for eight weeks.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton to Endorse Free Trade Accord
Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has been walking a tightrope on the issue of free trade for weeks, hopes to lay the issue to rest this weekend with the help of his supporters in the organized labor movement and Congress.
He will announce his support for the North American Free Trade Agreement, campaign officials said, but will also try to mollify opponents of the measure by pushing for legislative guarantees that call for worker training and environmental protections.


Page L. Lichtenfeld, Paul A. Bondor
Mr. and Mrs.
Merrill S. Lichtenfeld of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Page Leigh Lichtenfeld to Paul Arthur Bondor, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Bondor of Houston and Voorschoten, the Netherlands.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Lichtenfeld, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
She is a law student at Harvard University.
Her father is a managing director and an investment banker in New York for Montgomery Securities, a securities brokerage.


In the Eye of the Wearer
In Russian fashion, there's a whole new glorious scene out there.
It can seem just a touch vulgar to Western eyes, but it's a lot more compelling than socialist drab.
A freer market and an influx of dollars have brought a color-starved population a riot of choices, not all of them wise.
But after all the good, gray years of Soviet conformity, when if you saw one pair of cute white leather boots you suddenly noticed hundreds of them, Russians now have the possibility to dress almost as well, or as badly, as they like.


Tempers Grow Short As Congress Lurches To End of Its Session
The 102d Congress lurched toward adjournment tonight, arguing over taxes and energy policy in private and debating abortion, fetal-tissue research and patriotism in public, often in rancorous tones.
After a long day of closed-door talks, Senate negotiators announced in late evening that they had tentatively agreed with their House counterparts on a tax bill that would establish enterprise zones for depressed neighborhoods.
House negotiators continued to meet on the proposal after the Senate had quit for the night.


Rebecca Ann Bol And Jakob Dupont
Mrs.
C.
Hugh P. Silk of Washington, Conn., and Dr.
Morris Bol of Norwich, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rebecca Ann Bol to Jakob Dupont, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bo Dupont of Harrison, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Bol, 25 years old, and her fiance, 27, are first-year medical students, she at Cornell University Medical College and he at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Mr.
Dupont graduated from Vassar College and has a master's degree in philosophy from New York University.


111 Killed When Police Storm Brazilian Prison During Inmate Riot
In the worst prison violence in Brazil's history, military police repression of a Sao Paulo jail riot left 111 prisoners dead, security officials said today, but no police officers were killed.
The violence Friday, at Sao Paulo's House of Detention, Latin America's largest jail, left 22 police officers and 35 inmates wounded, the officials said.


Celebrating a Gulf Coast Artist
EAST out of Gulfport, Miss., the coastal road skirts the Gulf of Mexico and hits open water just beyond Biloxi.
There it takes a soaring leap across Biloxi Bay before heading on to Pascagoula.
Ocean Springs is the town you miss if you blink, the turnoff on the other side of the bridge where most people do not bother to turn off.
Ocean Springs is a quiet town of 18,000 overlooking the Mississippi Sound, a stretch of water set off from the Gulf of Mexico by skinny barrier islands that form part of the Gulf Island National Seashore.
The main street is lined with petite shops and mighty oaks.
The quaintish houses, most of them small to begin with, look tiny against the hulking trees on their lawns.
One writer described it as a town "so sleepy even an insomniac could not stay awake in it."


No Headline
I think, Is this right?
Should I try to not be a working mother, even though my image is of an independent mother? -- KRIS NORTHROP, who has a 4-month old daughter and has just returned to her work.  [ 32:2. ]


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Land Owners' Risk: Waste Cleanup Costs
CONNECTICUT harbors 1,200 to 1,300 hazardous-waste sites and an additional 300 to 400 potential sites, according to the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, and owners of the properties who may not have caused the pollution are nonetheless responsible for it in the eyes of the department.
The damage may have occurred decades ago, but the residual effects continue to pollute ground water and bedrock and, consequently, many residential wells.
The polluting industries have long since gone, and some properties have been sold or bequeathed to family members who are unaware of the contamination.
The environmental department must use every means to recover costs from the original offender; failing that, it goes after the current owner.


Talking: Lead Paint; Taking Precautions For Health
THE health hazards of lead-based paints are still identified in most people's minds with toddlers in inner-city apartments.
But health officials are discovering that toxic levels are also widespread in the average suburban home and that adults may be affected too.
Indeed, most one-family houses built before 1978 have some lead paint covering walls, floors, doors or windows, according to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.
"And we're only just beginning to gear up to all that needs to be done," said Bernard Edelman, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Health.


Thelonious Monk, Master Of the Deceptively Simple
There's a moment in "Thelonious," a composition from Thelonious Monk's first recording, in which just about everything shifts in jazz, and consequently in a good part of American music.
It's 1947, and Monk, 30 years old, is improvising.
What he's doing makes no sense within the context of what's come before him.
Though there's an obvious stride section in his solo and hints of Earl Hines and boogie pianists, there's a strange feeling of stasis, as if in the middle of a river, a patch of water refuses to move.
Lines crisscross, and abrupt left-hand explosions come from nowhere.
Instead of jazz's linear movement, Monk stops time, offering a new logic.
Forty-five years later, the music's newness still startles.
Coming across Monk is like discovering a new continent, populated with new species and ideas, shaped by a new geology.
The radical nature of the pianist's inventions aren't questioned anymore, but for a long time they were.
Monk, who would be celebrating his 75th birthday this Saturday, was called a fraud, and his personal eccentricities, along with his name -- Thelonious Sphere Monk -- were enough to suggest a lack of seriousness in an era when vanguard jazz was turning its back on entertainment and taking a public position of seriousness.
He would dance at the piano, wear beautifully odd hats, and when he spoke to people he didn't much like, he tended to be evasive, or short, if he answered at all.
None of this helped at first, and Monk spent the years 1947 through 1955 under a virtual blackout, rarely performing and recording, known unto only a few of New York's hardcore be-boppers.


The Wooly Bugger
WHAT: The Lure of the Moment for trout, an artificial wet fly made from marabou (the same stuff used in feather boas) tied with chenille thread to a steel shank.
Hook sizes range from the No. 12's, aimed at tiny wild trout, to the No. 1's, the 16-pound lunkers late-season anglers love.
Colors range from natural to Day-Glo disco eye-poppers shot through with gold lame.
WHY: Frankly, because under water the Wooly Bugger looks just like the Disgusting Live Insect of the Moment -- the leech, this month's blue-plate special in the trout world.
Marabou, the soft undertail coverts of the stork, isn't static.
It tends to pulse when wet, giving it a leggy, buglike look.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Berkeley Halts Quotas; Under Federal Investigation, Law School Changes Policy
The latest attempt by the Department of Education to rid American colleges of even the semblance of racial quotas, while playing to conservative fears about them, has educators wondering whether they will be able to give minority students any special consideration.
After two years of investigation, the department's Office of Civil Rights announced last week that the law school at the University of California at Berkeley has agreed to stop isolating minority applicants from the general pool.
Under the old system, Hispanic-Americans competed for a fixed number of openings, Asian-Americans for theirs and so on.
Berkeley officials disputed the department's contention that such practices violated Federal anti-discrimination laws.


It's a Jungle Out There
For some adventurous women, the modern style of dress is not a matter of hemlines but of the unbroken line of the one-piece cat suit, sleek and smooth, from its high neck to the foot.
It can be worn unadorned or as a foil for a creative belt, platform shoes, ballet flats or Chanel laced boots.
The second-skin fit of cat suits calls for aerobicized bodies.
One wearer confided: "It's great for shopping. You don't have to undress."


Air Tickets
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column on Sept. 6, "Making Changes on Air Tickets," came at a time I was arguing with Delta Air Lines on the subject.
On June 9 I made a reservation with Delta for a flight leaving Nov. 18 for Florida and returning Dec. 8.
The round-trip fare was $312.
A few weeks later the fare was reduced to $272.
Delta said I was entitled to the refund but would be charged a $25 fee.
I explained that there was no change in travel, only a change in fare.
Delta said the ticket had to be rewritten. (Your article did not state if there was a charge for change in fare.)


Celebrating 20 Years Of Elitism
Politicians who issue ominous warnings about a "cultural elite" turn curiously coy when asked to name names, but the arts, of course, merit conspicuous attention in their pantheon of villains.
And so does public television with its persistent habit of providing a showcase for the best and, on occasion, the most provocative of the arts, at home and abroad.
Wearing its "cultural elite" badge proudly though hardly defiantly, one public-television institution, the "Great Performances" series, is this Friday, at 9 P.M. on Channel 13/ WNET, throwing a 20th birthday party for itself, pointedly subtitled "Celebrating Creativity, American Style."


Making a Difference; A Power Plant 'Pioneer'
Women have been gaining more power but not like Annette Hope, who just took over 1,260 megawatts of it.
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company named Mrs.
Hope, 35 years old, to manage a traditional male bastion -- a power plant.
On Thursday she took over the Contra Costa plant in Antioch, Calif., which serves a million customers in northern and central California.


Republicans Play Fast and Loose With Clinton's Fiscal Record
To the Editor:
Fred Malek proves that the Duke of Wellington was right when he said there are three kinds of prevarication: "Lies, damned lies and statistics" ("Yes, 128 Clinton Fees and Taxes. Count Them," Op-Ed, Sept. 23).
Mr.
Malek uses the last to accomplish gross distortion of Gov.
Bill Clinton's record.
This is hardly the first time Republicans have used a blizzard of figures to camouflage cynical and misleading propaganda, but rather than lending credibility to such tactics, repetition should give voters and editors pause.


Silver, Black and Purple All Over
The Los Angeles Raiders have been more like guests than plunderers in recent years.
Despite the hyperbole-filled press guide they issue each season -- the current booklet proclaims in bold type that the Raiders are "The Team of the Decades" -- the silver and black is more like "The Team Living in the Past."
To some, it seemed that past would come alive again, that Eric Dickerson would find the magic he lost in Indianapolis, just as Jim Plunkett, washed up and gun-shy at New England, became a Super Bowl-winning quarterback, or as Lyle Alzado, well traveled and controversial, found kindred spirits in black.
The Raiders had also revived the fortunes of John Matuszak, Ted Hendricks and Todd Christensen.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
HARVEST FESTIVAL
Pumpkins in a patch or being transformed by a jack-o'-lantern sculptor will be among the attractions at a harvest festival on Saturday at the Reeves-Reed Arboretum in Summit.


Seminoles Intercept and Deflect Blame
In the sweaty, grim confines of Florida State's locker room today, sophomore cornerback Clifton Abraham sat with head bowed, a distinct candidate for most distraught Seminole.
Abraham had been beaten by wide receiver Lamar Thomas for a 33-yard, fourth-quarter touchdown pass that helped vault Miami to a pulsating 19-16 victory in the Orange Bowl.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column of Styles of The Times last Sunday misidentified a guest at a dinner celebrating the dedication of a research building at Rockefeller University.
He was Donald B. Marron, not David B. Marron.


Similar Names, Different Organizations
I am writing in response to the article "Digging Into History on Vacation" (Aug. 9).
I should state at the outset that The Center for Field Research is the program-development wing of Earthwatch, the not-for-profit organization that is funding and supplying volunteer field workers for the two archeological projects in Connecticut that are mentioned in the article.
The Center for Field Research receives scientific proposals for volunteer and financial support of field-research projects, manages the independent peer review and in-house evalation of those proposals, and makes recommendations for awards to the Earthwatch Review Committee.


Rubiano and Sky Classic Win Stargazing Races
Rubiano and Sky Classic took giant strides on the road to the Breeders' Cup championships yesterday when they outran two world-class fields of thoroughbreds in two landmark races at Belmont Park.
And Sky Classic, the turf champion of Canada, even raced into the record books by running the mile and one-half on the grass two-fifths of a second faster than the great Secretariat did when he set the track record in 1973.
Rubiano gave the first virtuoso performance of the afternoon when he swept through the homestretch and won the Vosburgh against some of the strongest sprinters in the sport.
It was the eighth victory in his last nine races, and it set the stage for a dramatic encore in four weeks when he will oppose many of the same horses in the Breeders' Cup Sprint.


Obsessed


Elizabeth U. Obih, Richard B. Frank
Elizabeth Uchenna Obih, a daughter of Clara C. Obih of Lagos, Nigeria, and the late Chief Collins K. N. Obih, was married yesterday to Richard Becker Frank, the son of Seymour and Gloria Frank of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
The Rev.
Samuel Morgenstern, a Universal Harmony Foundation minister, performed the ceremony at the Montauk Club in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Obih-Frank is an adjunct professor of writing at Manhattan Community College and a doctoral candidate in politics and international education at Columbia University, from which she received master's degrees in education and in political science.
Her father was the chairman of the Kema Group in Lagos, an investment firm where the bride's stepmother, Chief Mabel C. Obih, is the president.
The bride's mother, now retired, was a senior catering officer in Lagos for Nigerian Railways.


Crucial Round on the Nazareth Oval
Although one race will remain on the 1992 Indy-car schedule, today's 200-mile event in Nazareth, Pa., will go a long way toward determining which of the four remaining contenders will be the champion.
With a maximum of 22 points available to any driver in one race, the championship -- and the $1 million bonus that goes with it -- can still be won by Al Unser Jr., who currently leads with 163 points; Bobby Rahal, with 162; Michael Andretti, 152, and Emerson Fittipaldi, 145.


JoAnn Hanson, Allen Barnett
JoAnn Hanson, the president and owner of Avanti Real Estate Advisors Inc., a real-estate investment company in New York, was married yesterday to William Allen Barnett, the chief financial officer of the Navigators Group, a marine and aviation insurance company in New York.
The Rev.
Howard T. W. Stowe performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Hanson, who is 40 years old and is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Hanson.


Update; Woman Pleads Guilty In U.N. Standoff Case
A woman who threatened to firebomb herself and her van during a daylong standoff at the United Nations in April has pleaded guilty to attempted coercion.
The woman, Lynne Guenther, 41 years old, of Berkeley, Calif., said her protest on April 11 was an attempt to get the United Nations to establish a sanctuary for people who did not want their taxes used for military purposes.


Study Planned Of Ecotourism
The Ecotourism Society, a consortium of conservation and travel professionals, is developing a program to evaluate the conservation practices of tour companies operating in fragile natural areas.
The society is surveying consumers and tour operators to help prepare the final questionnaire it will send to organizers of tours.
Questions will touch on an operator's recycling efforts, predeparture procedures, policies on energy consumption, a trip's impact on the local environment and economic practices in the communities visited.
Questionnaires will be sent out next fall; first results are expected in the fall of 1994.
The two-year-old Ecotourism Society's membership includes tour operators, conservation professionals, academics, individuals and the tourism boards of several countries.
The society focuses on travel to natural areas, the Amazon and Alaska, for example, and the impact of tourism 's impact on them.
The society conducts workshops and seminars for developing countries and for universities.


D'Amato Shift Dooms a Bill On Insurance
An effort to revise the costly Federal flood insurance program, which was led by environmental groups hoping to protect coastal areas from erosion, seemed headed for swift passage until Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York reversed his support.
Now the measure appears doomed.
The Senator, a Long Island Republican who is embroiled in a stiff battle for a third term, was one of six co-sponsors of a sweeping reform of the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
But after he was pressed by a group of Fire Island residents, who own some of the most expensive beachfront homes on the East Coast, Mr.
D'Amato became a major opponent of even a watered down version of the measure.


2 Sides to Tie
To the Sports Editor:
Many have blamed Lou Holtz for giving up on a victory, but how about Michigan's football coach, Gary Moller?
There were 56 seconds left in the game when Notre Dame took over on its own 10-yard line.
Notre Dame had only one timeout left, but Michigan had all three.
If Moller had called a timeout after every Notre Dame play, the Irish would have had to punt with about 30 seconds or more left, more time than Notre Dame had for its three plays.
By not stopping the clock, Moller demonstrated that he was happy with a tie.
JAMES J. FALLON Mendham, N.J.


Chaotic Somalia Starves as Strongmen Battle
From his sparsely furnished offices in the south of this devastated and divided capital, Gen.
Mohammed Farrah Aidid, a Soviet-trained military officer who lays claim to being the rightful leader of Somalia, spends hours every day stitching together the frayed loyalties of clansmen who demand food and loot in exchange for their allegiance.
Four miles away, past pot-holed streets lined with rubble, Mohammed Ali Mahdi, a mild-mannered hotelier who goes by the title Interim President of Somalia, drives from hot spot to hot spot in his northern enclave to negotiate, in a similar effort, with breakaway soldiers who mutiny for more money.


Anti-Gay Backlashes Are on 3 States' Ballots
EVEN though the family values debate has faded from the Presidential campaign, it is in full fire in several states.
And when local communities talk about homosexuals, they make Patrick Buchanan sound subtle, leaving behind code words and generalities.
Here in Oregon, printed caricatures of drooling pedophiles have been used to urge people to vote for Ballot Measure 9, which would amend the state constitution to classify homosexuality as "abnormal, wrong, unnatural or perverse." If the measure passes, it will be the government's job to actively discourage homosexuality at all levels of state authority, from zoning commissions to fish and game licensing.


Labor Leader Is Accused In the Misuse of Accounts
The president of the firefighters' union in New York City has been accused in a union internal inquiry of misusing the organization's credit accounts, failing to document nearly $37,000 in questionable expenses and billing the union for $3,263 in gift flowers and car services for friends and relatives.
An 11-member, rank-and-file financial investigating committee of the Uniformed Firefighters Association said the president, James J. Boyle, had allowed 16 people, including a Daily News reporter, to use his telephone credit card, and had let other people sign his name for union-paid restaurant bills.


Hedi Molnar and Michael Curcio Jr.
Hedi Edith Molnar, a daughter of Bela Molnar of Chatsworth, Calif., and the late Ruth Molnar, and Michael Anthony Curcio Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curcio of New York, plan to marry in November.
Ms.
Molnar, 42 years old, is an account executive for Mead Data Central, a computer database service in New York.
She graduated from City College.


Bush Needs Votes, and Garden State Becomes a Battleground
George Bush has been to New Jersey so often in the last two months that voters could be excused for wondering if he has a vacation home here.
But these trips were all business.
New Jersey, with its 15 electoral votes, has not voted for a Democrat for President since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.
Now, though, with its battered economy and its traditionally volatile and independent electorate, this seemingly friendly territory has become a do-or-die state for the President.


How States Wiggle Out Of Tax Increases
FOR months, Bush and Clinton supporters have been wrangling over how many times the Arkansas Governor raised taxes.
Was it 128?
Or 43?
Was it more or less often than the President? (Who did it just once or 133 times, depending on who's counting.)
Everybody's missing the point.
"Counting the number of tax increases that have been signed into law has nothing to do with whether government is taking a bigger or smaller bite out of peoples' incomes," said Steven D. Gold, director of the Center for the Study of States in Albany.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue between 26th and 52d Streets will be closed from noon to 2 P.M. today for the Pulaski Day Parade.
Madison Avenue between 86th and 96th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. today for the Madison Avenue street fair.


Paula M. Carr, Mark N. Lindblom
Paula Michelle Carr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ambrose A. Carr Jr. of Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Norwood Lindblom, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norwood W. Lindblom of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Lindblom is a vice president in the middle-market banking group at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of industry relations at the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.


U.S. Plane Lands in Sarajevo to Resume Airlift of Aid to Bosnia War Victims
Despite anxieties in the Pentagon and elsewhere about a recurrence of the shooting down of an Italian transport plane, a United States Air Force Hercules today resumed the United Nations airlift of food and medicines to the 400,000 people trapped in Sarajevo by the Serbian siege of the Bosnian capital.
Exactly a month after the Italian transport was downed by a surface-to-air missile as it made its approach to Sarajevo airport, killing the four-man crew and causing the suspension of the airlift, a four-engine C-130 from the 37th airlift squadron based in Frankfurt, Germany, made an unchallenged landing at the airfield.


Becoming a Psychotherapist
To the Editor:
In his review of my book, "A Curious Calling: Unconscious Motivations for Practicing Psychotherapy" (Aug. 16), Stuart Schneiderman misrepresents its central thesis.
According to the reviewer, I conclude that "therapists are narcissists -- they are motivated by a basic wish to cure themselves." In fact, I make no such claim.
Rather, I argue that in order to practice psychotherapy effectively, clinicians must be well acquainted with the full range of motivations that drew them to the field.


POSTINGS: 253 Pages for $6.95; Portable Landmark Guide
Until recently, the choice of a comprehensive book on New York landmarks was either lite or Lucullan: an 82-page free pamphlet from the Landmarks Preservation Commission that was out of date or "The Landmarks of New York," by Barbaralee Diamonstein, which has 416 richly illustrated pages but costs $49.50 and is scarcely portable.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Fairfield, Conn. 760,000
1657 Fairfield Beach Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old contemporary.
Waterfront location, private beach, open plan, 60-by-185-ft. lot; taxes $9,276.
Greenwich, Conn. 1.016 Million
601 Round Hill Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 10-year-old contemporary.
Screened porch, sauna, terrace, 4.4 acres; taxes $8,427.
New Canaan, Conn. 1.4 Million
545 West Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 210-year-old historic colonial; swimming pool, barn, stable, 3.6 acres; taxes $8,132.
Bronxville, N.Y. 585,000
15 Sussex Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 61-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, sun room, formal dining room, 2 porches, playroom, wet bar; taxes $10,706.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 380,000
744 Hardscrabble Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 112-year-old farmhouse; living room, 2 fireplaces, great room, laundry room, barn; taxes $5,000.
Rye, N.Y. 330,000
68 Elmwood Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 63-year-old colonial; fireplace, formal dining room, den, deck, laundry room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,639.
OTHER AREAS Amityville, L.I. 240,000
27 Meadow Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car attached garage, 100-by-125-foot waterfront property; taxes $6,900.
Bohemia, L.I. 145,000
38 Nathan Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, basement, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,000.
Aberdeen, N.J. 164,000
28 Warren Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; h/w floors, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,092.


A Fair That Offers Unexpected Items
WHAT better time for a voyage of discovery into the world of crafts than Columbus Day weekend?
Both first-time visitors and never-miss-a-show collectors can expect to find the unexpected at the 16th annual Morristown Craft Market.
There will be new trends, new materials, new techniques and many crafts people who have never before shown their work at the fair.
During three days next weekend, about 15,000 people are expected to visit the 150 booths at the fair, at the National Guard Armory.
Nine artists are from New Jersey, the others from around the country.


That Beloved Shoe Box May Be a Photo Villain
THE shoe box ranks as one of photography's most beloved folk accessories.
For years, families have stored their photographic prints and negatives in shoe boxes -- sometimes right along with the box camera.
Those with a streak of neatness put the lid on the box to keep out dust and other foreign objects that could scratch and otherwise mutilate historical family images.


Using Fresh Broccoli to Good Advantage
BROCCOLI is available all year round, yet there is a season for this most versatile vegetable.
Early fall is when the crop is harvested on farms in this region.
Farm stands and farmers' markets are brimming with fresh-picked broccoli now.
Look for bunches that have tight, gray-green flowerets and no signs of yellowing.
For a change of pace, try the purple broccoli that some farmers are growing.
When cooked, it loses its purple but stays a darker, almost bluish green.
Both the stems and the flowerets of broccoli can be used in many recipes.
If only the flowerets are needed for a particular dish, reserve the stems for another purpose.


Machine Dream
THE TURING OPTION
By Harry Harrison and Marvin Minsky. 422 pp. New York: Warner Books. $21.95.


The Philharmonia Virtuosi Is Celebrating Its 15th
THE Philharmonia Virtuosi and its founder-director, Richard Kapp celebrate the 15th anniversary of their "Mainstage" series at the State University of New York at Purchase.
Today at 3 P.M. the maestro will provide the informative introductions that have become such a popular ingredient of the Philharmonia's concerts, then conduct a program of Schubert's "Italian Overture," Brahms's Serenade No. 2 and, with Dylana Jenson as soloist, the Violin Concerto of Samuel Barber.
The orchestra's highly successful "Kids Attend Free" practice has been renewed, so children 8 through 18 years old will be admitted without charge when accompanied by an adult.
The number to call for more information is 251-6200.


Keeping Above-Ground Pools Aboveboard
To the Editor:
"All About/Swimming Pools" (Sept. 13) quotes a representative of a California-based manufacturer of pools as stating that a permit is not needed for an above-ground pool.
Please note that in all of New York State and most, if not all, of the Northeast, a building permit is required for installation of even an above-ground pool.
HOWARD LIEBERMAN Eastchester, N.Y., Sept. 15


Recital Ensembles Open New Seasons
THE Camerata Ensemble's 10th season will open with a recital at Seaverns Hall, on the Kingswood-Oxford campus in West Hartford, with the cellist Laura Kane and the pianist Carolyn Woodward collaborating on Cesar Franck's Sonata in A Major, and with the violinist Vahn Armstrong, playing trios of Haydn and Brahms (233-0288).
Today at 5 P.M. the Pro Arte Singers begin their 18th season under their artistic director, Arthur Sjogren, in the First Presbyterian Church in Stamford.
This afternoon's program moves from several Brahms songs and choral pieces to Faure's Requiem, ending with Daniel Lesur's "Cantique des Cantiques," a work in French and Hebrew scored for 12 soloists and a 12-part chorus.


'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' Astonishes Once More
ON the surface, the McCarter Theater's "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" might look like yet another miscalculation in a long line of trendy celebrity-ruled revivals.
Yet, even though the presence of JoBeth Williams as Maggie the Cat is causing a stir at the box office, Tennessee Williams's colossus of a play is neither promoted nor played as a torrid vehicle for the star.
Without distortion, Ms.
Williams's performance as the most pragmatically willful woman in the playwright's canon serves the work with its essential allure, sardonic wit and true grit.


Medical Technology Is Overused
To the Editor:
The article "When Doctors Say Yes and Insurers Say No" (Aug. 16) hits some very relevant points about managed care today.
But it misses the major problem with high technology: its overuse.


Wall Street; The Precious Metal in the Cellar
Gold is getting popular again, and not just with the Armageddon-is-around-the-corner crowd.
Downright sensible folks who swear they have not stocked their basements with canned goods are actually touting and buying it.
It is not the first time in recent years that a handful of establishment Wall Street types got bullish on gold, and the bulls, of course, could be wrong again.
But they are betting with their pocketbooks, which is as good a reason as any to look at why anyone would buy long-suffering gold bullion or gold shares.


A Survival Guide to Birthday Parties
FOR parents raised on nostalgic memories of simple home birthday parties, complete with pin-the-tail-on-the-donkey games, paper baskets filled with candy as party loot and a specially baked cake, the reality of running parties for their offspring can be a rude shock.
Images of usually well-behaved youngsters in a celebratory mood, grinding popcorn underfoot into carpets, spilling soda on newly polished kitchen floors and otherwise wreaking havoc in a well-appointed home, can make any parent shudder.
With the school season well under way, heralding the opening of a birthday party social circuit that nearly rivals the charity fund-raising scene in Manhattan, the pressure is on parents to arrange something new and exciting.


Germany
To the Editor: Regarding your two articles on areas in former East Germany ("A 'Saxon Switzerland' in Germany" and "Thuringia, a Land of Long Ago," July 26), I spent 10 days touring this area at the time the articles appeared.
I heartily endorse the pleasures of Erfurt, described as a "serendipitous bonus." I shall never forget my first sighting of the monumental staircase leading to the Dom and adjacent church, St.
Severi.
It reminded me of an operatic set.


Hobbyists Stalk The Noncollectors
IN their constant search for new collectors, three hobby organizations are planning a combined extravaganza at the end of this month in New York.
October, after all, is deemed by the United States Postal Service to be National Stamp Collecting Month.
Part of the production is intended for people who know nothing about philately and perhaps can't even pronounce it. (Most dictionaries give the pronunciation as fih-LATT-l-ee, with the second L more or less swallowed, so it comes out in three syllables. But others make a case for a broader fih-LATE-el-lee, with four distinct syllables.) That part is a stamp show sponsored by the American Stamp Dealers Association, which has an understandable interest in recruiting customers for its members.


Vincent Hallinan Is Dead at 95; An Innovative Lawyer With Flair
Vincent W. Hallinan, a lawyer who invented a new defense trial strategy, reformed San Francisco's corrupt jury system, defended the union leader Harry Bridges and ran for President from jail, died on Friday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 95 years old.
The cause of death was not specified. His family said he had been in failing health.


Amy Linsky, Roy Bennett Oser
Leo J. Linsky of East Longmeadow, Mass., and Bettie Hallen of Springfield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Hallen Linsky to Roy Bennett Oser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan S. Oser of St.
George, S.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Linsky graduated from Brandeis University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in secondary education at American International College.
Her father is a distributor in East Longmeadow for World's Finest Chocolates Inc., a candy producer.
Her mother teaches English at Central High School in Springfield.


Correction
An article on Sept. 20 about the playwright Simon Gray misidentified the group that gave "The Holy Terror" its American tryout.
It was the Arizona Theater Company.


Those Dresses! They're Mine!
Nan Kempner doesn't normally give tours of the clothes in her closet, but now nine of her favorite dresses are on display for anyone to see.
Mrs.
Kempner, a connoisseur of the couture, has lent the dresses for Valentino's 30th anniversary exhibition at the Seventh Regiment Armory.


Colro Me Fuchsia, Purple, Orange . . .
There's more than a dash of Sergeant Pepper in this printed rayon vest from Gurilla Biscuit, a New York manufacturer.
It's a sampler of late-60's motifs: black and white optical shapes, neon-colored flowers and psychedelic swirls.
There's even the word "unity" spelled in hearts.
Fushsia, orange, turquoise, yellow and purple are just a few of its colors.
The vest's blue satin back has an adjustable belt.


Suzanne L. Lobo, Michael Maguire
Suzanne Louise Lobo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Lobo of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Gerard Maguire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Maguire of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Seton Fittin, a Roman Catholic deacon, officiated at Holy Cross Church in Rumson.
Mrs.
Maguire, 27 years old, is a product manager at Knight-Ridder Financial in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of Harris &amp; Lobo Inc., representatives of hardware manufacturers in Lyndhurst, N.J.


SURFACING
SPORTS --
The Mach 50:
an in-line skate with a Reebok Pump.  FASHION --
Brown and green jeans:
Brown is the new black (again). Is green the new brown?  FOOD --
Risotto for breakfast:
made with milk and honey. At Kings Road Cafe in Los Angeles.  CHILDREN --
Doc Martens for toddlers:
to wear with their motorcycle jackets from Gap Kids?  WORD --
Juju:
vibes, karma, as in "I'm getting bad juju from that guy."


On Demand


Foreign Affairs; Mexico's Economist Kings
There we were in the modern presidential office of Los Pinos, or The Pines, the Mexican White House: President Carlos Salinas, bald on top, very slight build, somehow floating in his large black-leather chair; I, to his left, on a very soft matching sofa, sinking, knees approaching chest.
I moved to reduce the gap, noting we both had Harvard Ph.D.'s.
He smiled under his rectangular mustache.


Rebecca Dwyer, Kevin R. Morano
Rebecca Marie Dwyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Dwyer of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Robert Morano, the son of A. Robert Morano of Spring Lake Heights, N.J., and Valerie Morano of East Brunswick, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter Donohue, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Teresa of Avila Church in Summit.
Mrs.
Morano, 26 years old, is an equity sales trader at Baring Securities in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University, as did her husband.
Her father is an executive vice president and the national sales director at Dean Witter Reynolds, the securities brokerage, in New York.


Jacqueline Gray And John M. Falk
Jacqueline Stacey Gray, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen H. Gray of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to John Mansfield Falk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Falk of Great Falls, Va.
The Rev.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Falk, 24 years old, is the design coordinator of public relations for Mobil Corporation in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father is the vice president of environmental affairs for Mobil Chemical in Fairfax.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 13 with an article about marmalade misidentified a store in Scotland.
The picture with the continuation of the article, on page 31, showed the Laigh Bakehouse and Coffee Shop in Edinburgh.


Maura B. Connors, Justin M. Bohan
Maura Beth Connors, a daughter of Diane W. Sunshine and Thomas T. Connors, both of New York, was married yesterday to Justin Moran Bohan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Bohan Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph De Santo performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Bohan, 25 years old, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She was until recently an assistant manager at Laura Ashley in New York.
Her father, now retired, was the president and the founder of Datamation Services, a former computer services company in New York.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Dr.
Abraham Sunshine.


Katherine Bilik, Michael Sweeney
Katherine Bilik, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene W. Bilik of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Michael William Sweeney, a son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Sweeney Jr.
The Rev.
Laura J. S. Benson performed the ceremony at Roxbury United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Sweeney, 32 years old, is a manager at Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting and management consulting firm, in New York.
A cum laude graduate of Colgate University, she received an M.B.A. from Cornell University, as did her husband.
Her father is a writer in Stamford.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In a speech yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Tony Pena Will Play Another Year
He's 35 years old, a geriatric age for major league catchers, but TONY PENA put in more time behind the plate than any other American Leaguer in 1990 and 1991 and has been a regular for the Red Sox this year.
Now, as he winds up his 12th major league season and his third in Boston, Pena is going to get one more.
He has signed a contract extension through the 1993 season.
Terms were not disclosed. (AP)


Executive Pleads Not Guilty
A prominent New York real-estate executive pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that he and his girlfriend tried to hire a private detective to kill his wife and her friend.
Robert A. Goldberg, 47 years old, of Hazlett, N.J., was arrested Friday and charged with attempted murder, conspiracy and criminal solicitation, said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Impact of Perot On Race So Far Is Termed Scant
A survey of political professionals around the country shows that Ross Perot has not succeeded in fundamentally altering the 1992 Presidential campaign simply by re-entering the race.
But many of them emphasize that his true impact cannot be gauged until he begins his expected advertising blitz, and until he makes his debut in the coming Presidential debates.


What Women Want (Part 2)
Barbara Glitzer is not alone in her complaints, and I am in receipt of other communiques from the battleline.
Here are a couple:
Dear Sir,
As a woman and a recent automobile consumer, your column ("Women Talk About What They Want," About Cars, Aug. 23) sure hit some of my sore points.
I recently went out to negotiate the purchase of a new car, having read and researched four fairly comparable models.
I cannot begin to tell you of my treatment.
The salesmen and managers must think that women are just plain stupid, vain, or both, when it comes to automobiles.


Using Fresh Broccoli to Good Advantage
BROCCOLI is available all year round, yet there is a season for this most versatile vegetable.
Early fall is when the crop is harvested on farms in this region.
Farm stands and farmers' markets are brimming with fresh-picked broccoli now.
Look for bunches that have tight, gray-green flowerets and no signs of yellowing.
For a change of pace, try the purple broccoli that some farmers are growing.
When cooked, it loses its purple but stays a darker, almost bluish green.
Both the stems and the flowerets of broccoli can be used in many recipes.
If only the flowerets are needed for a particular dish, reserve the stems for another purpose.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 13 about places to visit in Queens misstated the opening date of Radio City Music Hall.
It was Dec. 27, 1932.
The article also incorrectly described a projector at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
It is from the middle or late 30's; it was not at Radio City on opening day.


Two-Pronged Approach in Quest for Clean Air
To the Editor:
"California's Pied Piper of Clean Air" (Sept. 13) is misleading because it omits a significant aspect of the problem.
The automobile industry entered an agreement with the California Air Resources Board to try to meet a new, extremely low level of emissions by gasoline-powered cars with the understanding that the state would require the oil industry to produce reformulated gasoline with a special chemical content.
The oil industry agreed.


Autumn and Asters (Not Always Just Mums)
BOOKS for children are illustrated with a wonderful method to teach them the alphabet.
Each letter is drawn in a large size with an object selected whose first letter matches the letter in the alphabet, such as A is for animal, B is for bird, etc.
Gardeners can learn this way, too.
A is for autumn, apples and asters.
Let's pick asters.
By growing a selection from this huge tribe of plants, the fun can begin.
Tribe is the right word.
Asters belong to the plant family called Composites.
There are so many Composites, botanists have divided the family into tribes, 12 or 13 of them depending on which book you read.
In the aster tribe, for example, claims have been made that there are more than 100 genera.
Any gardener who has a daisylike flower in the border or sees one flowering in the woods at this time of year is almost safe to claim it as an aster.
The moist soil from summer's rains and the return of September sunshine has given these plants a special glory.


An Open and Shut Case
It is difficult to consider the scallop without stifling a yawn, especially now, at peak season.
Since Aphrodite rose from the waves and rode a scallop shell over the Aegean, the bivalve's sweet meat and distinct shell have been subordinated to the symbol of St.
Jacques, creamed and baked potatoes, bits of architectural flouncing and the logo of a gasoline company.
None of these even hint at the sweet, succulent seafood that, when fresh, is delicate and briny as an ocean mist.
Terrible things happen to scallops in this world.


Meet the Nijinsky of (Fill in Blank)
MICHAEL MOSCHEN deftly climbs the stairs to the rehearsal loft.
The hands that pour soda for a visitor look ordinary enough, and the green eyes that appear so mesmerizing on stage are friendly and clear.
Ready by the door are the duffel bags that the juggler-choreographer-scientist no one can quite define will take to Spain that evening, where he will do a television show.
After a year of relative quiet, Mr.
Moschen (pronounced MO-shun) is on the move again, blazing his own trail as he says he has always done.


Antonello Marescalchi, Journalist, 65
Antonello Marescalchi, who retired last year as the New York-based American correspondent for the Italian television network RAI, died on Tuesday at his home on the East Side of Manhattan.
He was 65 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Smoking. Is It a Habit or Is It Genetic?
STEREOTYPES ARE usually worth something.
Sometimes science supports them, as it has over the years with more than a hundred psychological surveys that sketch a profile of the perfectly true-to-type American smoker: extroverted, adventuresome, angry, impulsive, intolerant of rules, agitated by both tedium and stress, prone to divorce and auto accidents.
A drinker.
Craves caffeine.
With findings like these the notion of an "addictive personality" was staked out.
Enter the epidemiologists and psychiatrists and geneticists, who have only recently taken an interest in smokers, and they find more.
The connection between smoking and alcohol, no news in itself, starts to look too ingrained to be explained by social habit.
Then comes confirmation of a "chronic and pernicious" relationship, as one researcher put it, between smoking and depression.


Solheim Showdown: U.S. Women Close In
Forcing America's women golf stars to scratch and claw for survival, an increasingly confident European team maintained a surprising 1-point lead at the Solheim Cup going into Sunday's climatic singles matches.
Indeed, without Meg Mallon and later Pat Bradley holing crucial birdie putts on the 18th hole of the Dalmahoy Golf and Country Club in Saturday's last two matches, the Americans would be trailing by three full points instead of 4 1/2 to 3 1/2.


CLASSICAL BRIEFS
Bach: 'Goldberg Variations'
Vladimir Feltsman, piano. Musicmasters 01612-67093-2; CD.


Make a Date With Love
For dating couples who would like to see their hopes and fears reflected on the screen, here's a recommendation.
Go see a double feature of Cameron Crowe's "Singles" and Woody Allen's "Husbands and Wives" and telescope 20 or 30 years' worth of romantic travails into one eye-opening evening.
Mr.
Crowe is not Mr.
Allen -- his film is much lighter and bouncier -- but the connection between the two films is real.
Their formats are similar, and to a surprising extent they have the same matters in mind.
The differences are those of age, outlook and experience, which brings up another recommendation: see these films in what may seem to be reverse order, with the middle-aged "Husbands and Wives" first.
That way, the ebullient "Singles" can send you home humming its theme song ("Dyslexic Heart," by Paul Westerberg of the Replacements -- catchy but markedly different from Mr. Allen's favorite, Gershwin).
If you end the evening with the terminal despair of "Husbands and Wives," you may find yourself wanting to break up other things, too.


Update; Doggedly, Police Detectives Look for Baby Hope's Killer
Even for detectives hardened by the endless litany of grisly crimes, the discovery of the badly decomposed body of a baby girl in a picnic cooler was as ghastly as the job gets.
It struck a deep chord within them.
They named her "Baby Hope" and vowed to find out who she was and how she died.
The police came upon the cooler along the Henry Hudson Parkway on July 23, 1991.
Since then, promising phone tips have been uncovered as pranks and leads have gone nowhere.
All the determination of the detectives led to frustration.
Until last week.


Coming Schedule Is Break For Giants
If the Giants are to have a winning season -- and despite the negatives they do have a chance -- the winning must start today.
And they have an excellent chance to win when they play the 0-4 Raiders at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum.
On the three Sundays after that, the Giants will face the Phoenix Cardinals (0-3), the Los Angeles Rams (2-2) and the Seattle Seahawks (1-3).
If the Giants win all those games, their 1-2 record will climb to 5-2, giving them padding for division games against the Washington Redskins, the Philadelphia Eagles and the Dallas Cowboys.


Angela Levy, Antony Beck
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Levy of Bryn Mawr, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Angela Brooke Levy to Antony Rowland Beck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham J. Beck of Cape Town.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Levy, 26 years old, is a hair-accessories designer for the EllenBeck Brooke Collection, a manufacturing and designing concern in Lexington, Ky.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of DRT Industries Inc., a diversified holding company in Philadelphia.


Is There A Winner In This Stadium?
The National Football League never lost a dime overestimating the intelligence of its viewing public, but even P. T. Barnum would have struggled drumming up advanced interest in tonight's game between the Jets and the New England Patriots.
What we have tonight, live from Giants Stadium, is a nationally televised game on the cable network TNT between two teams without a victory -- the Jets at 0-4 and the Patriots at 0-3 -- whose offensive and defensive pratfalls are more befitting a Three Stooges film festival.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday showing where Gypsies live in Europe omitted figures for Hungary, which has a Gypsy population of 750,000 to 1 million, according to the International Romani Union.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE FINAL FATE OF THE ALLIGATORS Stories From the City.
By Edward Hoagland.
Capra Press, paper, $9.95.


Public &amp; Private; I Am Oz
I found it intriguing that Ross Perot described women reporters who prepare rigorously for interviews and ask difficult questions -- what we in the trade call "doing our jobs" -- as "trying to prove their manhood."
I'm intrigued because his manhood is precisely what Mr.
Perot has refused to reveal to the American people.


In the Baltic
To the Editor: I read William E. Schmidt's piece "Transition in the Baltic" (Aug. 30) with considerable interest.
A colleague and I rented a car in Germany and drove to Lithuania in July and we came to many of the same conclusions.
The border guards were much more pleasant, if somewhat confused about which documents are required.
We needed no visa for Lithuania and we were even allowed to drive into Russia, Kaliningrad Oblast, for the day without a visa.


Mary O'Donnell, Brian O. Hickey
Mary Patricia O'Donnell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. O'Donnell of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Brian Octave Hickey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald O. Hickey of Trumbull, Conn.
The Rev.
William O'Rourke performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church.
Mrs.
Hickey, 26 years old, is an account executive with Interactive Market Systems, a computer marketing software manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Providence College, as did her husband.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Texas; In Texas, Three 'Neighbors' Battle for a Vital Prize
More than anywhere else, perhaps, the Presidential campaign begins all over again this weekend in Texas, the nation's third-most-populous state.
This is, after all, President Bush's political base.
It is also Ross Perot's home turf, and Bill Clinton, born just a few miles across the Arkansas border, has had close ties to Texas since his earliest days in politics.
A Presidential contest involving three candidates, all from the same compact area, has no recent precedent.


Voters See What's Behind 'Family Values'; 'Disposable Fathers'
To the Editor:
Maggie Gallagher gets it backward in "An Unwed Mother for Quayle" (Op-Ed, Sept. 24).
The proposition that "fathers are just another new disposable item," a rephrasing of Vice President Quayle's salvo, never made much sense in contemporary American family life.
Yes, a few women set out to have children without mates, but they are a small percentage of all single mothers.


Alive and Well and Living in Iowa
To the Editor:
In your issue of Aug. 2, which has just come to my attention, you published a review of Wini Breines's "Young, White, and Miserable: Growing Up Female in the Fifties."


Police Kill Man in Bronx
A police officer fatally shot a Bronx man who had fired two shots at the officer and his partner early yesterday, the police said.
Officer Christopher Lawrence and his partner, Officer Anthony Lapinsky, were in University Heights in the Bronx at 2:46 A.M. when they spotted two men in what appeared to be a drug deal, said Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, a police spokesman.
The officers followed the men into a building and one of the men, Francis Gonzalez, fired at them, Sergeant Holloman said.
Officer Lawrence fired two shots, hitting Mr.
Gonzalez in the chest, he said.


Autumn and Asters (Not Always Just Mums)
BOOKS for children are illustrated with a wonderful method to teach them the alphabet.
Each letter is drawn in a large size with an object selected whose first letter matches the letter in the alphabet, such as A is for animal, B is for bird, etc.
Gardeners can learn this way, too.
A is for autumn, apples and asters.
Let's pick asters.
By growing a selection from this huge tribe of plants, the fun can begin.
Tribe is the right word.
Asters belong to the plant family called Composites.
There are so many Composites, botanists have divided the family into tribes, 12 or 13 of them depending on which book you read.
In the aster tribe, for example, claims have been made that there are more than 100 genera.
Any gardener who has a daisylike flower in the border or sees one flowering in the woods at this time of year is almost safe to claim it as an aster.
The moist soil from summer's rains and the return of September sunshine has given these plants a special glory.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TOUGH DRAW The Path to Tennis Glory. By Eliot Berry. John Macrae/Holt, $25.


Heather Rusk, Peter LaCrosse
Heather McNeely Rusk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Rusk Jr. of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Peter William LaCrosse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. LaCrosse of West Granville, Mass.
Msgr.
Anthony Della Villa officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
LaCrosse, 33 years old, is a chef at Oscar's Restaurant at the Waldorf-Astoria.
She graduated from the California Culinary Academy.
Her father is a past president of the World Rehabilitation Fund in New York and a past vice president of Columbia University.
Her mother, Elizabeth S. Rusk, is a registered nurse at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Medical Group.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Dr.
Howard A. Rusk, the founder of the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York University and a contributing editor of The New York Times.


Ilana Aaronson, Glenn Meyers
Ilana Lea Aaronson, a daughter of Phyllis Aaronson of Highland Beach, Fla., and Mark Aaronson of Shrewsbury, Mass., was married last evening to Glenn Scott Meyers, a son of Morton and Zara Meyers of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan.


New Cuisine Buoys Kosher Restaurants
LORI'S CASUAL CUISINE in Cedarhurst serves Italian, Chinese, Mexican, Spanish, French and American dishes.
The menu at the new Abigale's Grill, also in Cedarhurst, lists everything from teriyaki chicken to fusilli with grilled chicken and pesto.
At Ian's Promised Land in Plainview, the fare includes Greek salad, Chinese pasta salad, Turkish salad, falafel and pizza.


BEST SELLERS: October 4, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
6
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
2
1
30
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
4
19
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
3
12
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
5
6
3
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
6
8
8
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
7
5
6
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
8
7
6
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The story of Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton and her spouse.
9
10
4
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Visiting her native Napa Valley, a television star encounters shades of her unhappy childhood and romance with the heir to a winery.
10
9
2
THE LEGACY, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $15.95.) A fantasy tale about a spider queen's war to stop a band of elves in their quest for peace and security.
11
14
2
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran has to contend with a series of crimes that occur during a bus tour of Scotland.
12
2
BEFORE AND AFTER, by Rosellen Brown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A tragic event in a New England town pits members of a family against one another.
13
11
6
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
14
1
LIVE FROM GOLGOTHA, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.) The Gospel according to St.
Timothy, recorded in A.D. 96 amid intrusions by 20th-century religious and media personalities.
15 *
13
12
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old woman recalls what she saw as the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the radio talk show host.
2
2
5
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
3
3
19
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
4
4
16
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
5
17
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
6
10
2
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of A. A. Milne's character Piglet.
7
9
14
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
8
7
8
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
9 *
8
9
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
10
6
5
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
2
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL, by Joseph Mitchell. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Three dozen pieces about Manhattan life, published in The New Yorker during the past half-century.
12
13
3
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
13
12
21
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
14
19
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
15 *
15
2
KISSINGER, by Walter Isaacson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the former national security adviser and Secretary of State.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
12
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Tips on playing golf.
2
1
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
3
1
43
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Financial advice.
4 *
4
44
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
1
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
6 *
3
8
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) Rules to live by.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
SHOW BUSINESS, by Shashi Tharoor. (Arcade, $19.95.) An impressive novel about the rise, fall and rise again of a matinee idol in Bombay captures the crazy razzle-dazzle of the world's biggest and gaudiest film industry.
KATERINA, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Random House, $18.) In a narrative of tribal hatred overcome, the eminent Israeli novelist reimagines the Holocaust through the eyes of a gentile peasant woman, a runaway who has been taken in by a Jewish family.
VANISHING POINTS, by Thea Astley. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two intricately linked novellas -- "The Genteel Poverty Bus Company" and "Inventing the Weather" -- about disaffected Australians seeking escape from the monster called progress.
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969, edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $49.95.) Forty-three years of discussion between two world-class intellectuals whose lives were defined by the great ideas and events of the 20th century.
FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL: The Permanence of Racism, by Derrick Bell. (Basic Books, $20.) A prominent scholar of race and the law argues, with allegory, fables and dialogues, that our progress against racism so far has been illusory.
YOUR BLUES AIN'T LIKE MINE, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) An eloquent first novel that shows the lives and hearts of poor black and white people, with malice toward none.
THE OXFORD COMPANION TO THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, edited by Tom McArthur; managing editor, Feri McArthur. (Oxford University, $45.) This perfect browser's manual contains an abundance of neat things to know about what we say and why.


Just When the Doctor Sharpens Up, It's Over
Dwight Gooden walked off the Shea Stadium field and could only think about one thing.
Why does it have to be over? Why now?


Stand By! Here's a 40's Radio Revue
WE, the studio audience, after being thanked for "coming out and braving the snow," watch the signals light up:
Stand By. On the Air. Applause!
The cast members file in, brushing themselves off.
One heads for the Coke machine, another for the pay phone to call his bookie.
Overheard amid the din: "I'm sweatin' bullets." "Lou, I need a Bromo." "This is radio, Wally."


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MRS.
FITZ'S FLAMINGOS.
Written and illustrated by Kevin McCloskey.
Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard. $14. (Ages 5 to 9) There's a little bit of magic in this story about beautification in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Fitz plants pink plastic flamingos on a warehouse rooftop to improve the view, two at a time, every Thursday until she has quite a flock.
When the wrecking crew comes . . . the birds leave for Florida.


Kathleen Bradley, Walter E. McGhee
Kathleen Ann Bradley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Bradley of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Walter Emery McGhee, a son of Karl G. McGhee of Pittsburgh and Polly E. Enman of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
James Hayes, a retired Archbishop of Halifax, Nova Scotia, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
McGhee, 26 years old, is an account manager at Bloomberg Financial Markets, the financial news service, in New York.
She graduated from the College of Wooster.
Her father is the president of R. M. Bradley Capital Ltd., a stock brokerage in New York.


Feasting As A Fine Art
FOR DECADES NOW, A FUNNY THING has been happening to Americans on their way to the dinner table -- and to the nation's cooks on their way to the stove.
The plain (or fancy) delight of eating has been converted into an almost religious exercise.
Food and drink set before us is scrutinized not so much for its delectability as for its conformity to the latest nutritional catechism.
Cooks are evaluated less for their talents than for their orthodoxy.
In due course, a kind word will be said for the grain of truth in all this wrangling over nutritional dogma; but not just yet.
We need first to remind ourselves of the larger truth that eating among human beings cannot be reduced to nourishment alone without reducing our humanity as well.


School Accepts Moslem and Buddhist Holidays
WHEN Moslem students in the Herricks School District missed school on Sept. 9 to celebrate the Mawlid, the birthday of Muhammed, their absence was excused.
Buddhist students observing Bodhi Day, the Day of Enlightenment, on Dec. 8, will also be permitted to miss school.
The holidays are on the school calendar in the Herricks schools, making them excused absence.


Deborah Geffen and Gordon Posner
Deborah Jo Geffen, an English teacher at Aviation High School in Long Island City, Queens, was married last evening to Gordon David Posner, a marketing manager for the Gaylord Container Corporation, a maker of containers in Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Posner, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Florida in Gainesville and received a master's degree in English education from New York University.
She is the daughter of Steven Geffen of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Carole Geffen.
Her father is the vice president of legal and external relations in the Latin American division of the International Business Machines Corporation in Mount Pleasant, N.Y.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Susan Geffen of Armonk.


CLINTON COUNTRY
It was fun to read Roy Reed's reaction to my bust of Orval Faubus in the corridor of the Arkansas Capitol.
The "impish grin" that Reed saw was a "grimace" to an Arkansas Gazette reporter, and the old Governor himself was never quite sure about the mouth.


CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
I was initially mystified by Susan Lee's description of Washington's business and social life (Hers: "Capital Punishment," Sept. 6).
I've lived and worked here for 20 years, but I couldn't recognize the milieu.
Then it dawned on me: Lee knows only Republicans!
Her status as a Fellow ("Gal"?) at the American Enterprise Institute should have tipped me off.
Lee dines at Maison Blanche, where Administration factota smoke and drink too much and ignore their female companions.
She's only been to dinner parties in certain suburban neighborhoods of Northern Virginia, where women are expected to make the home nice and drive the car pool.


'Not in My Back Yard' and Repercussions
When Marjorie Eichler and her 10 adopted and foster children moved into a gracious Tudor-style mansion in the Prospect Hill neighborhood this summer, they were anything but welcomed, as some of their well-to-do, socially prominent neighbors filed a lawsuit to keep them out.
Now those neighbors -- including a state judge, a Yale University art museum director, a former New Haven mayoral candidate and a Yale pediatrician -- are themselves defendants in a Justice Department discrimination suit.


POP BRIEFS
Extreme: 'III Sides to Every Story'
A&amp;M 314540064; CD and cassette.


Correction
A report in the Postings column on Sept. 20 about housing for the elderly in the Bronx misstated the address of an apartment building.
It is on Bartow Avenue, opposite Co-op City.
In addition, the name of the second sponsor, along with B'nai B'rith, was omitted.
It is the Project HOPE Foundation.


South Africa Imperative: Confess and Be Forgiven
IS this advertisement in a Cape Town newspaper, perhaps, the latest clue that South Africa is nearing its day of reckoning?
It is a new pay-per-call telephone service called "Dial-a-Confession," offering South Africans the opportunity, for $2 per minute, to bare their souls into a tape recorder.
"Calls cannot be traced!" the advertisement promises.
"Feel good about yourself again!"
Confession is certainly much in the air as the country edges fitfully toward a new order.
Whistleblowers emerge to speak of evils they helped perpetrate within the system.
Leading institutions order up reports on their past misdeeds, from the South African Police (torture of suspects, collusion in various atrocities) to the African National Congress (torture of dissidents in its anti-apartheid war camps abroad, failure to control township militants.) However rigorous or credible, these in-house mea culpas reflect a common urge to get right with the world before it falls under new management.


Hong Kong Art, British Christmas
Details of 16 of Hong Kong's leading museums and galleries along with a map showing the closest stop to each one on the subway and railway systems are given in a new brochure, Museums, produced by the Hong Kong Tourist Association.
Among the listings are the Tsui Museum of Art, known for its collection of Chinese ceramics, the Flagstaff Museum of Tea Ware and the Museum of Art, which displays Chinese antiquities and fine arts.
The brochure is available from the Hong Kong Tourist Association, 590 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10036.


IN SHORT: FICTION
INDIGO By Richard Wiley. Dutton, $19.


MacPherson Provides Some Cheer for Patriots
The coach was bleeding from happiness.
Blood oozed from his forehead and he was laughing and shouting and hugging people.
It was right after a game last season in which the head coach, Dick MacPherson of the New England Patriots.
His team had just beaten the Indianapolis Colts in overtime, 23-17, in Foxboro Stadium on a pass from Hugh Millen to Michael Timpson.
"I was shocked when I saw him," said Pat Hanlon, the publicity director for the Patriots.
"I said, 'Coach, what happened?' He said, 'I guess I got a little excited.' "


BUSH REJECTS BILL THAT WOULD LIMIT RATES ON CABLE TV
President Bush fulfilled his vow today to veto a bill that would regulate cable prices, saying it benefited special interests rather than the public.
But he faces long odds in rounding up support to sustain his veto.
The veto message was sent to Capitol Hill while Mr.
Bush was campaigning in Florida.
It was the President's 36th veto, and no previous one has been overturned by Congress.


Hilary C. Kilbane, A. E. Allinson 3d
Hilary Coll Kilbane, a daughter of Ginger Kilbane of Darien, Conn., and Paul L. Kilbane of New York, was married yesterday to A. Edward Allinson 3d, a son of Patricia Allinson and Mr.
Allinson, both of Boston.
The Rev.
John Davis, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Allinson, 28 years old, is a buyer for the decorative home division of Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a senior vice president at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the advertising agency, in New York.
Her mother owns Hotel, a silverware importing company in Darien.


Michelle Duke and Roger Nettler
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack F. Duke of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michelle Helene Duke, to Roger Lawrence Nettler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. Nettler of Greenvale, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Duke, 26 years old, is the assistant to the director of community fund-raising at the American Cancer Society in New York.
She graduated from Queens College.
Her father is a financial consultant in New York.


Jennifer Wenson, Eric Adam Maier
Jennifer Louise Ann Wenson, an architect with Eric D. W. Cohler Inc.
Architectural Design, and Eric Adam Maier, a computer analyst for Reader's Digest, both in New York, are planning a June wedding.


Mutual Funds; The Scramble For High Yields
While 1992 has not been good to stock fund investors as a whole, the funds that have done best are those that seek income rather than growth.
This reflects the fact that investors are scrambling for alternatives to record-low interest rates in money market funds.
Equity-income, utility and, to a lesser extent, option-income funds all produce higher yields than other classes of stock funds.
The second theme is uncertainty, said A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical.
The prices of foreign securities have been falling because of the uncertainty in unstable areas of the world and political issues abroad.
The combination of these problems and currency movements have left overseas funds among the year's worst performers.


A Not-So-Short List of Well-Run Life Insurers
To the Editor:
I agree with the article "Northwestern Mutual: Frugal, Stodgy and Admired" (Aug. 30) that Northwestern Mutual is a fine old mutual life insurance company.
Unfortunately, from reading your article one would get the impression that the life insurance industry is in disarray and that Northwestern is the only well-run company.


Service Clubs Rallying To Reverse Their Slide
ONCE upon a time, in municipalities all over New Jersey, clubs made up of doctors, lawyers, bankers and other community leaders met once a week for lunch.
The groups, each a small local branch of a large national organization, offered members a chance to socialize, conduct a little private business and organize community service projects.
They called themselves Rotarians, Kiwanis or Lions, and they proudly erected signs at city or town limits proclaiming their existence.
The signs still greet newcomers to New Jersey communities, but the letters are often faded.
The clubs behind the signs now find themselves fighting against the tide of social change; their most crucial project is survival.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  SOMALIA'S STUBBORN STRONGMEN


Budapest Salute To Kierkegaard
Budapest's first Kierkegaard Week, exploring the influence of the Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard, will be held Nov. 30 to Dec. 5.
The week is sponsored by the Budapest Chamber Theater in honor of the debut of the Hungarian playwright Andras Nagy's award-winning drama, "The Seducer's Diary," based on an essay by the philosopher about his own life.
Festivities begin Nov. 30 with a concert performance of Mozart's "Don Giovanni," featuring artists of the Hungarian State Opera, at the Kiscelli Romtemplom, a recently renovated 17th-century church in the Buda Hills.
Daytime events include lectures, seminars and discussions (in English, German and Hungarian) led by scholars and writers.
These sessions will be held in various locations including the University of Budapest, the Academy of Science and the International PEN-Center.


The Moods Were Sunny
To the Editor:
Matisse not an easy artist  [ "The Many Moods of Matisse," Sept. 20 ] ?
Give us a break!
Even if, in the process of finding his own voice, he passed through a period that was "austere, dark and rigorous," he certainly emerged as the easiest and least psychologically complicated of artists.
DOROTHY NEWGARDEN Staten Island


A Disturbing Prospect
To the Sports Editor:
In announcing his return to the National Basketball Association, Magic Johnson is showing a total disregard for the health of N.B.A. personnel and his fellow players.
As a doctor and a former collegiate player, I understand the contact involved in the game.
Nobody plans accidents, but they certainly happen: i.e., the severe laceration Isiah Thomas suffered last season, with blood all over him, the equipment and the court.


Sports of The Times; You'll Never Guess What's Finally Here
SIX months later than usual, the baseball season is about to open.
Meaning baseball like it oughta be, baseball like it used to be, baseball as a game instead of greed.
When the National League and American League championship series begin, people will be asking questions not heard in months in most cities with major league franchises.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Green Politics; President Bush Softens Environmental Stand
After months of bashing environmental laws as a threat to jobs and battering conservationists as "extremists" out to "shut down the United States," President Bush seemed to soften last week.
First, the White House dropped a plan championed by Vice President Dan Quayle that would have enabled manufacturers to treat millions of tons of hazardous waste like household garbage and dispose of it in ordinary town dumps.


Japan, Relenting, Plans to Allow Import of U.S.-Made Sushi
In what is looking like a victory for free trade and American rice, Japan's Government has apparently decided to approve the plan of a restaurant chain to import frozen sushi from the United States.
Fujio Matsumoto, president of the Sushi Boy chain, said today that it had been told Friday by the branch of Japan's Food Agency in Osaka, where the company is based, that imports of sushi would not violate the nation's prohibition of imported rice.


Miss Burns, Mr. Lowther 4th
Kathleen Frances Burns, a daughter of Mrs.
John V. Burns of Naples, Fla., and the late Mr.
Burns, was married yesterday to George Lowther 4th, the son of Joan L. Parish of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Lowther 3d.
Canon Samir Habiby performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Lowther, 27 years old, is a sales associate at Razooks, the clothing store in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan College.
Her father was the chairman of Showcase Communications, an advertising agency in Naples.


POSTINGS: For Qualified First-Timers; Waiving Closing Costs
Closing costs and fees can be a startling expense when buying a home.
Chemical Bank, however, is waiving most of the expenses for low-and moderate-income first-time home-buyers through Oct. 31 with its Neighborhood Homebuyers Mortgage.
The program works by having the bank pay most of the closing costs and fees, including origination fees, also known as points, the documentation preparation fee, the bank attorney fee, the appraisal fee, the mortgage lender's title insurance, fee title insurance and the co-op lien search fee.


Chief of Police Becomes the Target In an Oregon Anti-Gay Campaign
Rarely a week goes by that Tom Potter does not receive either a death threat on the phone or a nasty letter in the mail.
As police chief of Oregon's largest city, Chief Potter said he had come to expect that a small number of people would always hate police officers.
But he has been somewhat surprised to learn how many people also profess to hate homosexuals.
The reason Chief Potter knows is that his daughter, Katie, is an officer in his department and a lesbian.
And he has supported her by marching with her in two gay pride parades here.


'Who Prospers?'
To the Editor:
In its preoccupation with the chapter on blacks, Jason DeParle's review of my book "Who Prospers? How Cultural Values Shape Economic and Political Success" (Aug. 16) misses the basic point not only of the book but also of the chapter on blacks.


Perfect Mother, Nurse, Patriot, Siren and Good Sport
MARLENE DIETRICH
Life and Legend.
By Steven Bach.
Illustrated. 626 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Debates; Details of Campaign Debates Are Settled in Hours of Talks
After hours of haggling over questions that included whether Ross Perot would be allowed to participate, the Bush and Clinton campaigns today formally announced a series of three Presidential debates and a Vice-Presidential debate.
The schedule for the Presidential debates, which will be 90 minutes and take place before live audiences, is as follows:


Lisa E. Fegley, Edward Petti Jr.
Richard Fegley of Chicago and Carol Fletcher of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Erin Fegley to Edward Charles Petti Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Petti of New Rochelle.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Fegley, 29 years old, is a production manager for the Donna Karan Company in New York.
She graduated from Iona College.
Her father is a photographer for Playboy magazine in Chicago.
Her mother is a nurse at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
The prospective bride is also a stepdaughter of Marijo Fegley of Chicago.


Abrams and D'Amato Use Opposite Strategies
Looking for the extra luster and momentum that only a front-runner can offer, Attorney General Robert Abrams has begun his race for the United States Senate by embracing any support that Gov.
Bill Clinton might provide over the final weeks of the campaign.
At the same time, his opponent, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is keeping a calculated distance from President Bush and his sagging fortunes in New York State.
For Mr.
Abrams, who won the Democratic primary two weeks ago by the smallest of margins, a close attachment to Mr.
Clinton is likely to enhance his standing in a state where the Arkansas Governor holds a lead of nearly 20 points over the President and twice that over Ross Perot in at least one poll, from the Marist Institute for Public Opinion.


Inside 'Hero,' A 1930's Heart Vs. a 90's Brain
There is a moral to the movie "Hero," which Andy Garcia eventually blurts out.
He plays John Bubber, a homeless man who takes credit for rescuing dozens of people from a plane crash.
The rescue was, in fact, performed by a petty thief named Bernie LaPlante (Dustin Hoffman), going against every impulse in his misanthropic little body.
But a television reporter, Gale Gayley (Geena Davis), believes that Bubber pulled her from the burning plane.
She makes him a media star, showing how heroes can be made from telegenic looks and sound bites.
If "Hero" had stopped there, it would have been a bitterly funny satire.
But Bubber performs his own courageous act, which leads to the moral of his story.
"I think we're all heroes if you catch us at the right moment," he tells the television cameras.
What a soothing sentiment.
How totally unconvincing, for there is a more realistic lesson in "Hero." Bernie tells his young son at the movie's end: you can't believe what you see on television.


The Wonders Of the Golden Age In Congo and Zaire
Facing each other from opposite banks of the Congo River, the twin cities of Brazzaville, Congo, and Kinshasa, Zaire, have, since the late 19th century, been a commercial and cultural nexus between the vast African interior and the rest of the world.
And since the 1950's they have been a wellspring of modern African music.
But only in the past few years have Americans paid much attention to Congolo-Zairean music.
Papa Wemba, Kanda Bongo Man, Diblo Dibala and a few others -- sophisticated stars who display their exotic style in cosmopolitan pop settings -- have won a small but increasing share of the world's most lucrative audience.


Stars Gone, Horsepower Remains
The offshore powerboat racing circuit lost much of its glamour last year when the movie actors Don Johnson, Kurt Russell, and Chuck Norris decided they had better things to do than race speedboats.
But organizers for the national championship race, scheduled for today on the Hudson River off Pier 59 in Manhattan, have supplanted marquee names with the potential for more action.
More than 65 boats are expected in the competition, the $80,000 Budweiser New York National Championship Race.
That means a relatively crowded course and added congestion at the turns.
In the competition last year, 37 boats competed.


What Women Want (Part 2)
Barbara Glitzer is not alone in her complaints, and I am in receipt of other communiques from the battleline.
Here are a couple:
Dear Sir,
Your column reminded me of the anger I felt when a salesman (and the term is meant to be gender-specific) kept addressing comments and questions to me about color when my husband and I were buying a car not too long ago.
I hope that guy read the column and noted that color was not mentioned in the items that women care most about.


Trying to Ease Rift, Dinkins Meets Police Officials
Mayor David N. Dinkins reached out to his police force yesterday, meeting with the department's 75 precinct commanders and its top chiefs.
And his efforts to soothe tensions would not end there, he said; he plans to meet directly with the rank and file.
"We must improve communications with the force," Mr.
Dinkins said.
"As the Mayor and chief executive officer of this city, this is my function and obligation."


At Least: Slow the Slaughter
Late and grudging, the Bush Administration now declares it will join in an effort to stop Serbian warplanes from bombing unarmed Muslims in Bosnia.
An effective ban on such flights from Serbia may clear the air space.
It will not clear America's conscience.
Vicious cluster bombs are not the only reason that Muslims are dying by the thousands.
Serb terrorists are still driving Muslims from their homes, now from the suburbs of Sarajevo.
Serbian artillery still pounds hospitals, homes, schools -- all in the despicable name of "ethnic cleansing." And as winter nears, hundreds of thousands of Bosnians face death by siege, by starvation, by winter winds.
To repeat, without exaggeration, that's hundreds of thousands.


The Pictorialists in a Twilight Mood
PRINCETON
A HUSH has descended over the Art Museum at Princeton University.
The turn-of-the-century photographers known as Pictorialists have descended, bringing with them a view of life that some might regard as merely ethereal and others as preposterous in its remoteness from real life.
A naked youth leans against a tree, playing a recorder; a woman awaits inspiration at her escritoire, quill pen in hand; Pre-Raphaelite maids wander alone on the shore or in fields.
The sun will occasionally penetrate an interior or cast a shadow across a pasture, but the general impression is of perpetual twilight.


For UConn, No Place Like Home
Connecticut beat Yale for the fifth time in a row and the ninth time in their last 10 meetings today.
Once again the score was decisive, 40-20, but the story this time was the setting more than the outcome.
After having played all previous 42 games at the Yale Bowl in a series that dates from 1948, the schools met for the first time at Memorial Stadium on the Connecticut campus, before a crowd of 12,104.
The game also marked the first time that Yale had played a state opponent away since it beat Trinity College in Hartford, 18-0, in 1898.


Mel Gibson Shoots (a Movie)
This tiny resort community, on the Maine coast not far from Camden, is a cluster of summer houses so quaint that in the words of one Southern Californian, "you almost expect a little train to drive down the lane with Mickey Mouse in the engine." The houses, with their picket fences and bay windows, look as if they were built for the movies.
And in fact, as local residents with binoculars and cameras wait outside in a drizzle, a movie is being shot inside one of them.
The film is "The Man Without a Face," a modestly budgeted drama that is Mel Gibson's directorial debut.
As the camera rolls, Margaret Whitton, looking like the quintessential all-American mom, is serving her family lunch from a steaming pot of SpaghettiOs.
Suddenly, the screech of an alarm rips through the house.
Mel Gibson, every bit the lean, mean, fighting machine that has made him an international star, leaps from behind the camera and into the dining room, index fingers pointed like automatic pistols.


Reinventing Glass, With Artistry as Well as Craft
At age 7, Gaetano Pesce was so awed by watching a Venetian street artisan bend glass rods in a flame that he went home, took a light bulb to the kitchen and turned on the gas.
"The bulb exploded," Mr.
Pesce (pronounced PESH-eh) recalled recently.
"But something else also happened. The thin pieces of glass started to melt in the flame. It made me understand how you shape glass in fire."


This Old House, It Gets Help . . . Selling
WHEN the State Department of Transportation needed to get rid of a 1700's center-chimney Cape-style house on Barnes Road in Wallingford, it got its best response not from real estate classifieds or legal notices, but from a free listing in a one-page newsletter.
The newsletter, the Historic Properties Exchange, was responsible for about 8 of the 15 calls that came in, said Philip J. Melchionne, a fiscal administrative officer with the department.


Confessions of a Gould Devotee
When Glenn Gould called me 10 years ago, the day before he suffered a massive stroke, I couldn't speak with him.
We had talked a few times before -- always close to midnight, always on the telephone -- for professional reasons, for scheduled interviews.
He would begin quietly, calmly, responding to questions about his conception of the piano and its music, his isolation and his withdrawal from concert life, his eccentricities and his reputation -- questions he must have been asked scores of times by his telephonic friends, with whom he chose to connect late at night with garrulous enthusiasm.
But before long he would relax into impassioned and vigorous intellectual fantasy, spinning out eclectic riffs.
I found myself acting as an entranced accompanist to a performance, offering a sort of continuo foundation for his improvisations.


Politics Keeps New York State Mental Unit Open
GOWANDA, N.Y., Oct. 1 --
A rattling wind slams against the red-brick facade of Building 86 of the Gowanda Psychiatric Center, then whistles down the hallways of what was once a ward in one of New York's state-run mental hospitals.
Like many of the other structures at the sprawling complex here, Building 86 is empty.
But Gowanda, which in its heyday in the 1950's had 3,710 patients on grounds surrounded by farmland, is not closed.
On the second floor of Building 67, amid wall stencils of horses, sunsets and a space shuttle, 14 mentally ill people live on a single ward.
They are the only patients here.


Overcoming a Linguistic 'Glass Ceiling'
IN order to stimulate conversation in her English as a Second Language class at Westchester Community College here, Esperanza Cano, an assistant professor, brought in a box of various household items last week for the class to discuss.
One of them was a whistle.
"Who can tell me what this is used for?" she asked.
A student from Nicaragua was the first to answer.
"The police use it to call the people," he said.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Tax Bill: Vote on passage of a broad tax bill that would give tax incentives to businesses investing in impoverished neighborhoods - along with a medley or tax benefits for every other economic group.
Approved 70 to 29, Sept. 29.


Herman Trunk, a Printer By Day and a Painter by Night
THERE recently occurred the unheard of: an exhibition by a contemporary artist who chose to remain anonymous.
When everyone else, it seems, is frantic for public attention, this individual, who, by the way, is not untalented, wants not to be known.
Still, admirable as the modesty was, reviewing the show was like being up a creek without a boat, never mind the paddle.


Steven Waskow Esther S. Hsieh and William M. Hou
Esther Szeyu Hsieh, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jui Sheng Hsieh of Belle Mead, N.J., was married yesterday to William M. Hou, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Shou L. Hou of Radnor, Pa.
The Rev.
Vincent E. Keane performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Hou, 28 years old, is an account marketing representative with the International Business Machines Corporation in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering there.
Her father is an author and a professor of mechanical engineering at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.


One Sport Means Less Money
DEION SANDERS's endorsement contract with Nike athletic shoes would drop sharply in value if the two-sport star decided to play only baseball or football, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported yesterday.
The three-year deal signed this year gives Sanders about $1 million a year, provided he remains in both sports, according to an attorney who reviewed the deal for the newspaper.


When Elderly Care for Their Elders; Increasingly, the Aging Find Themselves Tending to Parents
Ms.
Miller makes a daily trip to a nursing home in Brooklyn to do her duty by her 90-year-old mother, who has no idea who she is.
The trip usually reminds her of many things. Sad things.


Ahem!
Late Mardi Gras?
No.
Early Halloween?
No.
It's the initiation of Webster Hall (and no, it's not a dorm).


To Save or End a Troubled Parent's Rights
THE boy once called Gregory Kingsley is now to be known as Shawn Russ, thanks to the decision by a Florida court on Sept. 25 that granted the 12- year-old's plea to sever his relationship with the biological mother he barely knows and to be adopted by his foster parents.
But for the growing legion of children in foster care without his resources and for the beleaguered agencies that care for them, the legal precedent set by Gregory's case means very little.
Lost amid the novelty of Gregory's "divorce" from his mother Rachel was the reality of how common situations like Gregory's have become and how often states fail to respond to children living in a legal limbo.
Spurred by high levels of poverty, an increase in the number of struggling single-parent families and epidemics of crack and AIDS, the population of children in foster care has grown by nearly 50 percent since 1985, to 407,000 in 1990.
In addition, reports of child abuse or neglect have tripled over the last decade, to 2.7 million in 1991.
State's Guardian Didn't Even Call
Mark Soler, executive director of the San Francisco-based National Center for Youth Law, said that Gregory's case "shows the failings of the system, because there are thousands of kids in situations much worse than his, needing support but not getting it as they spend their entire childhoods shifting from one placement to another."


Ellen Gwynne, Nikhil Sathe
Ellen Eade Gwynne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Gwynne of Stony Brook, L.I., was married there yesterday to Nikhil Sudhan Sathe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sudhan D. Sathe of Bombay, India.
The Rev.
Kevin P. von Gonten performed the ceremony at All Souls Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Sathe, 24 years old, is the overseas representative for Gallery Guide/Europe in London, a bimonthly directory of European art exhibitions.
She and her husband graduated from Lafayette College, he summa cum laude.


New Lighthouse In Santo Domingo
On Tuesday, the light in the world's largest and most unusual lighthouse will be switched on just outside Santo Domingo to commemorate Columbus's voyages 500 years ago.
The recently completed building, whose design was chosen in a 1931 architectural competition, has been under construction on and off since 1946, although most of the work has been done in the past five years.
It is nearly half a mile long, with walls some 120 feet high.
Its size has brought comparisons to everything from a recumbent dinosaur or pyramid to an ultramodern weapons system.


Facts Are Entertaining
To the Editor:
Janet Maslin, in her roundup of environmental books for children (Aug. 30), thinks she speaks for children when she uses adjectives like "didactic," "scoldy" and "dutiful" to castigate recent books on rain forests and polluted streams and other timely subjects.


Haldore Hanson, 80, Chronicler of China and Victim of McCarthy
Haldore Hanson, a State Department official who was cleared of charges by Senator Joseph McCarthy that he was a Communist sympathizer, died on Sept. 24 at a hospital in Texcoco, Mexico.
He was 80 years old and lived in San Nicholas, Mexico, and Arcola, Va.
He had heart disease and died after a leg operation, his family said.


Business Diary/September 27 - October 2
THE ECONOMY Standing on a Platform of 'Fair-Share Sacrifices'


CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
Lee's comment that all the buildings in Washington are short is left out of historical perspective.
When the Washington Monument was built, it became law that no structure could dwarf it.
With one exception, buildings have conformed with that law.
The other reason for the lack of skyscrapers is strategic.
Anyone at the Pentagon would be happy to explain that.


Regina Souther, Michael Stiuso
Regina Reilly Souther, a daughter of Eugene P. Souther of Muttontown, L.I., and the late Jane A. Souther, was married yesterday to Michael Terence Stiuso, the son of Angela Stiuso of Albertson, L.I., and the late Alfred Stiuso.
Msgr.
Charles A. Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Ms.
Souther, who is 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a saleswoman at Peter DeNatale Jewelers in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is the senior partner at the New York law firm of Seward &amp; Kessel.


Pounding the Pundits
SOUND AND FURY
The Washington Punditocracy and the Collapse of American Politics.
By Eric Alterman. 352 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Kennedy 41, Canarsie 27
John F. Kennedy of the Bronx tried for a 2-point conversion after its first touchdown against Canarsie yesterday, a 1-yard run by quarterback Jose Marimon, but the pass attempt failed.
Little else went wrong for Kennedy after that.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
119.35
120.90
129.70
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4090
1.4835
1.6675
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2500
1.3395
1.1313
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7290
1.7145
1.7375
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$348.25
$349.30
$359.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In the End, Brewers Are Realists
Their destiny was decided a long way from here, so it didn't really matter that the Milwaukee Brewers lost today, just one day from the end of the season and one step short of their dream.
They came close, but the two things they needed most -- a victory here, a Blue Jay loss in Toronto -- never happened.


2 Old Foes Square Off Again in Bid for Congress
THE battlefield is new -- a Congressional district once contained entirely within Westchester, which now, after redistricting, also includes a thin strip of the Bronx as well as most of central Queens -- but the contestants are familiar, certainly to each other, and so are most of the issues.


Has the Dollar, At Long Last, Hit Bottom?
Since 1985, the dollar has gone from Schwarzenegger-like to 98-pound weakling.
Last week it slid to record lows against the Japanese yen and flirted with new lows against the German mark.
The question now is whether the once-almighty dollar will become a slightly heftier 108-pound weakling or an 88-pound pipsqueak.
The dollar could continue its slide if the Federal Reserve cuts rates further to pep up the torpid economy, as many economists predict.
A rate cut would hurt the dollar by encouraging money managers to buy marks or yen as they seek higher-yielding investments abroad.


Zeroing In at Authenticity in Huntington
DORIA is different.
This new storefront in Huntington is not just another of the copycat Italian cafes that dot the Island.
In those restaurants, it does not take the Great Swami to predict 90 percent of the dishes before opening a menu.
At Doria, stewed rabbit, braised cuttlefish, stecchi and cima alla Genovese are among the rarely seen listings.
Doria, which features the cuisine of Genoa, is named for the Doria family, historically the most influential of that city.


An Oasis Rich in Shady Operators
Joseph Del Raso leads the way through a gleaming marble lobby into the spanking new suite that housed College Bound, a chain of scholastic-test coaching centers that was a stock market favorite before collapsing this year.
Now the suite is deserted, half the furniture gone to satisfy debts, with dollies and packing crates ready to carry out the rest.
Peach-colored afternoon sunlight slants through the dust as Mr.
Del Raso walks to a pile of company documents.


Jani A. Aronow, Daniel A. Gerard
Jani Allison Aronow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Aronow of Commack, L.I., was married last evening to Daniel Arthur Gerard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Egon Gerard of New York.
Rabbi Ramie Arian officiated at the Skylight Ballroom in the Puck Building in New York.
Mrs.
Gerard, 35 years old, is the president of Aronow &amp; Pollock Communications, a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Ohio State University.
Her father owns the William Aronow clothing company in New York.
Her mother, Audrey Aronow, is the founder of College Choice Consulting, in Commack, a counseling service for high school students.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Shooting Past AIDS; It's a New Ball Game For Magic Johnson
For a man with the AIDS virus, Magic Johnson is proving that not much else can touch him.
First he told President Bush that the Council on AIDS was not doing enough and he'd just as soon not serve on it, thanks.
Then before the headlines faded, he was back in the news last week announcing his return to professional basketball this season.
The $14.6 million contract with the Los Angeles Lakers is the largest single-season contract ever signed in team sports.


The Stepford Channel
THIS is some kind of weird nightmare.
Watching commercials that are half an hour long.
Epic pitches for makeup, shampoo, hair conditioners, juicers, steamers, fitness machines, rhinestone setters and stain removers.
Or for Jessica Hahn's 900 number, "Love Phone."
Watching them not just between television shows but
as
television shows.
Lulled by their monotone, the spiritual opposite of MTV, and feeling powerless to turn off the smiling famous faces and euphoric, satisfied customers who promise a better, younger, prettier, richer, happier, more personally empowered you.


A Kind of Superdiocese
OPUS DEI
An Investigation Into the Secret Society Struggling for Power Within the Roman Catholic Church.
By Michael Walsh.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. $18.95.


SEPT. 27 - OCT. 3: Start Treaty; Ukraine Becomes The Variable in the Balance Of Nuclear Power
The Senate last week consented to the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, which cuts the numbers of long-range nuclear weapons by a third, and now arms control specialists are turning attention to Ukraine, a country that didn't exist when the United States and the Soviet Union negotiated the reductions.
Nuclear weapons are based in four former Soviet republics: Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus.
Russia, which has operational control over them, is to be the only one to retain any weapons after the treaty and its protocols go into force.
The other republics must give up nuclear arms forever, something no nation has done before.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
FELINE INSPIRATION
RESIDENTS of the Smithtown Health Care Facility were waiting for their therapy.
But their therapist decided to stay home.
"She's expecting," explained the therapist's chauffeur, Joan Bernstein of Center Moriches.
"When I asked her if she wanted to come she said no."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: James B. Stockdale; Scholar Follows Perot Into Heat of Campaign
In the commons at the Hoover Institution here, where the scholars gather each afternoon for coffee and camaraderie, there is widespread agreement that their colleague, James B. Stockdale, is a man of valor and decency who could be unfairly demeaned by the political process that he asked no part of.
Until Ross Perot tapped him as a Vice-Presidential running mate, Mr.
Stockdale, a retired Navy combat pilot and the nation's highest-ranking prisoner of war in Vietnam, was studying Greek Stoic philosophy at this think tank on the Stanford University campus and sharing with the other research fellows the lessons of seven and a half years in captivity.


Prepared to Take On The Office of President
As passing years expand the mosaic of a life, the willingness to accept yet another challenge recedes at a faster rate, faster still for those with long, single-spaced resumes that reflect distinguished careers of service and achievement.
Eventually, most of such people reach a point of idleness at which the body and mind can finally relax, satisfied with a life well done.


Path to Status: Coveted ZIP Codes
LONG ISLANDERS are finding that the fastest and least expensive route to a tonier address is via their ZIP codes.
It is not even necessary to move.
Thanks to a wealth of publications that rate ZIP codes according to median incomes, it is possible to stay put and simply take on the mantel of a more upscale ZIP code.


Streetscapes: 1 Fifth Avenue; A Good Joke Not Well Retold
THE 27-story apartment house at 1 Fifth Avenue is one of the city's most illusionistic statements, where flat brick work is made to appear three-dimensional through false shadow effects.
The cooperative corporation has spent $1.5 million over the last two years repairing and even replacing the deteriorating parapet walls and other masonry.
Now the building has an odd, spotty effect as the new horizontal ranges of brickwork clash with the old vertical detailing that was the basis of the false shadow effects.


CLINTON COUNTRY
It was fun to read Roy Reed's reaction to my bust of Orval Faubus in the corridor of the Arkansas Capitol.
The "impish grin" that Reed saw was a "grimace" to an Arkansas Gazette reporter, and the old Governor himself was never quite sure about the mouth.


Japan's Secret: The Cape Cod Connection
To the Editor:
Regarding your news article "U.S. Sushi? Tokyo Frets. Sushi Boy Says Yes." (Sept. 21):


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Thousand Trails Inc. reports earnings for Year June 30


Long Island Presses for Answers on Breast Cancer
To the women of Long Island, it remains a medical mystery that defies their most dogged investigations, even as it claims more and more of their friends and family.
To scientists around the country, the high rate of breast cancer that alarms women here is no mystery at all, but can be explained by a look at the women themselves: many of them Jewish, affluent, well educated, late to bear their first children, and even then, tending toward smaller families -- all factors that are known to raise a woman's risk of developing breast cancer.


Reviews/Film Festival; Dissecting Cold-War Mentality and a Shrunken Head
Anyone who believes that Americans have a monopoly on conspiracy theories should see the French director Arnaud Desplechin's intricately constructed film, "La Sentinelle." In the movie, which might be described as a medical thriller, a brain that turns out to be symbolic of cold-war mentality is meticulously dissected and analyzed on a laboratory table by a student of forensic medicine.
Without giving away too much, it should suffice to say that among other revelations about the recently ended cold war is the suggestion that it was a cloak-and-dagger game played with boyish relish by participants on both sides of the Iron Curtain.
That idea is hinted at in an early scene in which a lecturer describes the meeting at which Churchill and Stalin sat down together and in a matter of minutes blithely carved up eastern Europe.


Magnetech Corp. reports earnings for Year June 30


Japan's Plan to Ship Plutonium Has Big and Little Lands Roaring
As President of one of the world's tiniest nations, Bernard Dowiyogo of the Republic of Nauru usually follows a simple rule of economic and foreign policy in the Pacific: Stay out of Japan's way.
This weekend, with a touch of trepidation, he violated the rule.
Arriving in Tokyo, the head of the eight-square-mile country of 9,000 people suddenly found himself the spokesman for a growing number of nations telling Japan to keep the largest sealift of plutonium in history out of their territorial waters.
The island is on the equator, 2,500 miles northeast of Sydney, Australia.


BASEBALL Mets Look Back as Yankees Look Forward; No Sign of Panic Despite 1992 Woes
The Mets were bad in 1991, so bad that their season bred a sense of organizational urgency.
An overhaul followed.
The Mets have been worse in 1992, and yet the organization, while humiliated and discouraged and less financially flush, isn't on the verge of panic.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about the anniversary of the birth of Mohandas K. Gandhi misstated the date of India's independence.
It was in 1947, not 1948.


HIGH COURT BEGINS TODAY WITH FOCUS ON NEW COALITION
The Supreme Court opens its new term on Monday facing a docket of cases that will test the contours of the centrist coalition that dominated the last term's dramatic finale three months ago.
On one level, it is hard to imagine how the Justices can simply pick up where they left off in June, given the harsh tone that marked the fracturing of the conservative bloc in the closing days of the term.


International Absorbents reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Oliver Makes It the Day of the Dolphins
Miami led Buffalo, 17-10, at halftime today and the 80,368 fans in Rich Stadium -- the biggest home crowd in the Bills' history -- were no doubt thinking ho-hum, no big deal.
After all, they had seen their beloved Bills erase larger deficits by stampeding into the end zone over and over again with their no-huddle, hurry-up offense.
So why fret now?
True, in the third quarter, after the Dolphins took the kickoff and rolled 82 yards for a touchdown and a 24-10 lead, the fans did begin to squirm.
But hey, two touchdowns down with more than a quarter to play?
Only two touchdowns required for this maniacal, fast-paced Bills attack to even the score?


CHRONICLE
Although Congress has not yet acted on the North American Free Trade Agreement, which will eliminate tariffs on trade between the United States, Canada and Mexico, diplomats of all three governments will be on hand Thursday at the New York Hilton for an awards ceremony.


N.H.L. '92-'93: NORRIS DIVISION
After evolving from the league's worst division into one of its best in the last two seasons, the Norris takes a step backward by welcoming the Tampa Bay Lightning.
What will this expansion team mean for everyone else?


An Appropriate Hero On a Night for Leahy
Theatrically and ironically, the Jets found a new place-kicker, Cary Blanchard, in tonight's 30-21 victory over the New England Patriots while honoring Pat Leahy, who had endured a record 18 seasons as their place-kicker.
"I met Pat before the game," Blanchard said after kicking field goals of 47, 40 and 37 yards.
"He told me, 'You have a good game and maybe you can try to catch me,' meaning his 18-year category."


Softimage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Akihito Is Unhurt in Attack Protesting His China Trip


Abroad at Home; The Cover-Up Crumbles
When a politician tries to cover up his role in a scandal, he may do himself more harm than he would have by telling the truth at the start.
That was so for Richard Nixon in Watergate.
It is turning out the same way for George Bush in the Iran-contra affair.
From the moment the public learned of the affair, in November 1986, Mr.
Bush has maintained that he was not involved -- that as Vice President he was "out of the loop." In particular, he has said many times that he was not aware arms were being sent to Iran in return for release of American hostages in Lebanon.


Mozambique Leader and Rebels Sign Peace Pact
The leaders of the Mozambique Government and the rebels who fought to overthrow it signed a peace treaty today after 16 years of hostilities, formally ending the last of the southern African bush conflicts that flourished in the cold war.
In theory, the agreement between President Joaquin A. Chissano and the rebel leader, Afonso Dhlakama, should make it easier for international relief agencies to bring food to an estimated three million people who face starvation because of war and drought.
Some relief officials say the tragedy could be greater than Somalia's.


Tribal Colleges Helping Renew Indians' Spirit; Schools Are Decrepit
To the Editor:
In one respect your Sept. 20 article about conditions on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation was incorrectly optimistic.
By picturing schools as "the only large and well-kept buildings to be seen" on the reservation, you give the impression that on the education front things are fine.


Being Rich Enough To Join This Team
It requires millions of dollars to own and run a sports team.
But don't fret.
The cream of the current crop of owners is rich enough.
According to the latest annual calculation of the 400 wealthiest Americans by Forbes magazine, 21 own sports teams.
Their aggregate wealth: $18 billion.


Bridge
A useful guideline, virtually ignored by textbooks and teachers, concerns the declarer's play at the first trick when the dummy produces a doubleton queen or jack in the suit led.
In general, he should play low if, and only if, the defenders have exactly two significant honor cards in the suit. (There are two minor exceptions: a doubleton queen when declarer has nothing, and a doubleton jack when declarer has just the ace.)
Special circumstances may dictate special plays.
On the diagramed deal played in the Imp Pairs at the Summer National Championships in Toronto in July, the post-mortem revealed a weird exception to the general rule.


Accounts
*
Terminix International Inc., Memphis, has assigned Temerlin McClain in Dallas its estimated $10 million account.
The decision followed a review among eight agencies that also included the incumbent, Young &amp; Rubicam Detroit; Y. &amp; R. had handled the pest-control company's account for the last 12 years.


Global Investors Faced Twin Perils in Quarter
If the last three months are any evidence, global investors might need to stuff their money into safes and socks to protect their wealth from exchange-rate and stock-market convulsions.
A look back at the last quarter illustrates the twinned risks of foreign recessions and currency markets gone berserk.
Britain?
Stock prices were about even, but the pound's decline gave American investors a 6.4 percent loss.
Germany, home of the mighty mark?
Stocks were off so sharply as the economy slowed that the mark's strength merely limited American losses to 9.6 percent.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Friday described the background of the Fisherman's Friend throat-lozenge account incorrectly.
The account had not been at LCF &amp; L; LCF &amp; L had competed with Bozell New York, which was awarded the account.


KFC Widens Test Of Broiled Chicken
The Kentucky Fried Chicken Corporation is expanding the test of the Colonel's Rotisserie Gold, a line of broiled chicken with complementary side dishes, in what is expected to be an eventual national introduction.
The line, which has been available in Miami and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., since August, is now also being sold in Austin, Tex., and Syracuse.


World Economies


Kmart Is Trying to Fashion New Image for Its Apparel
THE KMART CORPORATION is undertaking an intensive effort to persuade skeptical women that they can find fashionable clothing amid aisles of appliances, weed killer and toothpaste.
To help in this arduous task, one of Kmart's agencies, Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell Inc. in New York, is introducing a series of three sophisticated, soft-sell commercials that seem more like clips from television sitcoms than retail advertising.


A Mixer in Newark For a Good Cause
Some time in the 1970's, JERRY IZENBERG became dismayed because Newark was not the Newark he had grown up in, when fans put aside their neighborhood and ethnic differences to sit side by side at sports events.
"I noticed there was not a single integrated event," recalled Izenberg, a sports writer and author.
"If there was an ARETHA FRANKLIN concert, it would be all black. If JERRY VALE gave a concert, it would be all Italian-Americans."


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday showing the ranking of securities underwriters misstated the source of the data.
It was Securities Data, not IDD Information Services.


FPA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/ Music; Offering Comments on Classicism
The New York Chamber Symphony began its new season on Saturday night by offering various commentaries on the Classical style.
They came from composers of altogether different eras, and as is usual in such cases, the music spoke as much about the commentators as it did about their subject matter.
Half of this well-executed, earnestly projected concert at the 92d Street Y was given over to Mendelssohn, a man who, though separated in time from the world of Haydn and Mozart, created an exquisite tension between it and Romantic effusiveness.
The G-minor Piano Concerto, played by Andre Watts, offered a concise demonstration.
The music operates within the self-imposed limits of the 18th century, but the flights of virtuosity in the outer movements and the aphoristic lyrical phrases of the Andante burst with the spirit of Schumann and Chopin.


Review/Television; Tracking a Nation's Wildlife From Desert to Tundra
If a Russian-American spring comes, can "Nature" be far behind?
The estimable PBS series begins a new season tonight with "Realms of the Russian Bear," a six-hour survey of a vast region, from the remote Arctic to the desert of Central Asia.
George Page, the series' host, is joined as tour guide by Nikolai Drozdov, a professor of natural history at Moscow State University, who is first seen on a boat at the edge of the Caspian Sea, which he calls "a naturalist's paradise." When is the last time you heard the host of a travel show confess that the area being visited was not a naturalist's paradise?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Industrial Midwest; An Inert Economy Is Driving Rust-Belt Voters From Bush
It may be a measure of the economy's dismal performance that stasis is good and that the Middle West, for all its dependence on manufacturing and its all-but-imperceptible growth, is seen as the bright spot in an elusive recovery.
Unemployment in most Middle Western states is below the national average, production outpaces the rest of the nation, however meagerly, and real estate, which never boomed here, has not gone bust.


Black and Hispanic Groups Battle Over Schools Post in Los Angeles
As Los Angeles becomes increasingly a city of minorities, a struggle for political power is intensifying among ethnic groups, and it has focused this week on a battle between a black and a Hispanic candidate for the post of interim Superintendent of Schools.
On Monday, the board of the Los Angeles Unified School District, the nation's second largest, is expected to choose between two deputy superintendents: Ruben Zacarias, who reflects the Hispanic background of 64 percent of the district's 650,000 students, or Sidney Thompson, who is black, like 14 percent of the students.
The elected board, in contrast, is made up of four whites, one black, one Asian and one Hispanic member.


Penril DataComm Networks Inc. reports earnings for Year July 31


Bari L. Parness, Alan Shaffran
Bari Lisa Parness, a daughter of Arlyne and Melvyn Parness of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday to Alan Mitchell Shaffran, the son of Eileen and Stanley Shaffran of Sharon, Mass.
Rabbi Reuben Katz performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Shaffran, 26 years old, is an account manager at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the New York advertising agency.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


After Prison Riot, Brazilians Hear of Police Atrocities
On the first visiting day since the worst prison violence in Brazil's history on Friday, human rights advocates, religious workers and relatives of inmates today brought out stories of executions by military policemen and of mutilations by police attack dogs.
With cleanup operations still going on, officials continued to deny reporters access to the House of Detention, the largest prison in Latin America.
The officials said 111 prisoners died in the violence.
But people who visited the five-story wing where a prisoner uprising and police attack took place offered estimates of prisoners killed ranging from 200 to 400.


Bush's Lawyer Says Nothing New In Recent Iran-Contra Revelations
President Bush's lawyer today dismissed as "stale hokum" recent information casting doubt on Mr.
Bush's statements that he was generally aware of President Ronald Reagan's initiative to sell arms to Iran but did not realize the arms-for-hostage nature of the operation.
Writing in the op-ed page of today's Washington Post, C. Boyden Gray, the President's legal counsel, said there was "nothing new" in the recent evidence, including statements by a former White House aide who said he told Mr.
Bush at several meetings in 1986 that arms were traded for American hostages in Lebanon.


Britain Wary of Using U.S. Air Power in Bosnia
While the British say they are helping to draft a United Nations resolution that would bar Serbian combat flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina , policymakers here are leery about using United States or allied warplanes to enforce an air-exclusion zone over the embattled republic.
Among other things, both the British and the French have indicated in recent weeks that they are concerned that United States air power could put European troops serving with United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia at greater risk of reprisal attacks from the Serbs.
No American troops are serving with the United Nations forces.


Pinkerton's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


A Wild Draw for Fischer and Spassky in Game 15
Bobby Fischer played to win a pawn, and Boris Spassky went for checkmate, but the wild course of their game came to a sudden halt yesterday at Move 33 when Fischer produced a knight sacrifice to force a draw by perpetual check.
Thus, with draws not counting, the score of their exhibition chess match in Belgrade still stands at 5-3, with Fischer ahead,after Game 15.
This was the third consecutive draw.
Ten victories are needed to win the $3.35 million prize.
The loser gets $1.65 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Congressional negotiators agreed on a tax bill offering $27 billion in tax breaks and investment incentives in the next five years, many of them meant to aid depressed cities, help the housing industry and encourage personal savings and industrial investment.
The measure, which the House and Senate will vote on today or tomorrow, puts President Bush in a political bind: should he sign or veto a bill that cuts some taxes and raises others?  [ Page A1. ]
Lacking other ideas, economists have turned to the consumer, that abiding American hero, to provide the push the economy needs.
All that is needed, these experts say, is a surge in confidence.
Then people would loosen the purse strings and start spending again, awakening the economy.  [ D1. ]


Tribal Colleges Helping Renew Indians' Spirit
To the Editor:
While your report on poverty at the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation is largely accurate ("Sad Distinction for the Sioux: Homeland Is No. 1 in Poverty," Sept. 20), I believe there is a major element missing in the picture you presented of life there.


Giuliani Mutes His Criticism of the Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani, who sparred bitterly with Mayor David N. Dinkins over the police rally at City Hall three weeks ago, sought to blunt his criticism of the Mayor, saying that "we should discuss other things for a while."
"Maybe we should shut up about this and talk about how we deal with welfare, how we deal with the school system," Mr.
Giuliani said on the WNBC-TV new program "News Forum," which was recorded on Friday and broadcast yesterday.
"And if we want to talk about his problem, let's talk about things other than a civilian complaint review board; the substantive things that would be mroe than just kind of useless symbolism."


Saztec International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deborah Jones, Jay Gillotti
Deborah Barran Jones and Joseph Peter Gillotti 3d were married yesterday in Weston, Conn.
Jay Shacochis, a justice of the peace in New Fairfield, Conn., performed the ceremony at the Cobb's Mill Inn.
Mrs.
Gillotti, 35 years old, is a senior manager in Stamford, Conn., at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting and consulting concern.
She graduated from the University of Pittsburgh and received a master's degree in accounting from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Marion and Emil Barran of Scranton, Pa.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Mexico's Chief, in a Shift, Meets Two of Castro's Main Foes in Exile
In an extraordinary departure from Mexico's tradition of political support for Cuba, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has met privately with two of the Communist Government's most prominent opponents in exile.
A Mexican official and foreign diplomats linked the meetings to efforts by the Salinas administration to win the support of Cuban-American leaders for the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mexico has negotiated with Canada and the United States.


Essay; Rise, Sir Rebuttal
Moderator: Good evening and welcome to lap one of the American Debatathon, or "Honey, I Shrunk the Candidates."
Listen closely because I won't explain this again.
Our format tonight is to have one panelist direct a question to one of the three candidates.
After a two-minute reply, each of the other candidates will have a one-minute rebuttal, followed by a surrebuttal by the original questionee.


N.H.L. '92-'93: ADAMS DIVISION
How did the National Hockey League spice up its least exciting collection of teams?
It put a low-budget expansion franchise in a small, old building in the very proper capital city of Canada.
Welcome, Ottawa Senators.


Lisa Dale Fluhr, Peter S. Metaxas
Lisa Dale Fluhr, a daughter of Howard and Margaret Fluhr of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Stephen Metaxas, a son of Christopher and Eugenia Metaxas, also of Great Neck.
Justice Alvin Schlesinger of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Metaxas, 25 years old, is an international benefits and compensation analyst at the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Segal Company, a employee-benefits consultant in New York.
Her mother is a program director at Spence-Chapin Services for Families and Children in New York.


CHRONICLE
SINEAD O'CONNOR, the Irish singer, displayed a photograph of POPE JOHN PAUL II and tore it to bits during a live television appearance yesterday.
The event occurred after an a capella song about racism, class differences, child abuse and other topics on NBC's "Saturday Night Live."


Environment Is a Mission At Sematech
Congress took the unusual step over the weekend of mandating that 10 percent of the Sematech computer chip consortium's $100 million 1993 budget be used for environmental research.
The new requirement, dictated by Congress on Saturday after months of pressure by a national environmental group and grass-roots organizations, is an indication of the changing role of the Government-sponsored manufacturing consortium, which was founded five years ago in an attempt to stave off Japanese competition in making semiconductors.


Review/Music; Holding Up a Mirror To Oddities of the Age
On the outskirts of high musical culture, which is itself on the outskirts of mainstream culture, is a small world of serious musical composition.
It was once believed that this world would merge with the mainstream, that audiences would come to know and love the most demanding works of our era.
But I don't think even the composers have that dream anymore.
Most have undoubtedly accustomed themselves to the introversion and dedication required for their variety of musical art.
On Thursday night in Merkin Concert Hall, Speculum Musicae, which has long been one of the most accomplished groups devoted to serious contemporary composition, lived up to its Latin name by holding up a mirror to music in our peculiar age.
In works written during the last decade, the players revealed a wide range of compositional ambitions.


Review/Music; A Cello, a Piano And a Partnership That Keeps Growing
For a decade, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma and the pianist Emanuel Ax have set aside part of every season to perform together.
Individually, they are eloquent, refined musicians who, at their best, have an uncanny ability to illuminate the emotional core of a musical work.
Together, they bring those interpretive and technical abilities to bear and offer the spirit of joint exploration and reasoned discourse that chamber music can be at its best.
At their recital at Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening, a listener who has heard these musicians many times was struck by the ways they have changed, particularly within the confines of their partnership.
Mr.
Ax, in recent years, has grown more assertive and colorful, both in his solo work and in his collaborations with Mr.
Ma.
And although Mr.
Ma still plays with the vigor, clarity and timbral lushness that has always distinguished his playing, one now hears a kind of mellowness and suppleness that was not there in the early days.


INSIDE
Brazil Faulted in Prison Riot
On the first visiting day since the police put down a deadly prison riot in Sao Paulo, families and rights monitors brought out stories of executions by military policemen.
Page A3.
Resolving Police Complaints
Mayor Dinkins proposed letting mediators resolve complaints of misconduct against officers in order to settle some disputes before they reach the police review board.
Page B1.
Peace Pact for Mozambique
The Government of Mozambique signed a peace accord with rebels, formally ending the last bush conflict in southern Africa and opening the way for food shipments.
Page A10.


Youth Dies as Stolen Car Slams Girder in Newark
A 14-year-old boy was killed early yesterday when a stolen car he was driving veered off a sharply curved street in Newark, plowed through a chain link fence and slammed airborne into a steel sign girder.
The police called it a speeding accident, but the victim's family said he was killed by police officers who chased and rammed him with a patrol car.
The police said the victim, Rasheed Ali Sharif, riding alone in a stolen 1992 Buick Century, was killed instantly about 2:40 A.M. when the car, traveling at what witnesses estimated was 75 miles an hour, missed the curve on Quitman Street near Clinton Avenue and crashed.
The authorities said no other car was involved and they denied any police involvement.


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Youth Shoots Girlfriend, Then Kills Himself
Distraught over the break-up of their relationship, a 16-year-old youth shot and wounded his 15-year-old girlfriend in the hallway of her apartment building in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon and then walked several blocks to his house, where he shot and killed himself, the police said.
The youth, identified by the police as Vincent Brown, shot Tricia Thomas once in the head after they argued for about a half-hour in the hallway just outside her first-floor apartment at 520 Crown Street, the victim's mother, Charmaine Thomas, said.


No Headline
Other countries, larger and more powerful than us, impose upon the Pacific peoples the unwanted costs of their technologies, while they extract all of the benefits. -- BERNARD DOWIYOGO, President of the Republic of Nauru, commenting on a Japanese plan to ship plutomium through the Pacific.  [ A6:4. ]


Trading Charges on Iraq
President Bush, criticized by Democrats over his Iraq policies, accused Bill Clinton of trying to arrange loans to Baghdad.
Mr.
Clinton called the assertion "pathetic." Page A16.


Plan Offered On Mediation With Police
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday proposed a new way to resolve some complaints of misconduct against police officers in which disputes could be settled informally and before reaching the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
The Mayor announced his proposal as part of a focused effort to repair relations with the Police Department and to soften the angry political oratory that erupted in the days after a police rally at City Hall three weeks ago.
He mentioned the plan at a Manhattan church service yesterday, but in an awkward moment, he decided not to explain the details after parishioners called for him leave the microphone because they wanted to continue with a program intended to honor Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale.


Giants Lose Their Momentum, and More
Remember those Giants who looked so sharp in the second half against the Dallas Cowboys and the entire game against the Chicago Bears?
Maybe they were an illusion.
Maybe the Giants are not a good team, an opinion some of their players now seem to hold.
For the first half today, they looked good against the Raiders, hitting pass after pass and building a 10-0 lead.
But in the second half, the Giants were outplayed by an 0-4 team, Mark Collins was outmaneuvered on two costly pass plays and the Raiders escaped with a 13-10 victory.
Their winning points came midway through the fourth quarter on Jeff Jaeger's 54-yard field goal, the longest of his career.


William Foley, 80, Heart Surgeon And Cardiovascular Clinic Chief
Dr.
William T. Foley, a cardiovascular specialist who treated Joseph P. Kennedy and the royal family of Sikkim, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
He died of heart failure, his brother-in-law John Cady said yesterday.
Dr.
Foley had been on the staff of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center since 1946.
He was chief of its vascular clinic and clinical professor of medicine from 1984 through 1989.
An endowed chair was established in his name in 1988.
He also maintained a private practice in Manhattan.
Prison-Camp Medical Hero
Dr.
Foley began seeing members of the royal family of Sikkim in 1963.
It was then an independent kingdom and is now an Indian state.
Several times, he made the 8,000-mile trip to treat the late Maharaja Sir Tashi Namgyal and his son, the late Palden Thondup Namgyal, the last two rulers of Sikkim.


U.S. Will Sell 7-Year Notes
Treasury financings this week include the regular auction of three- and six-month bills normally held on Monday and seven-year notes that will be auctioned on Wednesday.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was at 2.61 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 2.77 percent.
In when-issued trading, the seven-year note was being offered at a price to yield 5.81 percent.


Looming Confrontation in Georgia Threatens Peace Efforts
The most volatile region of the former Soviet state seemed headed for a heightened round of violence today as a tentative cease-fire crumbled in the mutinous Georgian province of Abkhazia.
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader and former Soviet Foreign Minister, ended an intensive day of shuttling through the conflict zone with a declaration that he could do no more, and that he might even step down.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines; Increasingly, British Editors Are Setting Tone in the U.S.
IN 1984, as almost everyone in the world must know by now, Tina Brown, editor of The Tatler, left London to come to New York and take over as editor in chief of Vanity Fair.
What no one knew, however, was that a British invasion of American magazines had begun.
Ms.
Brown was followed three years later by Anna Wintour, editor in chief of British Vogue, who took over HG and soon thereafter Vogue.
Over the next few years, British editors took over the helm at The National Review, Conde Nast Traveler, Details, The New Republic, TV Guide and Harper's Bazaar.


And on the Ninth Day of Christmas?
The Giants got as close as you can to a touchdown today without actually scoring a touchdown -- an inch.
Starting from the 1-yard-line with 22 seconds left in the first half, New York set up for eight plays, drew three half-the-distance-to-the-goalpenalties, sat through three timeouts, saw a Raiders defensive end try to become their quarterback and settled for 3 points.


Holocaust Memorial Is Dedicated in White Plains


Collins Takes The Loss Personally
Victimized first for being too short and second for misreading the sidespin of a football, Giants cornerback Mark Collins blamed himself for the 13-10 loss to the Raiders today.
"My fault," he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Pulling Punches on the Environment
Mounds of radioactive dirt and heaps of old plastic milk jugs often turn up as backdrops for the speeches of Senator Al Gore because he puts more emphasis on environmental issues than anyone else who has ever run for national office.
Even so, Mr.
Gore is pulling his punches on the environment as he campaigns for Vice President.
He knows that he is doing it.
He readily admits that he is doing it, and he says that sound political judgment requires it.


Review/Television; Fourth Amendment: Who Is Protected?
The Fourth Amendment of the Bill of Rights may not be the most visually arresting subject for a television documentary, but the producers of "Search and Seizure: The Supreme Court and the Police" have found ways to keep things lively.
In particular, the scenes of police
not
doing some searching and seizing of bad guys point up the tensions still aroused by a safeguard that Roger Mudd, the evening's reporter, calls "central to the American idea of what the Constitutional protections ought to be."
The history of the Fourth Amendment, originally instigated by Boston smugglers as a way of fending off the King's customs agents, is lucidly laid out, and the program moves on, with the help of constitutional scholars, to the development of interpretations of the injunction against unreasonable searches and seizures and the requirement of probable cause for search warrants.
To civil libertarians, the Fourth Amendment remains a basic protection against having police burst into your home or snoop on you at will; to many police officers and others troubled by crime, it has been distorted into a protection for criminals.


Arch Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Late Warnings On Tornadoes Prompt Review
A day after tornadoes touched down in Pinellas Park and Largo, killing three people on Saturday, National Weather Service officials said they would open a review into why the service's office issued no warnings until it was too late.
The tornadoes hopscotched across the Tampa Bay area for hours on Saturday, causing extensive damage in three mobile home parks.
The twisters, with winds up to 150 miles an hour, also struck two housing developments, leveling some homes and damaging others.
The tornadoes were generated by a violent two-day storm in the Gulf of Mexico.


Candidates on Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush  TODAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.) Adm.
James Stockdale  TODAY: 5:30 P.M., ABC, "World News Tonight with Peter Jennings." (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live." TUESDAY: 4 P.M., NBC, "Donahue." (Channel 4 in New York.) WEDNESDAY: 7 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.) THURSDAY: 7 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.) Senator Al Gore  TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live." TUESDAY: 4 P.M., NBC, "Donahue." (Channel 4 in New York.)  Ross Perot  TODAY: 7:09 A.M., NBC "Today," interview. (Channel 4 in New York.)


Review/Pop; The Roches, Revealing a New Edge
In the lyric of "A Dove," the title cut of the Roches' newest album, a bird that symbolizes the songwriter Maggie Roche's propensity for romantic passion alights on her windowsill.
Instead of welcoming the dove, as she used to do whenever it appeared, she summons her cat to scare it away.
Staring out of the window, she watches calmly as it flies into the distance over "the gilded old outrages that we can't forgive," and over the mountains and out of sight.
This wistful folk-pop ballad signals a sea change in the music of the Roches, the New York-based folk-pop trio who have been recording together, for 13 years.
And at their concert at Town Hall on Friday evening -- a rapturously greeted homecoming after an extended national tour -- that change was palpable.


Corrections
A drawing in The Metro Section on Friday with an "Our Towns" column about the right to die carried an erroneous credit.
The artist was Carol Fabricatore.


Roadway Services Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 12


In Honor of Patton, A Jumping Event
This is a double-anniversary year for Gen.
George S. Patton: it is the 80th anniversary of his appearance (fifth place) in the 1912 Olympics pentathlon and the 50th anniversary of his North African campaign that drove out the German army in World War II.
Riding is included among pentathlon events.
Between the wars, he competed at Madison Square Garden horse shows, riding for the Third Cavalry.


A Once Homeless Woman Advances, but Her Suit Does Not
YVONNE McCAIN vividly recalls her first horrible night in a welfare hotel.
"They put us in a room on the 11th floor," she said, adding that both sides of the mattresses were stained all over with urine.
"The floors were soaking wet. I remember calling my mother and asking if she could bring me newspapers to put over the mattresses. I stayed up worrying that the kids didn't climb out the windows because there were no bars.


Transactions: Weekend
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Tony Pena, catcher, to a one-year contract extension through 1993.
National League  SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Announced the contract of Dick Williams, scout, would not be renewed.
Announced the resignation of Brad Sloan, scout.


Pluses and Minuses Of New York Life
A second Manhattan agency is working to help city residents feel good about living in New York again.
Deutsch Inc. is posting about 4,000 signs around town, promoting the benefits of life in New York.
The posters present contrasting black-and-white horizontal columns with descriptions of the city accompanied by plus and minus symbols, the idea being that the positives outweigh the negatives.
The ads all end with a peace symbol, a heart and the letters "n.y."


PVC Container Corp. reports earnings for Year June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about Hillary Clinton's visit to the Bank Street College in Manhattan misidentified the head of the college's board.
He is Joseph A. Shutkin, not Joe Shumkin, and his title is chairman, not president.


Northwest Sports Enterpr. reports earnings for Year June 30


Spinnaker Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crack in Fiesta Bowl Dreams
A few college football dreams just became a little harder to reach.
Florida State's.
Notre Dame's.
And John Junker's.
Junker is the executive director of the Fiesta Bowl, which has made a dramatic rise to prominence in the last two decades through work that turned wishful thinking into reality.
In the first year of the bowl-games coalition, which has set out to establish some order to the selection process, Junker has continued to think big.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot's Quiet Campaign: An Odd Form of Politics
Ross Perot said he was going to be an unconventional candidate.
But so far, his rehabilitated bid for the Presidency has been more like a stealth campaign.
After keeping the nation on tenterhooks for more than a week about his intentions and then restarting his abandoned Presidential campaign on Thursday with much ballyhoo, the unpredictable Texas businessman has virtually dropped out of sight.


Coffeyville Journal; Gunfight Defines a Town and a Family
Guns blazing, the five outlaws ran out of the two banks and into a storm of rifle fire.
Four fell dead, but not before they had slain four of this city's defenders.
Of course, this time the guns held only blanks.
Before bleachers packed with visitors and townspeople, the gunmen were re-enacting the raid that some historians say marked the end of the Wild West.


For NBC, Stress in the Afternoon
The plot line may not have enough intrigue or sex appeal to make it as a soap opera.
But NBC's daytime programming is certainly a story of a relationship under stress.
The relationship in question is between NBC and its stations, and the stress for the network has been so great that Warren Littlefield, president of NBC Entertainment, said, "As far as daytime goes, we're not really a network anymore."


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Ranger Deadline for Kovalev
After the Rangers won their final exhibition game last night at Madison Square Garden, 4-0, against Toronto, General Manager Neil Smith met with rookie Aleksei Kovalev and set an unofficial deadline for signing him by today.
"If we don't get anything done tomorrow, he might as well go back to Moscow and play for Dynamo," Smith said.
"If he's going to go back, maybe he should stay there and develop another season." Smith will talk again today with Kovalev's agent, Martin Heller, but is clearly losing patience with this negotiating stalemate.
"If Kovalev doesn't play here, something's very wrong," Smith said.
Mike Richter made 33 saves, showing no effects of the groin injury that sidelined him for a month last spring and has still not fully healed.
The Rangers' third straight victory gave them a final exhibition mark of 6-2-1.
TENNIS  Becker Ends Title Drought
Second-seeded Boris Becker won his first title in more than seven months, rallying to beat top-seeded Petr Korda, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4, in the Swiss Indoors final at Basel.
Becker won his first tournament since March and his third over all this year, all coming indoors. (AP) Graf Wins in Three Sets: Top-seeded Steffi Graf defeated No. 4-seeded Jana Novotna, 6-3, 1-6, 6-4, to win the Volkswagen Grand Prix at Leipzig, Germany.
Both players had trouble holding serve throughout the match.
Graf won when Novotna's serve abandoned her again at 4-5 in the final set. (AP)
BOATING  Feingold Wins Offshore Crown
The 5-point lead that Superboat driver Ted Sabarese of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., had over his nearest rival, Allen Feingold of Philadelphia, turned into a 56-point deficit yesterday in the Budweiser New York National Offshore Championship on the Hudson.
Feingold's 45-foot deep-vee speedboat, Kid-Apache-Kid, beat Sabarese's 47-foot boat, INXS, to win the national championship for offshore Superboats.
Kid-Apache-Kid finished the offshore season with 2,181 points; INXS's point total was 2,125 points.
In third place over all with 1,913 points was Powerboat Marine Products, a 40-foot Superboat catamaran owned by Russell Wilkin of Bluffton, Ind.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DIAL 'M' FOR MOVIES
The nation's first video dialtone system, which will transmit cable television programming over telephone lines, is expected to go into service in three large apartment buildings in Manhattan early next year.
The companies planning the yearlong test of the new system -- New York Telephone and Liberty Cable Television -- say it will let subscribers choose what they want to watch when they want to watch, rather than subjecting them to the rigid schedules of traditional broadcast channels, cable systems and pay-per-view movies.
The companies say this would be possible with a device they call a "video jukebox," which will let viewers use a telephone line to dial an on-screen menu from which they can select programs.
B3.
ACCOUNTS OF CROWN HEIGHTS
In two weeks of sometimes chilling testimony in Supreme Court in Brooklyn, seven police officers, one sergeant and two detectives have each described a slightly different moment during the chaotic night in Crown Heights when Yankel Rosenbaum, a visiting rabbinical scholar, was stabbed to death.
But almost all of the witnesses said they heard Mr.
Rosenbaum, who was lying bleeding on a car, identify the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., as his assailant.
Page B3.


Pure Tech International Inc. reports earnings for Year June 30


Ellen Hopkins, Thomas J. Kuhn
Ellen Hopkins, a daughter of Carol Stutz Hopkins of Evanston, Ill., and James D. Hopkins of Tucson, Ariz., was married yesterday to Thomas Jeremy Kuhn, the son of Robert C. Kuhn of New York and the late Judy S. Kuhn.
Theodore Diamond, a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn., performed the ceremony at the couple's weekend home in Weston, Conn.
The bride graduated from Northwestern University and completed the premedical program at Columbia University in August.
Her father is the owner of Chicago Temporary in Chicago and Gold Star Temporary in Phoenix, temporary-employment agencies.
Her mother is a special-education teacher and the chairman of the O'Shaughnessy Learning Development Program at Loyola Academy in Wilmette, Ill.


Wolf Financial Group reports earnings for Year June 30


Fame or Farm? Belmont Decided
Sky Classic and Rubiano were still streaking along the road to the Breeders' Cup yesterday after their ringing victories at Belmont Park on Saturday.
But Dixie Brass and Fly So Free led a string of star horses who came out of the weekend headed for farm or pasture.
And Furiously headed a group of others waiting to see what happens next.
It was a weekend that decided whether horses would take strides toward divisional championships or call it a year.
And it set the stage for an even bigger day of racing next Saturday when Belmont runs seven stakes in its final dress rehearsal for the seven Cup races on Oct. 31 at Gulfstream Park in Florida.


CHRONICLE
Yes, hard times hit everyone -- even royalty.
There is talk around Parliament about shrinking payments to the family for performing their public duties, The Times of London reported last week.
The prospect, which is not being confirmed by the Palace or the Government, is not being considered without QUEEN ELIZABETH II's consent, the report said.
Buckingham Palace and the Treasury, the report said, are studying how to reduce the $14 million annual pay to the Queen and her family.


Bigger the Athlete, The Smaller the Role
Movie Notes: Sometimes you have to look quickly to catch sports heroes on the silver screen.
Three current films give small roles to people from the world of sports:
"Honeymoon in Vegas" -- NICHOLAS CAGE is playing cards with a collection of gamblers.
One of them chews on a napkin.
He is not identified.
But wait.
Chewing.
Nervousness.
Heavily lidded eyes.
Las Vegas.
That's right, it's JERRY TARKANIAN, the former University of Nevada-Las Vegas coach now calls the San Antonio Spurs his team.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In an interview yesterday on "Larry King Live" when asked about the perception that he does not care about the average American.
"It troubles me because I very much care. And I believe I am totally in touch, and I think the programs that I have tried to get through would have helped families -- would have, and I use that tense -- would have helped families if I could have been more persuasive with the Congress, or if the Congress has not made a decision the way we are going to win the White House is to block Presidential initiatives.


Not Just Another First Monday
This first Monday in October, the day set by law for the Supreme Court to open its new term, finds the justices facing a slim docket of cases.
The quiet has made the most compelling issue the Court's composition and how it may soon change.
Justice Harry Blackmun, 84 next month, put himself atop the list of short-timers, saying in his last opinion, "I cannot remain on this Court forever." Justice Byron White, a fit 75 and a member for 30 years, will compete for longevity records unless he retires.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, 68, has indicated that serving his lifetime on the bench is not his compelling wish.


What's in a Logo? 100 Years of Stanley
Lord Stanley, called back to England, never saw a Stanley Cup game.
But the trophy he donated in 1893 for Canada's best hockey team has endured.
And to celebrate the centennial, National Hockey League players will open the season tomorrow night wearing logos depicting a player triumphantly hoisting the silver.


Raising Money For Coding System
The American Association of Advertising Agencies and the Association of National Advertisers are undertaking a rare joint effort, to raise money to buy the Industry Standard Coding Identification System for television commercials.
At a news conference scheduled for Wednesday in New York, the two trade organizations plan to discuss details of their new Coalition to Preserve I.S.C.I., formed with the support of the Network Television Association, the Cable Television Advertising Bureau and the Television Bureau of Advertising.


Issues Expected to Be Offered This Week
The following equity offerings are expected during the week beginning today:
Alpha-Beta Technology Inc., Worcester, Mass., an initial public offering of 2 million common shares.
Alex.
Brown.
Archive Corp., Costa Mesa, Calif., 5 million common shares, Bear, Stearns.


A Currency Quandary; Debate Over Fixed vs. Floating Rates Is High on European Leaders Agenda
Why did no crisis erupt when the dollar plunged recently to record lows against the yen?
Why did a huge crisis erupt when the pound slipped a few percent against the mark?
The answer holds plenty of pointers about the future of Europe's -- and the world's -- monetary system.
For when the European Community's prime ministers meet next week to discuss how to stabilize their wobbly currencies, the pros and cons of floating and fixed rates will certainly be on the agenda.


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Year July 31


Where They Stand on the Deficit
The annual Federal budget deficit, the difference between what the Government spends and the tax revenue it receives, is now about $330 billion and is projected to rise to $500 billion by the turn of the century.
The deficit began mushrooming in the 1980's because income taxes were cut deeply under Ronald Reagan, while spending increased substantially, especially for Medicare and Medicaid.


Claimed Visitation Draws 5,200 People
Nearly 5,200 people throughout the day today visited the house of Joseph Januskiewicz, the Marlboro Township man who has said he sees an apparition of the Virgin Mary on the first Sunday of each month.
In the evening, about 2,000 people filled Mr.
Januskiewicz's backyard, many to worship before a statue of the Virgin and to wait for a sign that she had appeared.
At 9:30 P.M., the time when Mr.
Januskiewicz said he sees the vision, he came out of the garage, prayed silently, handed a rose to a woman in a wheelchair and quietly returned to his house.
Mr.
Januskiewicz, a 54-year-old draftsman, has been instructed by Catholic officials not to make announcements to the worshipers.


Susan C. Wittlin, Shepard B. Kay
Susan Carol Wittlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Wittlin of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday to Shepard Gary Kay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kay of North Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Harvey L. Goldschieder performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Kay, 26 years old, is a pediatric nurse at Schnieder Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She graduated from Curry College and is a master's degree candidate in parent-child health at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
Her father is the president and owner of Sentry Electric Corporation, a manufacturer of street lighting in Freeport, L.I.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Fueled by Words Alone, Radio Ads Are Nastier
When the new Bush campaign commercial attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton's credibility went on television on Friday, the Presidential campaign by some measures reached a new level of nastiness.
By some measures, though, it was already there.
Two weeks ago, the Bush campaign began broadcasting advertisements in Michigan accusing Mr.
Clinton of equivocating on everything from his draft history to his position on higher taxes.
Those commercials, even more biting in tone than President Bush's new ones, were broadcast only on radio.


Republicans Under Pressure on Cable Bill Veto


D'Amato and Abrams: Tit-for-Tat War on Ethics
Forget recession, health care and the environment.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams have managed to make the New York campaign for the Senate a contest of "Really, Bob!" vs.
"Come on, Al!" -- a tit-for-tat war of television commercial tag lines, listing each other's supposed sins.
That is just how Mr.
D'Amato wants it since he has been under fire for years over his personal ethics and faces a tough fight for a third term.
Mr.
Abrams, adopting the prevailing political wisdom that an attack left unrebutted is an attack that might ring true, has responded in kind.


Court Isn't Place for Decisions on Dying
To the Editor:
An influential New York appeals court rules that the Elbaum family must pay more than $100,000 for treatments provided to a permanently unconscious woman who, while competent, clearly and consistently expressed her wish to refuse the interventions (news article, Sept. 24).
Perhaps even more unsettling than this specific ruling is the court's expression of it.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY  Carolina Fght Corp Central Vt Pub Svc Corp Weyerhaeuser Co TUESDAY  Cipsco Inc Great Atlantic &amp; Pac Tea Hillenbrand Inds WEDNESDAY  Houston Inds Inc Murphy Oil Corp Rite Aid Corp Southwestern Energy THURSDAY  Ford Mtr Co Nwnl Cos Puget Sound Pwr&amp;Lt Co Shelby Williams Inds Unum Corp Wisconsin Pub Svc FRIDAY  Mercury Fin Co Montgomery Str Inc Secs NY St Elec&amp;Gas Corp Union Elect Co


Vote Is Disrupted On Assembly Seat
Balloting irregularities last night disrupted the selection of a Democratic candidate to run for the State Assembly seat on the Upper West Side of Manhattan being vacated by Jerrold Nadler.
Union leader William Nuchow was initially declared the winner over Scott Stringer by a vote of 9,918 to 9,900 in balloting by Democratic committee members.
Mr.
Nadler is giving up the Assembly seat to run for the seat in Congress that was held by Ted Weiss until his death on Sept. 14.


Judge Removed From Tobacco Case Was Only Doing His Duty
To the Editor:
The decision removing Judge Lee Sarokin from a cigarette-liability suit is more questionable than your editorial topic ("Justice Beclouded," Sept. 10) recognizes.


In Year of the Woman, The Europeans Prevail
The Solheim Cup competition between America's top women stars and a European band of golfing vagabonds was supposed to be a rout.
Incredibly, it was.
Against all odds (actually, 6 to 1 in the British betting parlors), in the face of greater experience and presumably, ability, a European team on a mission for recognition won seven of 10 singles matches today to emphatically wrest the female version of the Ryder Cup away from a strangely overwhelmed United States team by the runaway score of 11 1/2 to 6 1/2.


Brooks's Quintets: A k a The Devils
Herb Brooks likes to orchestrate miracles.
He succeeded in 1980 with the United States Olympic team and now his inventive mind wants to create five-man units with the Devils.
Normally, a National Hockey League coach will employ four forward lines and three defensive pairings and will often match them at random.
But Brooks intends to match the same defensemen with the same forwards as much as possible.


Will the Real Braves' Pitchers Step Forward?
Do not pay attention to the statistics, their manager says.
But how can you avoid the statistics?
John Smoltz, whom Bobby Cox has named to pitch Atlanta's first game of the National League pennant playoff against the Pittsburgh Pirates, has won only one of his last 11 starts while losing six and compiling a 3.66 earned run average.


Go-Video reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Waiting for Consumers to Spend
Sometimes a burst of consumer spending lifts the nation out of recession.
Sometimes a pickup in housing construction does the trick.
Sometimes business investment gives the economy the needed push forward.
And with the dollar so weak, many economists and Government officials have been hoping that exports, for the first time, will pave the way to a robust recovery.


Reviews/ Music; A Passion Provoked By a Musical
When Maureen McGovern was in the eighth grade, she recalls near the end of her new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars, she became so enamored of the musical "West Side Story" that she saw it 10 times.
Three decades later, that adolescent enthusiasm still animates her exceptional performances of three songs from the show.
Singing a medley of "Somewhere," "One Hand, One Heart" and "I Have a Love," Ms.
McGovern projects a power and sweetness that more than match the songs' signature performances by the young Carol Lawrence.
And at last Tuesday night's opening show of an engagement that extends through Oct. 24, it deservedly drew a sustained ovation.


Reviews/Film Festival; Taking Liberties With the World
Although their styles and moods are dissimilar, all three films in the New York Film Festival's program "Avant-Garde Visions," at 9 tonight at Alice Tully Hall, exalt the physical world in ways that delight the eye.
Ernie Gehr's "Side/Walk/Shuttle," the most abstract and pictorially intriguing of the three films, depicts San Francisco as a semi-abstract cityscape viewed from upside down, sideways and overhead, with a soundtrack that fades in and out.
His 40-minute film interweaves conventional views of the city with long sustained shots from carefully arranged perspectives in which the constantly moving camera slides slowly down the sides of buildings against whose facades the streets below form shifting abstract patterns.


Meeting Fails to Derail Boycott of School
School officials last night failed to persuade the leaders of the Eastern District High School P.T.A. to cancel their boycott of the Brooklyn school today to protest what they say are overcrowded, dangerous conditions.
Leaders of the Parent-Teacher Association emerged from a three-hour meeting with Deputy Chancellor Stanley Litow at 7 P.M. saying that the Board of Education had not addressed their concerns and that the boycott would proceed.


Rise in Single Parenthood Is Reshaping U.S.
As Janice Edwards drives home after work to the small, neatly kept house she bought last year, she proudly tells the story of how she has kept her family going since her husband left her five years ago, just before their second child was born.
"I thought we'd fall apart with no man there," she said.
"There was a time I had no money for formula, no gas, no water, no electricity, and I didn't know what in the world we would do."


Victoria Creations reports earnings for Year June 30


FATE OF TAX BILL IS FAR FROM CLEAR
Congressional negotiators have agreed on a tax bill that offers more than $27 billion in tax breaks and investment incentives in the next five years, many of them meant to aid depressed cities, help the housing industry and encourage personal savings and industrial investment.
The measure, which the conferees are expected to present to the House and Senate this week, puts President Bush in a political bind: should he sign or veto a bill that cuts some taxes and raises others, including some of each proposed by his Administration?
To pay for the tax breaks and incentives, Congress raised dozens of taxes and curtailed some deductions, just the kind of approach that Mr.
Bush has so often criticized Gov.
Bill Clinton for approving.
Bush Stance Hard to Predict
Some provisions that increase taxes were proposed by Congress, like the limit on the deductibility of moving expenses for people changing jobs.
Others were proposed by the Administration, like changes in quarterly tax payments by corporations and the self-employed.


BASEBALL Mets Look Back as Yankees Look Forward; 1993 Shuffles Are Seen in Bronz
The sentence in the press notes was the perfect warning for the Yankees: There are 181 days until Opening Day against Cleveland April 5, 1993.
That leaves six months for the Yanks to mold a raggedy operation into a smooth pennant contender.
Can it be done?
Can the Yankees surge from fourth place to first place?
Maybe.
Two teams steamed from worst to first last season so there is at least some precedent for dreary clubs turning into dreamy clubs.


Staodyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


TV Via Telephone Lines Planned for Manhattan
The nation's first video dial tone system, which will transmit cable television programming over telephone lines, is expected to go into service in three large apartment buildings in Manhattan early next year.
The companies planning the yearlong test of the new system -- New York Telephone and Liberty Cable Television -- say subscribers will be able to choose what they want to watch when they want to watch, rather than being held to the schedules of traditional broadcast channels, cable systems and pay-per-view movies.


Haldore Hanson, 80, Chronicler Of China and Victim of McCarthy
Haldore Hanson, a State Department official who was cleared of Senator Joseph McCarthy's accusation of being a Communist sympathizer, died Sept. 24 at a hospital in Texcoco, Mexico.
He was 80 years old and lived in San Nicholas, Mexico, and Arcola, Va.
He had heart disease and died after a leg operation, his family said.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Comerica Bank, Detroit, a subsidiary of Comerica Inc., is offering $150 million of 7 1/4 percent subordinated notes due in 2002 at 99.598 to yield 7.307 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.
*
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., is offering $100 million of 7.85 percent debentures due in 2012 at 100 through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Reverence and Rigidity in the New Age
The Age of Aquarius just keeps dawning and dawning.
In the 1960's, it showered good vibrations on the mystics and militants of Haight-Ashbury.
And in the 1990's, it enlightens the pockets of the traveling merchants and messiahs who buy exhibition space at one cosmic convention after the next.
At a glance, the Whole Life Expo at the New York Hilton over the weekend appeared to be a parody of a New Age gathering.
People wore titanium pyramids on their heads and convention badges on their lapels.
Vendors hawked crystals, tribal drums and the speedy removal of demons (Mastercard accepted).


N.H.L. '92-'93: PATRICK DIVISION
Many veteran fans of the National Hockey League still pine for the old six-team league that existed before expansion 25 years ago, when the talent level was high, the franchises were stable, the cities were geographically convenient and rivals played so often that visitors weren't really strangers.
Since 1967, the league has expanded to four times its former size.
It's hard to remember who plays right wing on the fourth line of the San Jose Sharks.
And even some of the league's brightest stars might visit only once each season.


Small Town, U.S.A.
Not long ago, a New Yorker looking for a simpler world journeyed to a small town.
This town had once resembled those on Christmas cards and in children's books: here the grocery store, there the fishmonger, the shoe repair shop to the north and the newsstand to the south.
All one needed to sustain life was concentrated in a few blocks -- unless one was looking for madder music and stronger wine, in which case, forget it.
Now the town looks more than ever like something on a Christmas card: Money's moved in and touched up the houses, resodded the lawns, gone wild with hydrangeas.
But this is no longer a simpler world, with necessities at hand.


Rheometrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suddenly, 148 Million Capitalists
Last week, Russia began issuing every adult and child a voucher worth 10,000 rubles, or about $50.
Next year, they'll have to decide whether to sell the vouchers for cash, invest them in a mutual fund or use them to buy shares in the thousands of factories being put up for sale.
In other words, every Russian will become a capitalist.


Corrections
A television review on Friday about "A Question of Attribution" on "Masterpiece Theater" misidentified a British spy.
He was Guy Burgess, not Anthony Burgess.


Wheelchair Athletes Head to Nationals
Wheelchair athletes have competed along with runners, but judged separately.
There even has been a 10-kilometer race for wheelchair athletes only.
But until now, there had never been a wheelchair event this distance that also doubled as the national championship.
The event is called the Riverside Rumble and it will be staged in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., on Sunday.


Police Word Is at Issue In Killing In Crown Hts.
In two weeks of sometimes chilling testimony in Supreme Court in Brooklyn, seven police officers, one sergeant and two detectives have each described a slightly different moment during the chaotic night in Crown Heights when Yankel Rosenbaum, a visiting rabbinical scholar, was stabbed to death.
But almost all of the witnesses said they heard Mr.
Rosenbaum, who was lying bleeding on a car, identify the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., as his assailant.


Books of The Times; Whatever Happened to the Frank Capra Spirit?
Hollywood vs.
America Popular Culture and the War on Traditional Values By Michael Medved 386 pages.
HarperCollins. $20.
"Hollywood vs. America," Michael Medved's ack-ack attack of a book, addresses an issue that seems to be weighing on many minds these days: the growing disparity between the values upheld by traditional Americans and what Mr.
Medved and some others see as the foul-mouthed, obscene, excessively violent, unpatriotic, antireligious, antifamily, antiauthoritarian, antiheroic, flat-out ugly and negative picture of life in this country that Hollywood films, network television and popular music now insist on portraying.


Market Place; Sears Investors Are Uneasy Lot
PITY those investors who get what they want.
That's the moral of today's story of the continuing financial squabbles at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
Sears should be a company whose stock is riding high.
After all, last week the company finally succumbed to more than four years of shareholder pressure and agreed to spin off a large portion of its financial network.
That includes its securities business, Discover credit card, real estate operations and 20 percent of its Allstate insurance subsidiary.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 13


Bookstores' Growing Rival: Bargains on the Curb
At the Shakespeare &amp; Company bookstore at 81st Street and Broadway, Stephen King's latest best seller, "Gerald's Game," sells for the publisher's list price of $23.
Two blocks north at Barnes &amp; Noble, the book is discounted to $16.10.
But a block south from Shakespeare, on the very same stretch of Broadway on the Upper West Side, Ottavio Quaalini is selling the book from a tabletop for $14.


Caroline J. Taub and Jeffrey L. Marcus
Caroline Joy Taub, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell J. Taub of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Louis Marcus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay M. Marcus of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Morris S. Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Mrs.
Marcus, 25 years old, is the manager of international publicity and artist relations for Atlantic Records in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the president of M. J. Taub Associates Inc., a business appraiser in Forest Hills.
Her mother, Phyllis B. Taub, is a sixth-grade teacher at Public School 19 in Brooklyn.


Dance in Review
Duquesne University  Tamburitzans  Fashion Institute of Technology
Thanks to the Duquesne University Tamburitzans, it's easy to believe that Eastern Europe begins in Pittsburgh.
When the Tamburitzans performed on Saturday night, they took their audience from Hungary into Serbia, Croatia and Bulgaria, then farther eastward through Georgia and Azerbaijan and on to Siberia.
At every stop on this theatrical journey, the troupe's dancers, singers and instrumental musicians looked at home.
Yet they were all students at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh.


Navy Deactivates Sparrow Missiles in Inquiry
The Navy has restricted the use of Sea Sparrow air-defense missiles throughout the fleet pending an investigation into the accidental United States firing on a Turkish warship on Friday.
Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the chief of naval operations, on Saturday directed the Naval Sea Systems Command to conduct a full review of the missile system, its maintenance and operating procedures and operator training.


Hands Join In Newburgh To Protest Klan Picnic
Religious and civic leaders and several thousand residents demonstrated in the heart of this old riverfront city today to protest a gathering of neo-Nazis and members and sympathizers of the Ku Klux Klan three weeks ago in the neighboring Town of Newburgh.
The theme was racial and religious unity against demagogy.


Real Life Intrudes On a Film On Chess
It was thrilling news for chess fans when they heard that Bobby Fischer would come out of retirement to play his old rival, Boris Spassky.
For Scott Rudin, the producer of a Paramount film called "Searching for Bobby Fischer," the timing left something to be desired.
"I picked up the newspaper, grabbed my heart and did a Redd Foxx take," said Mr.
Rudin, who was in the chess corner of Washington Square Park in Manhattan, where the movie was being shot.
"We were halfway through the filming and I thought, are we going to have to change the story?"
Panic subsided quickly.
A few scenes in which the characters discuss Mr.
Fischer's long absence from the chess world would have to be rewritten.
But the heart of the film, which stars Joe Mantegna, Larry Fishburne, Joan Allen and Ben Kingsley, would not be affected.
Based on the book of the same name by Fred Waitzkin, "Searching for Bobby Fischer" tells the story of Mr.
Waitzkin's chess-prodigy son, Joshua, who discovered his calling in Washington Square Park, and describes the joys and sorrows of being a chess parent.


Say 'Ah'? Sorry, Wrong Office


Justine Scancarelli and John Diamond
Justine Cara Scancarelli, a daughter of Eugene L. Scancarelli and Judge Adrienne H. Scancarelli of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Adrian Diamond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy W. Diamond of Coventry, England.
Judge Elaine Slobod, the senior resident judge for New York State Family Court in Orange County, performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Diamond, 28 years old, is the customer-services manager in Montvale, N.J., for the Radstone Technology Corporation, a manufacturer of computer assemblies, where her husband is a computer-applications engineer.
Her father is a lawyer in Mount Vernon.
Her mother is the supervising judge for the Ninth District of New York State Family Court, in White Plains.


Review/Theater -- Remembrance; Turmoil and Forgiveness in Belfast
Beneath the sudden clashes of temperament, Graham Reid's "Remembrance" has an elegiac gentleness in telling the story of two disparate families in Northern Ireland.
One, headed by Milo O'Shea, as a retired British soldier, is Protestant; the other, headed by Frances Sternhagen, is Roman Catholic.
To a background of violent political conflict, the two, widower and widow, are brought together by their loneliness and their decency.
Each is too old to be inimical to anyone.
Their adult offspring are an entirely different matter.
"Remembrance" (at the John Houseman Theater, after a 1990 production at the Irish Arts Center) is rueful rather than explosive, although the past carnage haunts the present.
Things are momentarily peaceful in Belfast, but each family has lost a son in the turmoil and each regards its own as an innocent victim.
The play's political aspects are more complex than they seem, as is the relationship between Mr.
O'Shea and Ms.
Sternhagen.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Says Clinton Tried to Aid Iraq
In an apparent attempt to shift some of the political heat over the Bush Administration's policies toward Iraq before the Persian Gulf war to Gov.
Bill Clinton, President Bush tonight accused the Democratic Presidential nominee of trying to arrange agricultural loans to Baghdad.
In an interview on the CNN program "Larry King Live," Mr.
Bush said that he was unaware of any illegal sales of military equipment to Iraq and that it was "fallacious" to suggest that his Administration had deliberately built up Iraq's military capability as a counter to Iran, as has been suggested in some published reports.


When Eagles Get Tough, Allen Gets Tougher
It figures that Eric Allen grew up playing big-play football with the big boys late into the evening under bright lights on 42d Street.
No, not in Times Square, mind you, but 42d Street in rugged southeast San Diego, where it was nothing for Allen to dive for the ball and suffer scrapes from the pavement and to line up against friends twice his size and age.
"There would be about 18 of us with ages varying from about 8 to 18 years old," Allen said.
"Even when I was 10 or so, I was always the first or second player picked for a team. It was me and Rocky Gaylord. He was probably better than I was.


Tecnol Medical Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


William Chapin, 88, Authority Manager And Moses Protege
William S. Chapin, a former general manager of the New York State Power Authority, died on Friday at the Brookhaven Memorial Hospital Medical Center in East Patchogue, L.I.
He was 88 years old and lived in Mastic Beach, L.I.
He died of heart failure, his son Richard said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  DOZENS DEAD IN DUTCH CRASH  An Israeli cargo jet crashed into an apartment complex in a crowded suburb of Amsterdam, setting off a firestorm.
At least 12 bodies were recovered within hours after the crash, but the toll was expected to rise steeply as rescue workers dug through the burning rubble.
A1  FEARS OF JAPAN'S PLUTONIUM  The President of the tiny Pacific nation of Nauru found found himself as the spokesman for a growing number of nations telling Japan to keep the largest sealift of plutonium in history out of their waters.
A1


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; With Reservations, Clinton Endorses Free-Trade Pact
Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that he endorsed the North American Free Trade Agreement, but also said that as President he would not sign it in its current form.
The Democratic Presidential nominee said an acceptable trade agreement should include provisions that would toughen environmental and worker-safety standards in Mexico and allow the President to establish a commission to monitor the agreement's impact.


Review/Television; Jack Benny Depicted As Comic Prince? Well!
In what could serve as a handy supplement to "Jack Benny: The Radio and Television Work," published last year by Harper Perennial in conjunction with an exhibition at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York, Home Box Office is offering an hourlong documentary called "Jack Benny: Comedy in Bloom." It makes its debut tonight at 10.
As perhaps the ultimate minimalist in American comedy, Benny was the master of silences.
Timing is all, and he was its master.
The classic illustration was the sketch in which a stickup man confronts the notorious penny pincher and demands, "Your money or your life." As audience laughter builds steadily, a long pause threatens to become an endless wait before Benny whines the boffo punch line: "I'm thinking! I'm thinking!" As the writer Larry Gelbart observes in the museum book, "Before Jack Benny, who would have believed anyone could succeed as a mime on radio?"


William McGuire, 66, Lawyer for L.I. Village
William L. McGuire, a longtime lawyer and the Village Attorney of Asharoken, L.I., died on Saturday at his home in Northport.
He was 66 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his son Mark said.


U.S. Social Well-Being Is Rated Lowest Since Study Began in 1970
With reports of child abuse and teen-age suicide on the rise, and with older Americans spending more of their income on health care, the nation's overall social well-being has skidded to its lowest point since the study began in 1970, according to an index tabulated by social scientists at Fordham University that was released today.
The annual study, "The Index of Social Health," seeks to evaluate the cumulative effect on Americans of 16 major social problems, among them unemployment, drug abuse and highway deaths linked to alcoholism.
In an effort to quantify the overall impact of those problems, the study boils down reams of national statistics, most of them gathered by the Federal Government, into a single, annual measure on a scale of zero to 100.


It's a Challenge to Hit It Where the Pirates Ain't
The double into the left-field corner is a single instead.
The shot to right-center is a 395-foot out.
The single through the right side somehow winds up an inconsequential 4-3 notation by the official scorer.
It's defense at work, and the psychological effect of it all is subtle but relentless.
It grinds on the opposition, and it propels the Pirates.
It has been an integral component in the calculus of hits and pitching and double plays and double steals that has secured the club's third straight National League East title.
And so it should come as no shock if it helps decide the National League Championship Series against the Braves.


Wisconsin Public Service Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos to July 31


Moyco Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


Pocket Protection Becomes an Issue
LEIGH STEINBERG, an agent for quarterbacks (he has 23 as clients), also does work for free.
It's not quite pro bono, but he is offering a weekly column to California newspapers.
His latest is about protecting quarterbacks.
In the last few weeks, he has seen some of his clients take a beating: JOHN FRIESZ of the Chargers is out for the year, while the Jets' BROWNING NAGLE and JEFF GEORGE and JACK TRUDEAU of the Indianapolis Colts have been sidelined for various injuries.


Investors Focusing On the Fed
Bond investors will be Fed-watching, Fed-listening and Fed-sniffing this week, trying to detect the Fed's presence in each of the market's jiggles and wiggles.
So many strategists expect Federal Reserve policy makers to ease interest rates after they meet tomorrow that bonds are already priced as if the central bank had cut its rates.
Even Friday's news that payrolls had fallen only half as much as expected left the credit market nearly flat after a sharp run-up on Thursday.


N.H.L. '92-'93: SMYTHE DIVISION
Even before Wayne Gretzky's sore back forced him to the sidelines, the Los Angeles Kings were a declining team in a declining division.
With No. 99 out and the San Jose Sharks no longer a charming novelty, a fault line is becoming more obvious in the southwestern corner of this transcontinental league.
By default, the Vancouver Canucks are the best in the West, which may excite fans in British Columbia and draw blank stares on Madison Avenue.
Vancouver's surprising first-place finish last season said as much about the weakness of the division as it did about the talents of Pat Quinn, the president, general manager and coach.
The rookie of the year was Pavel Bure of the former Soviet Union.
He excites a crowd like Bobby Hull with his rushes up the ice.
In goal, Kirk McLean, like his team, must put two good seasons together.
Petr Nedved, on wing or at center, must start living up to his press clippings.
Trevor Linden?
He is wonderful just as he is, although Quinn might move him from wing to center.


Details Magazine Defies Fickle Ads and Fashions
The success of Details, the two-year-old newcomer to men's fashion magazines, presents a compelling contrast to last week's demise of M magazine.
M is being closed because, it contends, there is not enough advertising in the men's luxury marketplace to go around.
But Details' entry into the field just as advertising had begun its plunge shows that the right magazine at the right time can succeed -- if it has enough money behind it.


Court Isn't Place for Decisions on Dying; Make a Living Will
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 24 news article on a New York appeals court ruling that the family of a comatose patient must pay for life-prolonging treatment even if the family had tried to have that treatment stopped clearly shows the need for all New Yorkers -- and Americans -- to fill out a living will, which spells out your wishes regarding life-sustaining medical treatment, and/or a health care proxy form, which designates another person to make medical decisions if you are unable to communicate.


Sports of The Times; Thwarting the Dream Team's Nightmare
OUTSIDE the bus, green lights flashed atop police cars and on the handlebars of police motorcycles.
Above, a police helicopter rumbled.
But despite its police escort, the Dream Team's bus was snarled in the Barcelona traffic.
"I'm getting off," Magic Johnson said. "I'm taking the subway back to the hotel."


Nice Journal; Mayor Absconds, and the City Feels Abandoned
With the Promenade des Anglais now free of summer crowds, Nice is back in character, able once more to show off the discreet and slightly decadent elegance that long appealed to Russian princes and English lords and to this day still draws Arab sheiks and Italian millionaires.
Yet to many a Nicois, this ancient Mediterranean port is not what it was.
It has lost its soul, it has lost its way, it has lost its clout, they say, because it has lost its Mayor.
"Nice without Medecin," Jean-Claude, a newspaper vendor, said mournfully, "is not Nice."


Europeans Bemused Over 'Family Values'
To the Editor:
The Republican Party's campaign for "traditional family values" under the aegis of Vice President Dan Quayle seems to Europeans (of whom I am one) to be just another aspect of the idiosyncrasy, even regressivity, of the United States social climate.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Auto Sales . . .
Sept.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Consumer Credit . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


Jets Notch a Victory and Find Kicker, to Boot
In a sense it was almost Darwinian the way the Jets finally got their first victory of the season, a 30-21 victory over the Patriots (0-4) at Giants Stadium tonight.
Call it survival of the not so lamest.
But as desperate as the Jets (1-4) had become in the first five weeks of the National Football League season, they were in no position to look disparagingly at any victory.
And they didn't.


Kuwait Vote Today Reopens Democracy Fight
Kuwait on Monday holds its first national election since the Persian Gulf war, reopening a 30-year-old battle between the political opposition and the emirate's ruling family over how democratic the nation will be.
The United States and other nations that sent forces to drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait last year have pressed the ruling family to establish a more representative system.
They are uneasy that Western troops spilled their blood to reinstate a government perceived as cavalier about democracy.


Mr. Bush Had to Know
George Bush claims that when he was Vice President he knew very little about the Iran-contra affair.
The record shows that he knew plenty.
If inclined, he could have opposed the selling of arms to Iran as ransom for hostages and the illegal supply of the contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr.
Bush maintains he was excluded from the "loop" of informed officials who engineered the blunders at both the Iran and Nicaragua ends of the scandal.
At the Iran end, he claims to have learned the full implications of arms-for-hostages dealings about when the public did -- after the story broke late in 1986.
Yet Howard Teicher, a Middle East specialist on the Reagan White House staff, says he explained the swap to him in the spring of 1986.
And a memo by an Israeli official, made public last week by ABC's "Nightline," shows Mr.
Bush's full awareness in July that the U.S. was dealing -- with radicals not moderates -- in arms for hostages.


Market Place; Adding Appeal To Savings Bonds
THE Senate took a big step last week to help parents finance their children's college education with Federal savings bonds, and the measure is now part of the joint tax bill expected to be submitted to President Bush in the next 10 days.
But a group of Wall Street professionals and local and state government officials known as the Saving for College Coalition is working behind the scenes to kill the measure.
These purveyors of investment products like exotic bank certificates of deposit, prepaid tuition plans and municipal bonds would have the most to lose if the measure became law and they had to compete with the deep pockets of the Federal Government for parents' scarce investment dollars.


La Russa's Idea of Trade: Three Men and a Baby
The trade is more than a month old, but it is still causing occasional aftershocks.
Jose Canseco is gone, but the memory of his sniping lingers.
Too bad, because the war of words that took place last week between Canseco, the larger-than-life former Oakland Athletics outfielder, and Tony La Russa, the A's manager, tended to obscure one fact: The players who came in return were significant contributors to Oakland's division-winning drive in the American League West.


Classical Music in Review
Parthenia  St. Peter's Church
Parthenia, a consort of viols formed in 1988, proposed a musicological thesis in its concert on Sunday afternoon.
Called "Music in Revolution in 17th-Century England," the program offered works by seven composers -- John Jenkins, Matthew Locke, William Lawes, John Okeover, William Brade, John Hingeston and Henry Purcell -- who flourished in the century between the late Elizabethans and their Baroque successors.


Review/Film; Lovers on the Streets of Paris, Literally
Alex (Denis Lavant) is a sad young wino and vagrant with the kind of lopsided, expressionless face that suggests he might be simple-minded.
He lives on the Pont Neuf, the oldest and most beautiful bridge in Paris, which has become a secret home to clochards, or bums, while closed for extensive repairs.
From time to time he wanders out into the world of the committed to make a few francs by giving sidewalk fire-eating shows.
Michele (Juliette Binoche), who is going blind, is a street artist and, like Alex, determinedly homeless.
One day she makes her way to the Pont Neuf and settles in with her bags, boxes and portfolio of sketches.
Hans (Klaus-Michael Gruber), the elderly, self-appointed guardian of the bridge's clochards, resents Michele's intrusion.
Alex falls hopelessly in love with her.


Foote, Cone Vs. Sunbeam-Oster
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago and the Sunbeam-Oster Company in Providence, R.I., are in a dispute over the appliance maker's account.
The agency said yesterday that it had resigned the account, which it was awarded in July after a review involving four other agencies, and filed a $1.3 million suit against Sunbeam-Oster last week, in Cook County, Ill., Circuit Court.
The suit seeks to recover funds that Foote, Cone said the client had agreed to spend for advertising that was later canceled.


Lemieux's Number Is Now 42 Million
The Pittsburgh Penguins confirmed today what Mario Lemieux had made known last week: that he had signed a new seven-year contract.
The financial terms of the pact weren't revealed, but no one denied the figure of $42 million, which Lemieux had given last week in an interview with a Montreal radio station.
That would make him the National Hockey League's highest-paid player.


Europe Markets Endure A Day of Heavy Losses
European stock markets fell sharply and the weaker currencies plunged in value again today after investors apparently decided there was little chance that Europe could pull out of its economic turmoil anytime soon.
The heavy selling of stocks and the continued decline in the value of the British pound, the Italian lira and other currencies was in part a delayed reaction to the German central bank's decision on Friday not to cut interest rates.
Economists say lower rates in Germany are essential to improving Europe's economic prospects.





Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Relative Calm Displayed by Bonds
The stock market's selloff and snap-back produced less a flight to quality than a crawl yesterday, with most Treasury securities barely ahead and the 30-year bond down.
As the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 100 points, then recovered most of that, the five-year note rose half a point, then retreated, to stand at 10114/32 , up just 4/32 in late trading.


Mutation Bestows Beauty and Death On Quarter Horses
THEY are champions among show horses: radiant, muscular, Titian masterpieces made flesh and sinew.
Their sculptured beauty often wins generous prizes at competitions, and as registered quarter horses go, they are considered a highly coveted line.
Yet researchers have discovered a genetic defect in these dazzling beasts that can cause the muscles to periodically seize up with spasms so uncontrollable that the afflicted animal may topple over and even die.
Paradoxically, the same defect that is risky to the horse's life turns out to be the trait behind its exquisite physique.
And now that scientists have identified the guilty mutation and have developed a relatively simple test to detect it, a debate is roiling the fierce, high-stakes world of horse breeding on whether it is fair to continue propagating a potentially dangerous trait in a breed simply because the characteristic can reap so many rewards for the human owners.


Numerous Ways to Handle Numbers
COMPUTERS were invented to manipulate numbers, although more people use them today to write letters and reports or play games.
Here are three programs for the home or business number cruncher.
The first, Hi, Finance, is available in a new version for Windows 3.0 or later.
There are six modules in the program.
All take advantage of Windows's easy-to-use menus and icons, on a 386 or higher computer with at least four megabytes of working memory, a hard disk and a mouse.


Fire Prevention Week Begins


CHRONICLE
PEGGY LEE has won another round in her four-year battle to keep the Walt Disney Company from selling videocassettes of "Lady and the Tramp" without paying her what she considers a fair share of royalties.
On Friday, a panel of three judges on the California Court of Appeals in Los Angeles upheld a 1988 decision that awarded the singer $3.2 million.
Miss Lee supplied the voices for four characters in the 1952 animated film and sang three songs in it.
She was paid $3,500 at the time, and no royalties.


High School In Brooklyn Is Boycotted On Violence
Nearly all 3,100 students stayed away from Eastern District High School in Brooklyn yesterday, after some parents and community advocates called a boycott because of violence, crowded classes and other long-simmering resentments at the school.
It was not clear whether students did not show up for classes at the high school in Williamsburg because they heeded the boycott's leaders or because of fears about a possible recurrence of the melee that broke out in the cafeteria on Friday between black and Hispanic students, igniting the boycott.


Dying Synagogue Hangs On With Help From a Few Faithful
These are the High Holy Days, and so once again the faithful have returned to Derech Emunoh, the battered, barely surviving synagogue by the sea.
Past one empty, weed-choked block after another, they trek to the 87-year-old brown-shingled synagogue that waits forlornly, like some isolated mission on a devastated urban plain, a stark remnant of the days when this part of the Rockaway peninsula was a thriving, largely Jewish beach resort.


Candidates Get Free Advice
The editors at Baltimore magazine wondered what would happen if the advertising talent in their city was assigned to sell George Bush or Bill Clinton.
Four agencies took up the challenge, and the resulting fanciful ads, in mock-up form, can be seen in the magazine's October issue. (The agencies were quick to point out that the ads did not necessarily imply inclinations, much less endorsements.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Day; Clinton Pushes Hard in Florida, as Bush Support Slips
Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore declared today that the Democrats would win Florida because President Bush had abandoned the state, which has been won by the Republicans in all but two Presidential elections since 1952.
The Democratic nominees for President and Vice President touched base with all of the important groups of voters that the Democrats have identified as winnable this year, including students, blacks and the elderly.


Mets Pacts and Repairs
One day into the post-season, General Manager AL HARAZIN announced yesterday that the Mets intended to pick up the option years for 1993 on the contracts of both SID FERNANDEZ and HOWARD JOHNSON, and that ANTHONY YOUNG and MACKEY SASSER had undergone successful arthroscopic procedures.
Fernandez, with a 14-11 record and a 2.73 earned run average, led the staff in victories.
Johnson, who had knee and shoulder surgery in August and missed the last two months, batted .223 with 7 home runs and 43 runs batted in.
Both will earn $2.1 million next year.


Sallie Mae Issue Has Floating Rate
The Student Loan Marketing Association, which provides cash for student loans by purchasing them from issuers, was in the debt market yesterday to raise working capital.
Traders said the agency, known as Sallie Mae, priced $400 million of six-month floating-rate notes due April 8, 1993, to yield 9 basis points more than the bond-equivalent yield of the three-month Treasury bill.


VOTERS IN KUWAIT ELECT LEGISLATORS
Kuwaiti men went enthusiastically to the polls today to elect their first Parliament in six years and test the democratic resolve of the country's ruling family.
Voting appeared brisk in scattered polling sites throughout the capital and the mood was festive, despite tight security, including the circling of police helicopters above the city.


Blueprint For a Human
AT an ever accelerating pace, scientists are mapping the human chromosomes and specifying the positions of critical genetic instructions, an enterprise that the most optimistic scientists believe will yield boundless insights into human disease, human ancestry and even human nature.
The diagrams on this page are the newest and most complete maps of the human chromosomes that scientists have yet devised.
They are the result of an international collaboration involving 129 researchers in the United States, France and elsewhere, and they are some of the earliest fruits of the Human Genome Project, the vast effort to interpret the entirety of the human genetic blueprint.
These maps, called genetic linkage maps, represent all the various biochemical landmarks known so far.
They are the most intimate look yet at the stuff of what we are, a sort of DNA as centerfold pinup.


Norman Rush Awarded Fiction Prize in Ireland
Norman Rush was awarded the 1992 Irish Times-Aer Lingus International Fiction Prize for his first novel, "Mating," the third time an American has won the four-year-old prize, it was announced yesterday.
The prize of $:25,000, approximately $46,250, is the largest annual prize for a work of fiction published in the United States, Ireland or the United Kingdom.


Israelis Not Ruling Out Sabotage in Amsterdam Plane Crash
Israeli officials said today that they could not rule out possible sabotage as they sent two teams to Amsterdam to investigate the fiery crash of an El Al cargo plane into an apartment complex.
The officials emphasized that they had no specific reason to suspect sabotage, but added that it had to be included among the possibilities, along with mechanical failure, which some of them considered more likely.


The Cold War's Over and It's Time to Rebuild; Arms-Sale Hypocrisy
To the Editor:
Senior Pentagon officials in the Bush Administration are deploring Russia's sale of weapons to Iran (news article, Sept. 24).


Brazil Takes Turn to the Left; New Chief Makes Slow Start
Only three days after Itamar Franco became Acting President, Brazil appears to be drifting toward left-wing nationalism, with the Workers' Party scoring strongly in mayoral elections and Mr.
Franco attacking "foreign interests."
Slow to fill a power vacuum left by the impeachment of Fernando Collor de Mello last week, Mr.
Franco is acting as Brazil's reluctant President.
Although he denounced his predecessor's plans to maintain a "parallel government," Mr.
Franco discussed his own Government today in terms of "however long it lasts."


Patterns
Amid It All, Madonna
As the fashion flock landed here over the weekend to begin a three-week viewing of European ready-to-wear collections for spring, the main topics of conversation were the economy, the strikes, the weather and Madonna -- not necessarily in that order.
The Material Girl's decision to attend a Dolce &amp; Gabbana show on Sunday meant that guests, including major magazine editors and retailers' representatives, had their cars stopped and their invitations scrutinized by the police and private security guards.
Then there is the party that Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana are giving for her tonight at Le Cinema at the same time as Giorgio Armani's party at Rolling Stone for his Emporio line.
He had thought Madonna would be at his party.


Dutch Search for Their Dead Where El Al Plane Fell
Emergency workers toiled under floodlights in the ruins of an apartment complex here tonight, seeking bodies from the crash of an El Al cargo jet that the Mayor said could claim 250 victims.
The Boeing 747-200F, with a crew of three and one passenger, plowed into two crowded nine-story apartment buildings nine minutes after taking off from Schiphol Airport on Sunday.


Observer; Down With Sacrifice
I have reconsidered my position on sacrifice.
Last week I was all for it.
My policy was: plenty of sacrifice for all hands.
That was what the nation needed, I thought.
How wrong I was.
My new policy is toleration.
Let those who want to sacrifice go to it.
Let's be tolerant.
Let's not deny the individual right to sacrifice.
Just leave me out of it, please, and you, too, if you like.


California Democrats Soar as G.O.P. Crumbles
Enjoying heady leads in the polls, Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein, running for the two Senate seats from California, are reaping the benefits of a unified, efficient Democratic operation in the state and of a fractious Republican party that is losing moderate voters.
"The Democrats are running the best campaign I've seen them run, on both the national and state level," said Steven A. Merksamer, a leading Republican strategist in the state who was chief of staff to Gov.
George Deukmejian.
"And the Republicans, traditionally a fine-tuned machine, are spending all their time destroying each other."


Court Tells Virginia To Give All Access To Military Training
A Federal appeals court ruled today that if Virginia wanted to keep women out of its state-supported military college, the Virginia Military Institute, it would have to establish an equivalent program for women.
The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, refused to order the 153-year-old college to admit women, saying coeducation would spoil the unique experience the school offered.
But it said the Constitution's equal-protection clause did not permit Virginia to offer such a unique opportunity to men while denying it to women.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH In a speech yesterday in Dover, Del., discussing Gov.
Bill Clinton's views on the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Showdown Turns Into A Showcase For Eagles
The Philadelphia Eagles win Round 1.
In a battle tonight with the Dallas Cowboys for early bragging rights in the National Football Conference East Division, the Eagles' bite was as nasty as their bark.
They took a 10-7 lead at halftime and then blew the game open with three touchdowns in the second half to earn a 31-7 victory.
It was the Cowboys first regular-season loss since Nov. 17.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  STILL NO COMPROMISE ON REVIEW BOARD
Negotiations between the City Council and Mayor Dinkins on how to structure an independent police review board remained stalled, even though both sides say that they want to quickly resolve their differences before the debate polarizes the city.
After five days of negotiations, the Mayor and the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, remain deadlocked over who should appoint the board members.
The longer the deadlock remains, the more supporters of the Mayor's bill within the Council worry that his position may scuttle any chance of compromise.
B2.
OFFICERS ACCUSED OF THEFT
A detective and a sergeant in upper Manhattan have been suspended after another detective told the authorities that the two men took money from a car at a homicide scene and did not report it, the police said.
The police refused to say how much cash the two officers were suspected of taking from the car, in which two men were killed in a drive-by shooting last month in Washington Heights.
B3.


COMPANY NEWS
COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP., Houston, began shipments of a discounted line of file servers as well as a high-end server aimed at large businesses.
The discount Prosignia server is priced between $2,699 and $4,499, and the Systempro XL is priced at $13,999.
IDB COMMUNICATIONS GROUP INC., Culver City, Calif., said it had received approval from the Federal Communications Commission for the acquisition of World Communications Inc., a subsidiary of Swiss-based TeleColumbus A.G.


6 Years Later, Conviction Is Overturned
In 1987, it took a Suffolk County jury one hour to find Leonard Callace, a sometime cabdriver and construction worker, guilty of sodomizing a teen-age girl at knife point in a parked car in Selden.
Today, after spending nearly six years in prison, Mr.
Callace was back in court, this time to hear District Attorney James Catterson agree to set aside the conviction.


The Mayor's Softer Voice
Mayor David Dinkins's more conciliatory approach to the Police Department is most welcome.
New York City needs a break from the tensions generated by the bitter police demonstration three weeks ago, and that means lowering the voices on all sides.
The most important voice is, of course, the Mayor's.
His was among the harshest in town, reflecting his anger at the nature of the police demonstration.
The rally against an all-civilian police complaint review board was an unruly mess, with racial slurs, drinking and rowdy behavior on the part of some officers.


A Win in the World Court
A war sparked by a soccer game makes headlines, but not its epilogue at the World Court.
Few noticed the other day when The Hague jurists settled a bitter dispute over the land, island and maritime boundaries between El Salvador and Honduras.
The pacific outcome underscored the court's potential for resolving scores of disputes that now embroil new states in Europe and Asia.


Housing Pact Is Reached For Brooklyn
The Dinkins administration and a group of churches and homeowners' associations in Brooklyn have reached an agreement in principle that will allow the group to build as many as 1,300 single-family houses for lower-middle-class families previously unable to buy their own homes.
The agreement, which calls for the construction of 700 to 800 rowhouses west of Pennsylvania Avenue in East New York, was reached last week and will be formally announced later this week, city officials said yesterday.
The area is now one of the most impoverished and crime-racked in the city.
Another 500 houses are to be built about a mile away in the Spring Creek section.


FCA International reports earnings for Year to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Quayle's Call for Props Trips on Potato Threat
In the negotiations over a format for the Oct. 13 campaign debate in Atlanta between Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, the Quayle team suggested that the debaters be allowed to use props.
The Vice President's handlers said their man might like to read, say, from a copy of the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee's much-debated, best-seller on the environment, "Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit."
O.K. by the Senator, replied the Gore handlers, so long as Mr.
Gore could hold up a potato.


Citicorp President Resigns
Richard S. Braddock, president of Citicorp and the first in line to succeed John S. Reed as chairman, resigned unexpectedly yesterday, raising the possibility that he had been blamed for some of the bank's ills or had simply decided that he was not likely to move up to the chairmanship.
Bank officials said that Mr.
Braddock's departure was a friendly one.
"He is a very vigorous guy, and he is looked upon as having done a very good job here," said John M. Morris, a Citicorp spokesman.
But if Citibank sought to put a friendly spin on the resignation, many others in the world of American banking said Mr.
Braddock's departure came as a big surprise and even annoyed them.


Can't Anybody Here Enjoy This Game?
Major league baseball has always had an amazing capacity to produce brilliant playoffs and stellar World Series when a cleansing effect is needed to erase off-field disasters.
Witness the four amazing division races of 1982 that drew fans back just one season after a disillusioning 50-day strike.
If such dramatics are good for what ails, then baseball needs a set of playoffs from Atlanta, Pittsburgh, Oakland and Toronto to erase the horrible taste of the cantankerous season that was.
For territorial disputes, unrepentant displays of greed, xenophobia, realignment-related revolts, courtroom dramas, cross-country tugs-of-war over teams, and, ultimately, the sacking of Commissioner Fay Vincent badly overshadowed the games on the field, attaching themselves to baseball like so many leeches.


Review/Fashion; Nostalgia Walks Softly Down the Runway
As the economy everywhere continues its downward spin, the sheer delight in dressing up is put on hold.
So how do Italian fashion designers cope?
Bring on the costume party, they say.
The icons of late 1960's and 1970's fashions have been marching down the runways at the spring and summer ready-to-wear shows.
Make way for bell-bottom pants, flower power, neon colors and peasant blouses.
Love-ins and happenings are just around the corner.


Learning if Infants Are Hurt When Mothers Go to Work
An infant girl squirms among the toys at a day-care center, saying "ahh, ahh" and reaching out.
The teacher, who is holding another infant in her arms, smiles at the girl, says "Want to play ball?" and reaches over to push a beach ball into the infant's lap.
It hardly seems the stuff of high science, let alone Presidential politics.
But these everyday actions of teacher and baby, scored by a watchful researcher in dozens of categories like "responds to child's vocalizations" and "positive physical contact," are yielding specks of data in a vast national study designed to answer some of the most emotionally charged questions in science and society today: Do working mothers imperil their children's inner security and future happiness?
Does day care at an early age put children on a slow track for life?
Complicated Research


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.15
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.67
2.61
5.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.78
2.77
5.07
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.75
5.77
7.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.32
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.40
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.37
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


High Court to Resolve Unclaimed-Funds Feud
The Supreme Court agreed today to resolve a high-stakes interstate battle over the fate of unclaimed dividend and interest payments that for a variety of reasons banks and brokerage firms cannot forward to the customers for whom they were intended.
New York State, which for years has taken most of this money for itself, could lose hundreds of millions of dollars from an unfavorable decision.


No Headline
"Everything flew up to the ceiling, bookcases fell over. I was so scared I couldn't think. I just grabbed my coat and ran. " -- JOHANNA KOK, who survived the plane crash in Amsterdam.  [ A3:4. ]


Review/Music; Philharmonic Repaints Mussorgsky's 'Pictures'
Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" has whitened and faded in the course of incessant repetition.
Some jaded concertgoers might reasonably claim that there is nothing new to say about the score, that its fierce, strange colors cannot be restored.
Kurt Masur, in an outstanding interpretation with the New York Philharmonic on Friday night, showed otherwise.
These "Pictures" glowed and glared; the orchestra played as if the ink were not yet dry on the page.
The first step was to set aside the most familiar of the orchestral versions.
No competitor could hope to rival Ravel's diversity of detail, his lavishness of sound, but even the most sophisticated glitter obscures the revolutionary starkness of Mussorgsky's original piano score.
As has become his habit, Mr.
Masur substituted the orchestration by Sergei Gorchakov.
The conductor introduced this version to the West in 1968 and recorded it a couple of years ago with the London Philharmonic.


A Warning for Small Investors
Individual investors have rarely had it so tough.
With low interest rates tarnishing the value of safe investments like certificates of deposit, investors scurrying for yield have turned increasingly to the stock market -- only to get another sharp reminder yesterday that equities are a very volatile investment.
The sharp selloff in the market yesterday, which drove the Dow Jones industrial average down as much as 105 points before a rally cut the loss to 21.61 points, underscored the troubles the market has seen in the last three weeks.
Since mid-September, the market has fallen continually, giving up about 200 points as of yesterday.


The Cold War's Over and It's Time to Rebuild; Weiss's Foresight
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 15 obituary on Representative Ted Weiss of New York failed to note one of the most important and portentous legislative efforts that engaged his attention for years: the conversion of military facilities to civilian uses.


Alabama Town Is Divided Again By Racial Strife
A fatal police shooting coupled with a racially charged city election have led some people here to draw comparisons to the ugly days of 1964, when segregationist opposition to blacks' election efforts made Lowndes County a voting rights battleground.
Killed in the shooting on Sept. 2 was Raymond Davison, the 33-year-old nephew of a controversial black politician who lost a mayoral race in August.
The body of Mr.
Davison, with a shotgun wound to the head, was found about 100 feet from where the police said they opened fire on men trying to firebomb property owned by Mayor Ralph (Bunk) Norman.


Potomac Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to Aug 31


Perot Adviser Endorses Clinton
John P. White, the economist and businessman who helped devise Ross Perot's recommendations for reducing the Federal budget deficit, endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton today, saying the Democrat had "an excellent economic plan" that would return the country to "a sound footing."
The Clinton campaign vice chairman, Eugene Duffy, said the endorsement, coming as it does from a respected economist who has worked on resolving the budget deficit, "buttresses Bill Clinton's program and further legitimizes it."


Classical Music in Review
Jaime Laredo  Violinist Lehman Center for the Performing Arts
In observation of the Columbus Quincentennial, Jaime Laredo presented a concert of "Music of Spain and the Americas" on Saturday night.
Luis Battle accompanied him at the piano.
The program was intelligently assembled and compellingly played; Mr.
Laredo can be faulted only for excluding Columbus's native Italy from his trans-Atlantic scheme.


2 COUNTS DROPPED AGAINST C.I.A. MAN
The Office of Independent Counsel prosecuting the Iran-contra affair today dropped two of the nine counts against Clair E. George, a former top official of the Central Intelligence Agency who is scheduled to go on trial for a second time on charges of lying to Congress.
By dropping the two counts and altering two others, prosecutors appear to be trying to streamline the case to make the charges easier for a jury to grasp when Mr.
George goes on trial later this month.


Wal-Mart Notes To Yield 6.135%
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is offering $500 million of seven-year notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The notes were given a 6 1/8 percent coupon and priced at 99.94 to yield 6.135 percent, or about 35 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


U.S. Agency Criticizes High Price of Drug
A Federal agency said today that the Genzyme Corporation had priced one of its drugs so high that many patients would have to trade all their lifetime health insurance to buy the drug for two to three years.
The Office of Technology Assessment, a nonpartisan Congressional research agency, said that the pricing -- which is an average of $382,000 per patient a year -- raised serious questions about whether the Government should participate in developing drugs with little or no say in how they would finally be priced.


Courier Is No. 1, Replacing Edberg
STEFAN EDBERG arrived in Australia yesterday to receive the news that he had lost his No. 1 tennis ranking to JIM COURIERwithout either player hitting a ball.
Edberg also slipped below PETE SAMPRAS, who has achieved his highest ranking ever at No. 2.
Edberg is in Australia for the $1.1 million Sydney Indoor championships, where he is the defending champion.
He will play tomorrow.
This is the fifth time the No. 1 spot has changed hands this year in rankings that are calculated weekly based on results over the previous 52 weeks.
This week's Australian Indoor falls a week later than last year on the ATP Tour calendar so the 240 computer points Edberg earned here in 1991 drop out.


CHRONICLE
Mr.
Brokaw also was busy fending off rumors generated by a report in the Oct. 10 issue of TV Guide that he was considering running for the United States Senate.
The magazine noted that he could run either from Montana, where he spends a month each year and where a Senate seat will be open in 1994, or from his native South Dakota, where a vacancy is expected in 1996.


China's Communists Prepare Party Congress
The Communist Party is preparing for a rare congress that will convene next week to shuffle the national leadership and establish a party line that is supposed to last for the next five years.
The party congress, the first to be held since 1987, is expected to confirm the rise of more pragmatic, change-minded officials within the leadership and to launch a new slogan: the building of a "socialist market economy."


Plain-Paper Printers: Color for the Masses
MOTHER NATURE isn't the only one having fun with color at this time of year.
The Hewlett-Packard Company introduced two new color printers yesterday, taking another step toward making color a standard enhancement of printed documents.
Color printers have been available for many years, but mediocre print quality, high cost and annoying maintenance demands have kept them from becoming widespread.
Color laser printers are still painfully expensive and it will be several years before they reach the average user's desktop.
Color ribbon printers are cheap but produce atrocious color.


COMPANY EARNINGS: Morton Salt's Outreach; When It Rains, It Removes Odors
Looking to avoid stocking runs?
Try marinating new panty hose in a salt bath for three hours.
Morton Salt, hoping to join baking soda and vinegar on the list of household ingredients with mythic cleaning and curative properties, is running full-page advertisements in magazines like The Ladies' Home Journal and Better Homes and Gardens, listing "a million and one different things" to do with salt instead of, say, sprinkling it on steak.


Cyril C. Means, 73, A Specialist in Laws Regarding Abortion
Cyril Chesnut Means Jr., professor emeritus of constitutional law at New York Law School, died yesterday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 73 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.


For Pirates and Braves, 'Almost' Just Won't Do
The ache of "almost" is everywhere.
It can be heard in Atlanta Manager Bobby Cox's voice, cracked by three decades of baseball and the singular hurt of the 1991 World Series.
It can be seen in the mournful eyes of Pittsburgh Manager Jim Leyland, haunted by a dozen seasons of minor league managing and consecutive disfigured autumns of National League Championship Series shortcomings.
Charlie Leibrandt can still see Kirby Puckett's home run in World Series Game 6.
Lonnie Smith replays the Game 7 decoy at second base in his mind.
Barry Bonds wears his career post-season average of .156 like a badge of dishonor.
The image of 18 straight zeros on the scoreboard still do their macabre dance in the minds of the Pirates.


Business Scene; Guns or Butter? Labor Ambivalent
WHEN it comes to putting pressure on military contractors to stop making warplanes and guns and start making subway cars or electric autos, no group is more ambivalent than the nation's labor unions.
"We take the high road," said Mark Roberts, an A.F.L.-C.I.O. official.
"We are for shifting resources from weaponry to civilian goods." But unions are still lobbying Congress for more money to build more fighter planes and more submarines.
Behind this contradictory behavior is jobs.
With the military budget shrinking in the post-cold-war era, thousands of jobs in weapons factories are disappearing, and the workers involved are demanding that their unions do something.


Lillian Vernon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Fayva Weighing Other Agencies
Fayva, the retail footwear chain owned by Morse Shoe Inc. in Canton, Mass., said yesterday that it would review its account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $10 million, after seven years at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York.
In a telephone interview, Glenn Stewart, a Fayva spokesman, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
"We want to examine what's out there," he said, adding that the review followed the appointment of a new chief executive, Malcolm Sherman.


Islanders Take First-and-10 Approach
The Islanders' main office is down the Hempstead Turnpike, about a mile from the Jets' Long Island headquarters.
While the Jets' record (1-4) is nothing to celebrate, the hockey team can see one positive aspect of the football team's bleak experience so far this year.
"It just proves that exhibition games don't mean much," Al Arbour, the Islanders' coach, said, alluding to the Jets' 5-0 preseason mark.


Marriott to Spin Off Hotel-Management Business
The Marriott Corporation said yesterday that it planned to spin off its financially healthy hotel-management business from its ailing real estate operations to create two separate publicly traded companies.
In its heady growth years of the 1980's, Marriott borrowed heavily to build hotels, which it then sold profitably, while retaining lucrative management contracts.
But when the real estate market deteriorated, Marriott was saddled with 141 hotels it could not sell.
This led to a crisis at the company, which it eventually overcame.
Still, the unsalable hotels damped earnings.


Bridge
Cover the East-West cards on the diagramed deal, and estimate the chance the lie of the hidden cards will make four hearts by South unbeatable.
The chance is obviously very small, but the long shot comes home.
The deal occurred in a sectional tournament earlier this year in Houston, and is offered by Henry Holden of that city as proof that there is a great deal of luck in duplicate.
Looking at the North-South hands, one would expect to lose three diamond tricks and two black aces, with a danger of a second spade loser.


Megamation Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
New World String Quartet  Weill Recital Hall
Friday's all-Schumann program by the New World String Quartet had an extraordinary beginning that the rest of the evening never quite lived up to.
The elusive Russell Sherman played "Kreisleriana," offering deep and original thinking on a familiar piano piece.
With Mr.
Sherman, standard repertory becomes not simply a program item but an object of contemplation.
If the stretched phrasing and deep pauses between sections appeared eccentric, this was eccentricity with its own convincing logic, charged with a spiritual energy most performers either lack or are too busy too employ.
None of these idiosyncracies would have worked without the profound technical and tonal resources Mr.
Sherman brings to them.
The minute overlapping pedal effects and the denial of pedal altogether in exposed passages made some unusual arguments very convincing.
Elsewhere, the New World String Quartet played the A-minor Quartet and joined Mr.
Sherman in the E-flat Quintet.
The success of such a chamber group is largely decided, I think, before the fact: that is, in the choice of four talents matched to an equal level of competence.
In the New World, ability and force of personality seem to vary.
In both pieces, at any rate, outward intentions, no matter how intelligent and strong, often outran the ability to create inner agreement on blend and articulation.
In the Quintet, Mr.
Sherman and his colleagues operated in separate worlds.
The pianist's individual style of phrasing and the quartet's use of conventional interpretive wisdom (all of it quite plausible) contradicted one another.
It was as if two separate performances were going on simultaneously.


Sports of The Times; No Murder In the Eyes Of the Giants
THE father of Boom Boom Geoffrion once told his hockey-player-to-be son, "When they're down, step on 'em."
This often has been the suggested attitude in sports, more in practice than in professed theories of sportsmanship.
Lawrence Taylor, in fact, stated it with bitterness after the Giants game Sunday, using much the same language as the Boom Boom's.


General Motors Promotes Two
The General Motors Corporation elected two vice presidents at a board meeting today.
Bruce G. MacDonald, 53 years old, was promoted to vice president for corporate communications.
He had been executive in charge of the corporate communications staff when it was restructured in July.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  NEW SEEDS SPROUT IN RUSSIA
Farmers in the Russian wheat belt may still snarl at the mention of "reform," but some tender shoots of market initiative are beginning to sprout on collective farms.
A1  GRIM SEARCH OUTSIDE AMSTERDAM
Workers sifted through the ruins of an apartment complex near Amsterdam for bodies from the crash of an El Al cargo jet.
The Mayor said 250 people may have died.
A3


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Poll Finds Hostility to Perot And No Basic Shift in Race
Ross Perot's return to the 1992 Presidential campaign has been greeted with overwhelming hostility by American voters, leaving the contest fundamentally unchanged, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Gov.
Bill Clinton holds a persistent lead over President Bush as the campaign enters its final month.
Mr.
Perot, who briefly surged to the top of some polls last spring, has a remarkably negative image in the new survey, with 80 percent of the people who once supported him but no longer do saying they do not trust him.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
African Development Bank is offering $300 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due 2004 at a price of 98.955 to yield 6.88 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Noncallable, the notes are rated triple-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.
*
Alaska Housing FinanceCorp. is offering $200 million of tax-exempt general- purpose housing revenue bonds through Dean Witter Reynolds.
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 3.10 percent in 1993 to 6.25 percent in 2008, with term bonds due in 2012 yielding 6.50 percent and a bond due in 2023 priced to yield 6.637 percent.
The financing is rated Aa by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. Common Stock  *
Global Marine Inc., Houston, an international offshore drilling contractors with interests in oil and gas production, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of 20 million common shares and will use the proceeds to satisfy minimum debt service obligations and for general corporate purposes.


Leader of Union Is Remembered As a Visionary
Some of the luminaries of the worlds of labor, folk music and progressive politics in New York City and beyond filled Avery Fisher Hall yesterday in tribute to Leon J. Davis, the founder of the nation's largest labor organization of health-care workers, who died last month.
As his widow, Julia Gaberman, sat in the second row, one friend after another, from the civil rights leader Coretta Scott King to the actor Ossie Davis and the singer Pete Seeger, praised Mr.
Davis for his progressive leadership of Local 1199 of the Hospital and Health Care Employees Union, which for decades has represented orderlies, aides, clerks, janitors, laundry workers and other employees of hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacies.


Mets! Yanks! Jets! Giants! Do Knicks Dare to Dream?
No one has to inform Pat Riley that people are eager for the Knicks' season to begin.
The Jets are 1-4.
The Giants are 1-3.
And the Mets and Yankees have just completed losing seasons.
But while Riley knows expectations are high, he also wants to diffuse the notion that the Knicks are a championship team waiting to be crowned.
New York looks good on paper.
But with seven new players expected to make the 12-man roster, Riley will know much more once the Knicks begin training camp Friday in Charleston, S.C.


High Holy Days May Be Last Ever for Synagogue in Rockaway


Intermagnetics General reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Former College Official Disputes Times Account of His Actions
A rabbi who is a former official at Rockland Community College says he was not involved with financial aid there and knows nothing about an investigation by the Rockland County District Attorney.
In an article in The New York Times on Sept. 30, the District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz, was quoted as saying that he was investigating financial aid for students in the Jewish studies program at the college, and whether the money actually went to students.
He said he understood that an official with the Jewish studies program, Rabbi Chaim Chait, had picked up the aid checks.


Corrections
A sports chart yesterday about major league baseball players who were league home-run leaders at the age of 22 or younger omitted an entry.
In 1965, at 20, Tony Conigliaro led the American League with 32 home runs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Debate on Debates Over, Debate on Panel Begins
Now that the debate over Presidential debates is over, an even more ticklish process can begin: picking people to quiz the candidates.
Today, officials from the campaigns of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton began drafting their own lists of possible questioners.
As they seek to settle on a mutually acceptable list, the campaigns will return to the bargaining table later this week to scratch off names they do not want. (Although Ross Perot will debate, his representatives were not involved in the negotiations over the debate rules and, thus, will have no role in selecting panelists.)


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Congress voted to override the veto of cable TV legislation, breaking President Bush's streak of 35 successful vetoes.  [ Page A1. ]
The legislation will make life harder for the cable companies but may not necessarily aid consumers.
News Analysis.  [ A18. ]
The fate of unclaimed dividend and interest payments is to be decided by the Supreme Court.
New York and Delaware have claimed money that banks and brokerage firms cannot forward to the customers for whom it was intended.  [ D2. ]


The Cold War's Over and It's Time to Rebuild
To the Editor:
"The Mothball Era in Arms Industry" (Business Scene, Sept. 22) repeats the widespread myth that reductions in military spending made possible by the end of the cold war "seem to be inflicting permanent damage on the American economy."


British Chief, His Ratings Dismal, Fights Party Revolt Over Europe
Only six months after leading the Conservatives to a national election victory, Prime Minister John Major opens up a new political campaign this week, struggling to regain the confidence of party faithful bitterly divided over his handling of European and economic policy.
With the Conservatives gathering in Brighton on Tuesday for their annual conference, Mr.
Major and his Cabinet are under severe strain.
A public opinion poll released over the weekend shows that Mr.
Major's popularity has plummeted since his narrow election victory win in April, with fewer than one in four now approving of his performance.


Free Trade, but With Time Bombs
Finally, Gov.
Bill Clinton has given his long-awaited answer on free trade and it is ambivalent.
Does he support the North American Free Trade Agreement?
Yes, but.
He would accept provisions negotiated so skillfully by the Bush Administration with Mexico and Canada.
But he wouldn't approve an accord unless it included eight new conditions, two of which would be substantially different from anything the three countries have agreed on during a year of intensive negotiations.


Queenstown Journal; Crucified in the 20's, a Black Church Rises Again
On May 24, 1921, the men of an obscure black Christian sect called the Israelites put on their Old Testament white robes, strapped crude swords to their hips and followed their prophet into battle.
On a field of thorn bushes and red dust at Bulhoek, near this colonial outpost, the Israelites confronted the largest peacetime police contingent that had ever assembled in this country: 800 men armed with rifles, machine guns and artillery.


COMPUTERVISION FACES SHAREHOLDER LAWSUITS
Shareholders of the Computervision Corporation filed several class-action lawsuits in Federal District Court in Boston Friday, charging that the company failed to disclose material information in connection with its initial public offering of 25 million shares of common stock in August.
Last week, after the company said that losses for the third quarter would be "substantially" worse than previous expectations, Computervision's stock was hammered in active trading.
The stock, which was initially offered at $12, closed yesterday at $5.50, up 37.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Disturbing Issue of Kennedy's Secret Illness
An issue that has to be raised every Presidential campaign is the health of the candidates.
The reason is that many Presidents have suffered serious illnesses while in the White House.
All too often they, their families and aides have misled, if not lied to, the public about their health, with the malady becoming known only many years later.
Yet another instance of such reticence about Presidential disease is being published this week in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
Two pathologists at the autopsy of John F. Kennedy have broken a long silence and stated that the President's adrenal glands were found to be almost completely gone.
The glands produce key regulatory hormones, and their absence, if they are not replaced, can cause wasting and death.


David von Schlegell, Abstract Artist, Is Dead at 72
David von Schlegell, an abstract sculptor and painter who was also a professor emeritus at the Yale University School of Art, died yesterday at St.
Raphael's Hospital in New Haven.
He was 72 years old and lived in Guilford, Conn.
He had been ill for some time with prostate cancer and died of a stroke, said his wife, Susan Howe.


Angola Opposition Charges Fraud in the Election
As Angola's governing party appeared poised to win this country's elections, leaders of the main opposition group said tonight that the balloting had been rigged and vowed not to accept the results.
At a meeting of political parties, the electoral council and United Nations representatives, Abel Chivakuvuku, foreign affairs spokesman of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, said the insurgent movement, known as Unita, considered the elections "entirely fraudulent" and "very dangerous for Angola."


Witch Hunt in the Navy
The Tailhook scandal has been "spun up," to borrow a service phrase, into a crisis that affects the Navy leadership's credibility on a wide range of issues.
A botched internal investigation and the ongoing revelations of inexcusable harassment of women at a Las Vegas convention of naval aviators a year ago have also left in their wake a witch hunt that threatens to swamp the entire naval service.
Careers have been ruined, often on the basis of mere innuendo and without a shred of due process.
And on Sept. 25 Acting Navy Secretary Sean O'Keefe made a series of sweeping decisions -- and one altogether remarkable pronouncement -- guaranteeing that the effects of this scandal will reverberate for years.


Romanian Vote Inconclusive; Runoff Planned Next Sunday
President Ion Iliescu and his main opponent in presidential elections have been forced into a runoff because no candidate received an outright majority in the voting last month, final results show.
Mr.
Iliescu, a former Communist who leads the governing Democratic National Salvation Front, received 47 percent of the vote in the six-way race on Sept. 27, election officials said on Sunday.
His main rival, Emil Constantinescu of the Democratic Convention opposition coalition, had 31 percent.


CONGRESS REBUFFS BUSH IN OVERRIDE OF CABLE TV VETO
Congress voted tonight to override President Bush's veto of legislation to regulate cable television companies, breaking his streak of 35 successful vetoes.
The bill itself, which would authorize regulation of minimum cable service and seek to encourage competition, was almost lost in the politics of the moment.
Democrats, who have waited four years to defeat Mr.
Bush on such a test of strength, exulted, and Republicans were split over what the vote meant.


U.S.-Made Vehicle Sales Fell in Late September
Sales of domestically produced vehicles dropped a scant seven-tenths of 1 percent in late September, but automotive demand on a seasonally adjusted basis seemed to perk up a bit after months of sluggishness.
Sales of domestically produced cars were off 1.2 percent, to 250,367, for the Sept. 21-30 period, while sales of light trucks rose one-tenth of 1 percent, to 169,307.
However, the seasonally adjusted annual rate for car sales was 6.8 million, compared with 6.1 million for mid-September and 7.2 million in late September last year.


Fannie Mae Prices A Callable Issue
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, priced $800 million of a callable debenture yesterday through various securities dealers.
The issue, to mature on Oct. 10, 1997, is callable on or after Oct. 10, 1995.
The pricing came a day sooner than originally planned as terms were set early and allocations nailed down rapidly, enabling the Government agency to bring the issue to market for pricing.


Wave of Mergers Is Ahead, But Not Like the 1980's Kind
A SIGNIFICANT new round of agency mergers and acquisitions seems imminent, although it will be far different from the wave of buy-ups and buyouts that roiled the industry in the boom years of the 1980's.
The primary differences are that unlike many of the 80's transactions, which were motivated by growth for growth's sake and occurred at spectacularly high prices, the next spate of deals will be impelled by much more practical purposes and will be reasonably priced.


Editors' Note
An article on Sept. 30 about problems with financial aid at the Judaic studies program at Rockland Community College in New York included a statement by the Rockland County District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz, about a former college official, Rabbi Chaim Chait.
The article said Rabbi Chait "was reported to be in Israel and could not be reached for comment."


Q&amp;A
Night Birds
Q.
I heard a bird flying at night in New York City.
It had an unmelodious call.
What might it have been?


INSIDE
Supreme Court Begins Term
The Justices signaled a resumption of the constitutional debate over church, state and education that marked the end of their last term.
Page A20.
A President's Illness
Two pathologists cite proof that John F. Kennedy suffered from an adrenal insufficiency, contradicting his denials.
The Doctor's World, page C3.
Siege Intensifies in Sarajevo


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Hear 2 Cases on Religion and Schools
The Supreme Court opened its new term today by signaling a resumption of the constitutional debate over church, state and education that marked the end of the last term just three months ago.
Among the 21 new cases the Justices accepted today for argument and decision were two involving religion and the schools.
One poses the question whether the Constitution permits public financing for a sign-language interpreter to accompany a deaf child to class in a parochial school under a Federal law guaranteeing a free education for handicapped children.


New Drugs by Process of Elimination
Biotechnology researchers spent the 1980's searching for magic bullets -- perfectly conceived drugs that could be fired at a disease and destroy it with exquisite precision.
But now researchers and several drug companies have concluded that the shotgun-and-computer approach may work just as well.
Several start-up companies have been formed to pursue the new technique, joining a race already in progress among biotech pioneers like Genentech Inc. and the Chiron Corporation that are devoting significant resources to the effort.
A number of large traditional pharmaceutical companies are moving in as well.


Autoinfo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chinese Agency Indicted in Jeans Import Scheme
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan yesterday accused a Chinese Government agency of conspiring with a subsidiary in New York to evade United States quotas on clothing imports by falsely labeling thousands of jogging suits and pairs of blue jeans.
Yesterday's indictments in Federal District Court charged the China National Textiles Import and Export Corporation, which prosecutors said was the agency in charge of textiles and clothing trade, with conspiring to defraud the United States.
It was the second set of indictments in a broad 17-month investigation by the Customs Service into Chinese textile export practices.


Pay-Fone Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's endorsement of the North American Free Trade Agreement misstated its length in some copies.
The treaty is some 2,000 pages long, not 2,000 words.
The article also misstated the combined economic output of the trading partners in some copies.
The output of the three nations, the United States, Mexico and Canada, would be $6 trillion.


By Design; All Wrapped Up
A shawl can be a woman's security blanket.
Not only does a shawl provide warmth in nippy weather, in chilly rooms or on planes, but it also imparts a lot of style to any outfit, anytime, anywhere.
Tossed around the shoulders, a shawl adds a dashing dose of color to a somber suit.
Over a skinny long skirt, a shawl wrapped and tied pareu-style gives the silhouette an added dimension of sophistication while camouflaging errant bulges.


John G. Friend, 58; Retired as Chairman Of a Chicago Bank
John G. Friend, a retired chairman and former director of NBD Chicago Bank, died Friday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 58 years old and lived in Winnetka, Ill., and Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Mr. Friend died of prostate cancer, said his wife, Abby Mandel.


First-and-Missing: Moore's Blunder
Eric Moore did not hear the call.
That's the answer, reason or excuse the Giants gave today for their failure to score a touchdown with first-and-goal from the 1-yard line and 22 seconds left to play in the first half on Sunday afternoon.
"It is my fault," Moore admitted today here in the locker room at Giants Stadium.
"I'm supposed to be on the field."


U.S. IS CRITICIZED ON IRAQ LOAN CASE
A Federal judge today criticized the Government's handling of a case involving billions of dollars in illegal loans to Iraq in the 1980's, saying he had "grave questions" about the prosecution.
Judge Marvin H. Shoob of the United States District Court in Atlanta, who presided over the sentencing hearing of a local banker involved in the scandal, issued an order expanding on his previous criticism of prosecutors and recommended postponing the trial to enable the Government "to employ its full resources to obtain all the facts."


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Is Tangled in Contradictions In Debut of His Revived Campaign
Five days after rejoining the race for the White House, Ross Perot continued his campaign of contradictions today.
Mr.
Perot suggested on the NBC News program "Today" that President Bush was a captive of the White House who was out of touch with the people, saying, "You've got to get out there on the front lines and taste it." But the independent candidate announced no plans of his own to move out of the television studio and onto the campaign trail.


An Easing Of Threat To Ozone Is Reported
THE rates at which two ozone-destroying gases, halon 1301 and halon 1211, are accumulating in the atmosphere have fallen by about half since 1987, when the United States and 22 other nations agreed to stop producing them by the year 2000, a study shows.
The decline in emissions supports industries' claims to be on or ahead of schedule in cutting halon production to the levels mandated by an agreement called the Montreal Protocol and reflects the search for cheaper, safer alternatives, said Dr.
James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, who participated in the study.


How to Deter Devious Foreign Policy
President Bush's reckless aid to Iraq is finally getting the attention it deserves in the 1992 campaign.
He now concedes U.S. aid was diverted to the making of nuclear arms.
His embarrassment offers a cautionary example to future Presidents: the public will not tolerate attempts to conceal their conduct of foreign policy from Congress.
Had Mr.
Bush's dubious strategy received a thorough airing in 1989, a lot of pain might have been spared.
But Mr.
Bush chose to conduct the policy surreptitiously.


Olympic Cities Support Sarajevo
The seven North American cities that have been host to the Olympics, plus Atlanta, the host city for the 1996 Summer Games, will raise their Olympic Flags this afternoon at 1 o'clock to show concern for the plight of the war-torn city of Sarajevo in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The demonstration is an effort to raise both awareness and funds for the city, which was host for the Winter Olympics in 1984.
The cities participating today include Los Angeles, Montreal, Mexico City, St.
Louis, Squaw Valley, Calif.; Calgary, Alberta, and Lake Placid, N.Y.


The Irreligious Fare Less Well in America
To the Editor:
America's religious tolerance has limits.
Anthony Lewis cites John F. Kennedy's request to be judged on abilities rather than "on the basis of where he goes to church on Sunday" ("The Two Americas," Sept. 14).


Storm Left Hard Future For Hawaii's Lush Island
For the last dozen years, Will Squyres, a former helicopter gunship pilot in South Vietnam, has carried tourists up over the spectacular natural wonders of Kauai.
But this day he somewhat reluctantly agreed to fly a visiting photographer and reporter to see what Hurricane Iniki had done to what many consider the most beautiful of the Hawaiian Islands.
His Jet Ranger lifted over Kawaikini, the 5,243-foot volcanic peak.
Below, stands of Norfolk pines, koa and eucalyptus trees could be seen flattened like match sticks.
The Alakai swamp hardly looked touched, but soon the famed remote Na Pali Coast came into view, its spectacular bluffs scoured by storm erosion and the trail that is the only land access washed out.


Jets Find Cure for Monday Blahs
After the Jets opened the 1992 season with four losses in a row, some of the players started to wonder not when the team would win a game, but if they would win.
"I think we had started doubting ourselves and we might have even lost a little confidence in ourselves, after going 0-4," said right guard Dwayne White.


OLCO Petroleum reports earnings for Year April 30


A Screenwriter Whose Life's Script Stars Privacy
Like the hero in the film "Hero," David Webb Peoples is an unlikely, and unwilling, celebrity.
As the screenwriter of two major films in the last few months, "Hero" and "Unforgiven," Mr.
Peoples has hit the Hollywood jackpot.
Moreover, "Blade Runner," the director Ridley Scott's futuristic cult classic which Mr.
Peoples co-wrote a decade ago and which many critics consider a masterpiece, has been successfully reissued.


U.N. Standby Forces: Still a Good Idea
To the Editor:
"The New Blue Army" (editorial, Sept. 20) endorses United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's proposal that U.N. members earmark standby forces the Security Council could call up on 48 hours' notice.
As you note, this was provided for in the United Nations Charter.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stocks were lower here today in a continuation of selling that began on Monday.
In afternoon trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 166.6 points, or 0.97 percent, at 17,268.
On Monday, the Nikkei lost 222.57 points, or 1.28 percent, the seventh consecutive day the market closed lower.


Mohawk Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; What Worked in 1988 Is No Aid to Bush Now
If 1988 is remembered as the year they wrote the book on negative campaigning, 1992 may be the year the book was sent back for revision.
With just four weeks to go until Election Day, George Bush's campaign strategy is starting to look a lot like the one he used four years ago.
He is attacking Bill Clinton's fitness to be Commander in Chief (shades of Michael S. Dukakis riding a tank), questioning the Arkansas Governor's patriotism (shades of the Pledge of Allegiance) and attacking his record on the environment (shades of Boston Harbor).


High Court Will Take Up Bush's Policy on Haitians
The Supreme Court placed the Bush Administration's bitterly contested policy toward Haitian refugees on the agenda for its new term today.
Acting at the Administration's request, the Justices agreed to decide whether the involuntary return of all Haitians picked up on the high seas violates United States immigration law, as a Federal appeals court held two months ago, or whether the policy is a valid use of Presidential power to deal with a serious immigration crisis, as the Administration contends.


National Micronetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Returning to a Camp That Lives Only in Memories
BOB DAVIS remembers that terrifying night all alone on Dream Island.
Neil Grundman remembers the hot hikes.
Irwin Fleischner remembers the mystery ride on the camp truck to a haunted house.
Les Walhimer remembers snake dancing in a downpour.
And Dan Winston remembers the solitary midnight walk -- actually, it was more like a consummately cautious creep -- from the camp cabin to the baseball field, along a dirt path past spiders and owls and bats maybe, and who knows what all.


Astronomers Open New Search for Alien Life
ASTRONOMERS, moving beyond philosophical musings and science-fiction fantasy, are about to mount the first comprehensive, high-technology search for evidence of intelligent life elsewhere in the universe.
The new search is scheduled to begin symbolically on Monday, the 500th anniversary of the day Columbus happened on the shores of America.
Using newly developed electronics, more sensitive radio receivers and the most powerful telescopes, the scientists hope, like Columbus, to identify the next new worlds.


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 11


Boycott at a Brooklyn High School Keeps Almost All Students Away


Stock Markets Plummet Overseas, But Prices Recover on Wall Street
The world's stock markets plunged yesterday, as investors reacted to the political uncertainties of the American election and the continued monetary turmoil in Europe.
But Wall Street, unlike the European and Japanese markets, managed to reverse direction and recover nearly 80 percent of its morning losses by the closing bell.


Mexico Cheered by Support Of Clinton for Trade Accord
The Mexican Government voiced confidence today that Gov.
Bill Clinton's qualified endorsement of a North American Free Trade Agreement had cleared the path to its approval.
Mexican business leaders who support the accord were openly euphoric.
After a week of steady increases, values on the Mexico City stock exchange leaped 64.63 points, or 4.65 percent, on the news, closing at 1,454.35.
It was the market's second-largest gain this year.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Activated Tahaun Lewis, cornerback, from the practice squad.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Announced the resignation of Pat Hanlon, vice president of public relations.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Darrick Owens, wide receiver.
Signed Yancey Thigpen, wide receiver.
Waived Mike Finn, defensive lineman, from the practice squad.
Arena Football League
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Named Roman Gabriel general manager. Hockey  National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Assigned Dave Tretowicz, defenseman; Mike Vukonich, center; and David Goverde, goalie, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
Returned Fred Brathwaite, goalie; Cam Danyluk, left wing; and Chris Wing, right wing, to their junior teams.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Signed Dan Quinn, right wing, to a one-year contract.
Recalled Brad Berry, defenseman, from Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
Assigned Derrick Smith, left wing, to Kalamazoo.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Re-signed Jeff Norton, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
Assigned Dave Chyzowski, Brad Dalgarno, Zigmund Paiffy and Scott Scissons, forwards, and Wayne McBean, Jeff Finley and Dennis Vaske, defensemen, to Capital District of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Alexei Kovalev, right wing.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Mario Lemieux, center, to a seven-year contract.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Assigned Herb Raglan and Chris Simon, forwards, and David Karpa, defenseman, to Fredericton of the American Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Denny Felsner, right wing, and Parris Duffus, goalie, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.


Classical Music in Review
New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players  Symphony Space
The productions that Albert Bergeret and his New York Gilbert and Sullivan troupe present every season at Symphony Space have won many fans among New York's Savoyards, but in recent seasons costs have outstripped the company's ability to fill its coffers.
On Sunday, Mr.
Bergeret addressed that problem by organizing a benefit concert devoted mostly to Gilbert and Sullivan favorites.


With Hint of Debate, More Haggling for Abrams and D'Amato
The haggling over the number and form of debates between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Attorney General Robert Abrams continued yesterday, producing a hint of agreement to debate once.
Maybe.
By the end of the day, the only thing that seemed certain was that the two Senate campaigns would haggle on, with each side portraying the other as the more unreasonable.


N.F.L. Is Loser Again In 2 More Labor Cases
After losing twice in the last month in court battles involving free agency, the National Football League lost again yesterday, this time on two different fronts.
In Washington, a Federal jury awarded 235 players $30 million in damages from the league's 28 teams because the clubs had fixed the wages of players who were members of developmental, or taxi, squads in 1989.


People
*
Mike Raymond was named senior vice president and group account director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, succeeding Edward Barnidge, who retired.
Mr.
Raymond was previously corporate vice president of marketing at Domino's Pizza, Ann Arbor, Mich.


House Approves Energy Legislation
The House today overwhelmingly approved compromise energy legislation that would encourage the use of alternative fuels and streamline licensing of nuclear power plants.
But a filibuster threat in the Senate left final passage in some doubt.
Two years of backroom skirmishing and parliamentary delays have already torn out of the legislation the provisions that would have done the most to reduce American dependence on foreign oil.
One would have permitted oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge; the other would have required automobile fuel efficiency.


Candidates on Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).


Anti-Incest Mechanism
The offspring of white-footed mice leave their parents' nest before reaching sexual maturity through an innate behavioral mechanism that prevents incest, according to a study in the current issue of the journal Nature.
Scientists have long suggested that offspring of many species of mammals and birds are thrown out of the nest by the parent of the same sex to prevent competition for resources and mates.
But the new study points to a biological mechanism in the offspring themselves that guards against incest, which can be harmful to a species.


Potomac Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
DAVID KAPLAN, the ABC news producer who was shot to death in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, in August, will be honored with the Press Freedom Award of the Committee to Protect Journalists at a dinner on Oct. 21 at the Pierre in Manhattan.
The person who is to present the award to Mr.
Kaplan's widow, SALLY KAPLAN, knows the perils of reporting in countries under siege: TERRY ANDERSON, the Associated Press correspondent who was held hostage in Lebanon for more than six years.
Awards will also go to journalists from Kuwait, Namibia, Thailand and Haiti, as well as to KATHARINE GRAHAM, chairman of The Washington Post Company.
The committee was formed in 1981 to protect the rights of journalists and to document incidents of abuse and censorship.


Review/Theater: Les Atrides; Taking the Stage to Some of Its Extremes
Ariane Mnouchkine, the Parisian director, may or may not be one of the world's greatest theater artists, but who can doubt that even by France's high standards in the field she is a champion control freak?
Those attending "Les Atrides," the 4-play, 10-hour cycle of Greek tragedy with which Ms.
Mnouchkine and her company, Theatre du Soleil, are making their New York debut, will quickly learn that there are strict rules to be obeyed.


2 Officers Suspended Over Theft of Money
A detective and a sergeant in upper Manhattan have been suspended after another detective told authorities that the two took money from a car at a homicide scene and did not report it, the police said yesterday.
Saying an investigation by the Internal Affairs Division was continuing, the police yesterday refused to say how much cash the two officers were suspected of taking from the car, in which two men were killed in a drive-by shooting last month in Washington Heights.
The murder victims were suspected Colombian drug dealers, the police said.


If We Care How We Live, We'll Clean Up New York Ourselves
To the Editor:
"Litter City" (editorial, Sept. 28) recognizes the serious problem that exists in every municipality and community throughout this country.
We can wait for New York City to clean up around us, with our tax dollars, or we can recognize that the city's highways, streets, parks and playgrounds will remain filthy and that it is we who must live in it and with it.


Corrections
A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in the Vietnam War referred incompletely to President Richard M. Nixon's comment, in March 1973, that he wanted to "get Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from the White House tapes, is ambiguous.
In its full context, it can be read as a reflection of a desire to end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of the growing Watergate scandal.
Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a reference to the scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr.
Nixon was about to deliver.


If the Truth Hurts, the Giants Must Be Aching
Coach Ray Handley, considering the Giants' 1-3 record after losing to the Raiders on Sunday, concluded today that the team's biggest problem was that it "didn't exhibit a killer instinct."
"I felt it was a game we should have won," Handley said.
"We let them get away. That was the most frustrating thing of all."


China Accepts U.S. Insurer
The American International Group announced yesterday that it had been granted a license to open both life and property casualty insurance companies in China, the first foreign insurer to do so in more than four decades.
The new operation for A.I.G., a New York-based company that is the largest writer of commercial insurance in the United States and a major insurer abroad, will be based in Shanghai and will sell life insurance to Chinese citizens and foreign nationals, the company said.
A.I.G. will also provide property and casualty products to joint ventures and other foreign business in Shanghai.


Apology for New York Telephone Brochure
New York Telephone apologized yesterday for a brochure that it sent to 190,000 small businesses around the state that suggested ways to weed out prospective employees who observe Jewish holidays by taking the day off from work.
Under the heading, "Questions You'd Love to Ask a Job Prospect -- But Can't," the brochure said the employer should not ask directly, "Will you be taking time off from work to observe Passover?"


On My Mind; The Clinton Doctrine
The campaign of 1992, so long a desert of tedium and cynicism, has finally produced what the country has needed for too many dry years -- a lucid, warm adult statement of principle about what the United States can give to the world, and gain from it.
Of the hundreds of campaign speeches, a talk by Governor Clinton in Milwaukee on Oct. 1 is likely to be remembered longest.
It was meant for Americans but will be studied intently in the rest of the world.


G. M. Productivity Trails Domestic Rivals'
A study of the United States automobile industry's manufacturing productivity, due to be released this week, showed today that the General Motors Corporation, the industry leader, has fallen further behind its domestic rivals during the last two years.
The Ford Motor Company continues to lead G.M. and the Chrysler Corporation in productivity, but since 1989 Chrysler has pulled away from G.M. and closer to Ford, according to James Harbour, president of Harbour &amp; Associates of Troy, Mich., manufacturing consultants.


Yamaguchi Ponders Olympic Comeback
Kristi Yamaguchi has gone hip-hop.
Her on-ice costume is slinky.
Her balletic leaps are jazzy jumps.
"I'm just learning this sort of routine, so it's a little embarrassing," Yamaguchi said yesterday, before the Women's Sports Foundation Awards dinner in Manhattan.
"It's not what I'm used to. From one extreme to the other."


Holocaust Survivors Had Skills To Prosper
WHEN he was just 7 years old, Sidney Shachnow and his family were seized by the Nazis along with the other Jews in their Lithuanian town.
Sidney's father escaped, fighting with partisans against the Nazis; his mother was sent to a concentration camp.
Sidney was assigned to a forced labor camp.
Though laborers often starved or were beaten to death, he somehow survived for four years, until World War II ended.


More Than 240 Still Missing After Plane Crash in Amsterdam


Mayor and Council Still at Odds on Review Board
Negotiations between the City Council and Mayor David N. Dinkins on how to structure an independent police review board remained stalled yesterday, despite both sides saying that they want to quickly resolve their differences before the debate polarizes the city.
While the issue of an independent agency to investigate police misconduct has opened up racial divisions in the Council and fueled a bitter feud between the Mayor and the police in the last two weeks, the talks have run aground not on the broad question of whether such an agency should exist, but on the narrower question of who should appoint the board members -- the Mayor or a combination of the Mayor, the Council and the police administration.


First Investors Loses Ruling
A New York State judge has ruled that the First Investors Corporation, a mutual fund company known for its high-pressure sales tactics, acted improperly when it paid $14 million in dividends to its owners in 1990, shortly after it learned that the states of New York and Massachusetts were investigating it.
In a decision issued Friday, Justice Martin Schoenfeld of New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan said that it "appeared likely" that the defendants had defrauded investors, and that the dividend payment "was made with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud First Investors' future creditors," and was thus illegal.


A Viewer's Guide to the Playoffs
Happy happy joy joy.
After six months of CBS's Occasional Game of the Week, we get mass quantities of quality time with Tim McCarver, Jim Kaat, Sean McDonough and Dick Stockton.
We miss them so when they go on hiatus.
But post-season gives us up to 21 chances to atone for lost moments and unseen replays.
What can we expect? WILL MR. REPLAY BE IN OVERDRIVE?
CBS's penchant for spinning its Lazy Susan of replays until it finds the desired clip fits the new wave, living-in-the-immediate-past scheme of Ric LaCivita, producer of the World Series and the National League playoff games.
Perhaps it will be remembered that baseball is going on live and prudent use of Mr.
Replay is necessary.
Note: a potentially more conventional, more live game will emanate from the A.L. sites, where the games are overseen by the producer, Bob Dekas, and the director, Bob Fishman.
WILL THE McCARVER REPEAT-O-METER BE IN OPERATION?
Not if Mr.
Replay is restrained.
McCarver's loquaciousness is stretched when too many shots of the same play are shown, leaving him to repeat what he's just said.
Get the best replay done, then let McCarver (or Kaat) peer into the future, not the past.
BUT WILL McDONOUGH'S E.K.G.
SHOW SIGNS OF EXCITABLE LIFE IN HIS UNIVERSE?
McDonough is well-spoken, occasionally witty and knowledgeable.
He serves McCarver ably.
Yet he doesn't serve himself as well, being so vanilla bland and so devoid of passionate peaks and valleys.
We can't help but think of the drama endemic to games called by Vin Scully and Al Michaels when we hear McDonough's low-decibel act.
Have a ball, Sean.
You can be a star, too.
TELL ME AGAIN, WHICH RIVERS CONVERGE IN PITTSBURGH?
JOAN AND JOHNNY AND BOBBY?
This one is a staple.
If the Pirates' stadium weren't called Three Rivers, we'd be rid of this geographic gnat.
But as surely as the Statue of Liberty is in New York Harbor, so do the Ohio, Allegheny and Monongahela rivers converge at the stadium.
Get the jump on Tim and Sean before they say it.
Impress Rand &amp; McNally.
GRAPHICS YOU WILL SEE AND SEE AND SEE:
Barry Bonds's dismal playoff batting average. . . .
Ted Turner and Jane Fonda. . . .
Barry Bonds's dismal playoff batting average. . . .
Bud Selig. . . .
How 40-year-olds like Dave Winfield hit in post-season. . . .
Winfield's dismal post-season batting average. . . .
Barry Bonds's dismal playoff batting average. . . .
DON'T FORGET, WE WILL ALSO HEAR THESE (A LOT):
That Oakland has the most foul territory.
That it's called Skydome, not The Skydome.
That Skydome has a Hard Rock Cafe.
That they're not just highlights via Pat O'Brien, but ROCK-AND-ROLL highlights.
That Pittsburgh's newspapers are on strike.
That Pirates catcher Mike LaValliere is nicknamed Spanky.
That Andy Van Slyke altered his batting stance because of his bad back.
WHO'S THE GENIUS?
One motif you will hear is the ongoing debate (surely more crucial than the Bush-Clinton debates) over who the bigger genius is, Oakland A's Manager Tony La Russa or Pirates' Manager Jim Leyland.
If they're geniuses, what are Blue Jays' Manager Cito Gaston and Braves Manager Bobby Cox?
Are La Russa and Leyland bigger geniuses than Bill Walsh?
Another note you'll hear often: La Russa is a lawyer.
JIM LEYLAND, TOBACCONIST:
If CBS's cameras are on their mark, they'll catch Leyland in a corner of the dugout sneaking a cigarette.
Question for Jim Gray, CBS's N.L. roving reporter, to ask Leyland: "Never mind why you took out Drabek so early -- why don't you wear one of those new nicotine patches?" ALL HAIL KNUCKLECAM:
CBS must give thanks to the Niekro-Wilhelm-Tiefenauer gods for having sired knuckleballer Tim Wakefield, Pittsburgh's Game 2 pitcher.
Some of the best shots last year were the slow-motion replays of Blue Jay pitcher Tom Candiotti's knuckler mambo-ing home.
They were so clear you could probably see "Hi, Hoyt" written between the seams.
GOOD CAMERA, BAD CAMERA:
With its video arsenal, CBS has the power to give us glorious shots like some of these last year: Twins catcher Brian Harper peering in at Manager Tom Kelly in the dugout for the sign or Lonnie Smith's base-running gaffe in Game 7 of the World Series.
But it can also provide too many useless crowd shots, wrong angles, and (again) too many replays.
And when it's time for one team to celebrate and the other to mourn, don't miss dramatic slices of life for hackneyed shots of cheering fans.
YOU BOYS HAD BETTER PARTY WITH SNAPPLE:
Last week's shocking images of division-winning Braves swigging champagne on TV -- an image not seen since the days of Peter Ueberroth -- won't be repeated.
Baseball has told the four playoff teams to be teetotalers in front of the TV cameras.
Irate Moet and Chandon employees will carry picket signs outside the four playoff ballparks.
THE ROSS PEROT PRE-GAME SHOW:
The out again-in again Presidential candidate's 30-minute infomercial makes its debut at 8 P.M. tonight, a lead-in to Game 1 of the Pirates-Braves series.


1,500 ARE LAID OFF IN JERSEY AGENCIES
The New Jersey Supreme Court opened the way today for the immediate layoff of about 1,500 unionized state workers and the transfer of as many as 5,000 others to new jobs starting Tuesday.
Union officials who had gone to court hoping to stop the layoffs predicted that state services would be thrown into chaos.


Strike Forces USAir to Cancel Some Flights
A machinists' strike forced USAir to cancel about a quarter of its flights yesterday, but many travelers were able to find seats on flights of other airlines, most of which honored USAir tickets.
The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, which represents 8,300 USAir workers, started setting up picket lines yesterday morning after talks broke down late Sunday.


T.W.A. Accounts Put in Review
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it had put in review its American and European advertising accounts, which have combined billings of $45 million.
The review comes amid a pending change in ownership, with employees hoping to acquire the troubled carrier from Carl C. Icahn.
Craig Pavlus, T.W.A.'s senior vice president of marketing, said that both incumbents had been invited to participate.
Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York handles the American account, while Groupe FCA in London handles the European account.


William S. Chapin, 88, Manager Of New York State Power Agency
William S. Chapin, a former general manager of the New York State Power Authority, died on Friday at the Brookhaven Memorial Hospital Medical Center in East Patchogue, L.I.
He was 88 years old and lived in Mastic Beach, L.I.
He died of heart failure, his son Richard said.


Arbor Drugs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
Buena Vista Hospitality Group, Lake Buena Vista, Fla., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, Fla., to handle its $2 million account previously at Market Development Group, Maitland, Fla.


Deal Calls for an HBO Film To Be Shown Also on NBC
In a deal that signals further cooperation between broadcast and cable networks, a new movie produced by HBO will run on that cable network in January and on NBC only a few months later.
The two networks announced the deal yesterday and said it could be the first of a series of movies that could be put on television on each of the two networks within the same television season.
Charles Schreger, the vice president of HBO Enterprises, said he could envision as many as five HBO movies playing subsequently on NBC each year.


Add Weakening Market To Recipe for a Rate Cut
Today's stock market adds some piquant spice to the stew of factors that the Federal Reserve's chief policy-making committee will consider when it meets Tuesday.
On balance, economists said, the market's weakness made an interest-rate cut more likely.
Fed officials, already concerned about the fragile state of the economy, cannot turn a blind eye to the volatile situation on Wall Street.
What is more, Fed officials concede their anxiety about the economy's enduring weakness, even as they have already cut rates many times to spur the economy.


Review/Ballet; Some Russian Dancers Make Up for a Cancellation
Last December, some touring Russian dancers came to Lehman Center for the Performing Arts and moments before the curtain was to rise had to cancel their performance because their scenery had not arrived.
That cancellation weighed upon their consciences.
On Sunday afternoon, therefore, the little troupe, which cumbersomely calls itself Yekaterina Maksimova and Vladimir Vasiliev, Stars of the Bolshoi Ballet and Company, returned to Lehman.
As a way of paying what they regarded as a debt, the dancers accepted no fee.


Classical Music in Review
Chopin Trio  Kosciuszko Foundation
The Kosciuszko Foundation began its third season of chamber music Sunday afternoon with a concert by the Chopin Trio of Warsaw.
Each program in the series will feature at least one work by a Polish composer, with a particular emphasis on music of Szymanowski and Lutoslawski.


Lilly Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Writing Is on the Wall For Makers of Pen PC's
Pen computing, which as recently as six months ago was seen by many personal computer industry executives as the key to reigniting the hypergrowth that was the trademark of the 1980's, is languishing.
Heralded as the crucial bridge to millions of consumers who have shunned personal computers that use typewriter-style keyboards, the pen-based machines have attracted hundreds of millions of dollars in the last three years, both in venture capital and in research and development spending by dozens of hardware and software firms.


Video Display Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Values in Conflict Schools Diversify the Golden Rule
As the children surged from Public School 87 in Queens, Mary Owen worried about the state of traditional values and what she saw as the latest evidence of their erosion: a New York City curriculum that teaches first graders to accept gay people.
"I don't think you should teach innocent children that's an acceptable life style," Ms.
Owen said, as she waited to pick up two of her children from the school in Middle Village the other day.
"You should teach them the normal one, the old-fashioned one, white picket fences and a mommy and a daddy."


Kovalev Signs With Rangers
Faced with the possibility of a public-relations debacle, Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, yesterday signed rookie Aleksei Kovalev on the day the Russian player had threatened to return to Moscow.
"Would he have gone home? Who knows if he was bluffing?" Smith said.
"His bags were packed."


A Mixed Signal for Consumers; Cable TV Bill Provides Only Limited Regulation of Rates
The cable television bill will undoubtedly make life more difficult for cable television companies.
But it is not so certain that it will it make life easier for consumers.
Congress was able to muster enough votes tonight to override President Bush's veto of the bill.
Still, even many supporters view the bill as an imperfect measure that provides limited rate regulation and that will only chip away at the fundamental cause of soaring cable prices, which is the absence of competition.
Restraint of Prices


Sealy and Ellis Sign
The Indiana Pacers signed their first-round draft pick, the former St.
John's star MALIK SEALY, to a multiyear contract.
No terms were released.
Sealy, a 6-foot-8-inch swingman who was the 14th overall selection in the draft, averaged 22.6 points per game for St.
John's last year.
LaPHONSO ELLIS, chosen fifth over all by the Denver Nuggets in last June's college draft, has signed a five-year contract with the team worth more than $13 million.
The deal will pay Ellis in excess of $2.6 million per season on the average, slightly less than Nuggets center DIKEMBE MUTOMBO's annual average of $2.75 million.


D'Amato: Abrams and Crime
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is running a series of tough radio and television advertisements attacking the fund-raising practices of his Democratic opponent, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, and arguing that Mr.
Abrams's support for national health insurance would lead to higher taxes.
Last week, the Senator also began broadcasting this commercial statewide, but only on radio -- the medium politicians often use for their harshest attacks.
THE RADIO SCRIPT: Announcer, speaking over smoky, sinister jazz music: "Curiouser and curiouser said the cat." (A screeching cat's meow is heard).
ACCURACY: Mr.
Abrams opposes the death penalty, on the ground that innocent people might be condemned.
As a freshman State Assemblyman from the Bronx in 1966, Mr.
Abrams voted against a bill providing that "sentences of life imprisonment for murder, kidnapping and treason may prohibit parole." The bill passed 86-46; it made no mention of drug dealers.
That same year, the D'Amato camp says, Mr.
Abrams voted to oppose drug testing for convicted drug users, but Mr.
Abrams's press secretary, Timothy Gilles, said that a quick check of legislative records found no information about this.
The Deputy First Assistant Attorney General, James McSparron, was accused of using drugs with colleagues by his wife in a bitter 1990 divorce trial, and in pre-trial depositions, his lawyer asserted his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination, and he refused to answer questions about whether he had provided drugs to others.
But an investigation by the Albany police found no criminality, and in the divorce trial, Mr.
McSparron denied providing drugs to anyone, and he remains in the office.
Norwood K. Banks, an assistant in the Attorney General's office, was arrested on drug charges in 1985, and dimissed.
Nathan Riley, a former assistant in the Attorney General's press office, now works for State Senator Joseph L. Galiber of the Bronx, who advocates legalizing drugs to reduce crime.
SCORECARD: This ad holds that there is no statute of limitations in politics, using two 26-year-old votes by Mr.
Abrams to impugn his crime-fighting credentials.
It also uses the disparate cases of Mr.
Abrams's aides, one of whom was never even accused of any wrongdoing, to suggest that the Attorney General has harbored a drug den in his office.
With its meowing cat, insinuating voice and echoes of Alice's Wonderland, it treats Mr.
Abrams with a dismissive humor.
But Mr.
Abrams is well known as mild-mannered and non-threatening, and the ad's attempt to paint him as an evil archetype could backfire.


Free-Market Ideas Grow on Russian Farms
Ask about the "free market" or "reform," and people out on these fertile South Russian plains still begin to snarl.
But ask about the price of wheat or the cost of fuel, and the animated patter tells a different story.
A year after the Government began to wean agriculture from the hugely inefficient Soviet system, some tender new shoots of market are appearing in the hardened old collective farms, the kolkhozes.


Books of The Times; Discovering One's Own Life Amid Someone Else's
Doctor Criminale  By Malcolm Bradbury 344 pages. Viking. $22.
Francis Jay, the hero of Malcolm Bradbury's latest novel, has a lot in common with the author's earlier protagonists: Henry Babbacombe, the feckless scholar turned television writer in "Cuts"; the hapless professor of linguistics, Dr.
Angus Petworth, in "Rates of Exchange," and Stuart Treece, the bumbling English teacher in "Eating People Is Wrong." Though he has left academia for the world of literary journalism, Francis isn't terribly sophisticated about the workings of the world at large; still in his 20's, he tends to look at people and relationships as texts waiting to be analyzed and deconstructed.


Israeli Arabs Live Peaceably and Loyally
To the Editor:
"Winds of Islam Sweep Israel, Changing Landscape" (Umm El Fahm Journal, Sept. 16) gives undue credence to the gloomy and inaccurate observations of Dr.
Alexander Bligh.
Dr.
Bligh is not the Prime Minister's Adviser on Arab Affairs, but the immediate past prime minister's adviser.
Dr.
Bligh's job has been abolished by the Rabin Government in accordance with its coalition agreement with the major Israeli Arab parties.


Serbian Guns Resume Heavy Shelling of Sarajevo
Six months to the day after Serbian nationalist forces began their war for Sarajevo, the city exploded today with one of the most intense Serbian bombardments of the siege.
At least 21 people were killed and scores injured as volley after volley of tank fire hit civilian neighborhoods.
The bombardments set several high-rise buildings on fire and prompted residents to hurl their belongings over the balconies of blazing apartments in an effort to save their property.


Implants Won't Help All Deaf Children to Hear
To the Editor:
Re "All Deaf Children Can Now Be Taught to Listen and to Speak" (letter, Sept. 20) from Steven Parton, whose profoundly deaf daughter can use the telephone and enjoy music due in large part, we must assume, to her having a cochlear implant:


News Drivers Postpone Vote on Sale
The newspaper drivers union postponed a vote last night on Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to buy the bankrupt Daily News because of a disagreement within the union over newspaper delivery routes, union leaders and members said.
Douglas LaChance, the president of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, said that the squabble among some union members was minor and predicted that it would not stand in the way of rank-and-file approval of a contract with Mr.
Zuckerman, which Mr.
LaChance has endorsed.


National Book Awards Finalists Are Announced
Books examining the lives and words of two former Presidents, by authors who had previously won or been finalists for the National Book Awards, were named finalists yesterday in the nonfiction category for the 1992 National Book Awards.
Two first-time authors, one first-time novelist and one previous National Book Award winner were nominated in the fiction category and a previous poetry finalist was among the five finalists in that category for this year's award.


Devils Demote Vilgrain
CLAUDE VILGRAIN and BRENT SEVERYN, who were left unprotected by the Devils in Sunday's waiver draft but were not picked by other teams, were assigned yesterday to the Devils' top minor league affiliate, the Utica Devils of the American Hockey League.
In another move yesterday, Coach HERB BROOKS announced that CHRIS TERRERI would be the starting goaltender for New Jersey tonight in its season opener, against the Islanders at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


A Nail-Biting But Winning Brooks Debut
Except for a brief period late in the second period and early in the third, the Devils looked marvelous tonight, what with their new uniforms, with John MacLean back and with Herb Brooks making his debut as their coach.
The white, red and black uniforms appeared to be more intimidating than the white, red and green the Devils wore in their first 10 years at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Topics of The Times; The Battle on East 39th Street
A woman in a white Mercedes was talking on her car phone, stuck in traffic on East 39th Street in Manhattan, waiting for a parade to go by.
She threw a small wad of paper out of the window.
A passing runner gave her a furious look and threw the paper back into the car.
The woman screwed up her face, said something into the phone, and threw the paper back.
Two more times the runner threw it into the car.
Two more times the driver tossed it out again.
Finally, the runner lobbed the paper into the Mercedes one last time and triumphantly jogged away.


Plasti-Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Arbor National Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Man Who Kept a Client Who Wants to Be President
Not every advertising executive has a client who decides to run for President.
Yet Dennis McClain, who is heading the ad consortium creating commercials for Ross Perot, says that relationship is not why he agreed to work on the maverick billionaire's campaign.
"I think of him in terms of having the background to deal with some of the economic hurdles we have in front of us," said Mr.
McClain, who is president at Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., and president of the ad consortium, called the 270 Group.


Olympic Financial Ltd. reports earnings for Year June 30


Telling Tales of the Past With U.S. Documents
Ranging from the early 17th to the late 19th century, 16 documents from the collection of Americana at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, near 77th Street, are on display through Sunday.
Each item in the exhibition, "Markers of Change: Documents of American History," tells a story about some aspect of American history, including Constitutional liberties, racial equality, women's rights, military affairs and the role of American Indians.


CBS in Deal With Affiliates
CBS and its affiliated stations declared a truce yesterday in their long war over a network plan to cut compensation payments to the stations.
The proposed agreement worked out between the network and the affiliates could enable CBS to bid more aggressively in its effort to sign David Letterman, NBC's late-night star.


How to Stomach The Debates
POLITICAL pundits and Ozzie and Harriet types -- Democrats and Republicans alike -- are howling "Hobson's choice" over the proposed early evening schedule for the Presidential debates, which begin Sunday at 7 P.M., Eastern time.
But it is not the apparent conflict between family and country, the choice between sitting down to dinner or sitting down to the debates, that has people so exercised.
No, it is the inevitability of high-fat retro food.
Oh, some voice the quaint notion that "family dinner" means "no TV." But when pressed, most admit that just about everybody watches television while they eat and that it is the particular cravings that television arouses that make them feel fatalistic.


Du Pont Prices 10-Year Notes
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company priced for sale to the public $300 million of 10-year notes yesterday through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The notes have a 6 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.677 to yield 6.795 percent, or about 55 basis points more than the 10-year Treasury note.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Appeal Is Requested
A Philippine team dethroned as Little League baseball world champions said they had told Little League International to nullify a decision stripping them of the title or face legal action.
"We intend to file a damage suit if they do not consider our appeal," said SILVESTRE RIVERA, chairman of the Zamboanga City Little League Baseball Association.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Charts Poor Economy in 30-Minute TV Talk
Using an unusual purchase of 30 minutes of television time, Ross Perot took viewers on a graphic tour of America's faltering economy tonight and asked them to choose a President "who will do it, not just talk about it."
Armed with more than two dozen charts and a metal pointer, Mr.
Perot used virtually his entire presentation to dissect the causes of the recession.
The independent Presidential candidate heaped scorn on both political parties, contended that government had lost touch with the people, and blamed short-sighted policies for the country's indebtedness.


Rockefeller U. Opens A New Research Center
After the ribbon was cut on a new $100 million research center at Rockefeller University, a group of young scientists and students in white laboratory coats were invited to enter ahead of waiting dignitaries.
The significance of the gesture was not lost on many of the people who attended the ceremony recently inaugurating the John D. Rockefeller Jr. and David Rockefeller Research Building.
The university, with its new 14-story research center, is giving high visibility to a new generation of scientists in an effort to maintain its pre-eminence in research.


6 Reasons The Streak May Hit The Big 53
They are the only professional team from the New York City area with a better-than-outside shot at a championship.
The Rangers have depth, speed, goaltending, toughness, big money and a couple of super-duper stars in Brian Leetch and Mark Messier.
They should win this time, even in the spring against the Pittsburgh Penguins, the defending champions.
But because the Rangers are the Rangers, something could go wrong with the 1992-93 season.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Polls; Despite Perot's Re-entry, Clinton Retains Big Lead
Gov.
Bill Clinton continues to lead in the Presidential race, according to five nationwide polls taken since the re-entry last Thursday of Ross Perot raised the possibility of changing the dynamics of the race.
When the five polls are averaged, the result is 48 percent for Mr.
Clinton, 36 percent for President Bush and 10 percent for Mr.
Perot.


Sausage Making As Art, as Craft, As Family Tradition
LIKE folk dancing and strudel baking, sausage making is a traditional art form that is passed down from generation to generation.
Even today, when there are far more glamorous and high-paying professions than stuffing meat into casings, New York is blessed with a number of family-owned sausage stores that still use Old World methods even as the next generation takes over.
In neighborhoods from the Polish-Ukrainian one in the East Village in Manhattan to the Italian one in Corona Heights, Queens, families, in some cases several generations, practice a culinary craft many people thought was dying.


DAY OF CONTRASTS IN RANCOROUS RACE
The personalities and tactics of the New York Senate race were sharply etched yesterday, as Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato took his campaign to the Senate floor in an all-night filibuster for the kind of local cause he has made his specialty.
And in New York, where State Attorney General Robert Abrams has been trading rancorous attacks with Senator D'Amato, the state's top Democrat urged a sharp shift in strategy.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo warned Mr.
Abrams that to win he would have to find a specialty of his own, a way to set the campaign agenda and thus refocus the political debate.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The tax bill passed by the House was stalled in the Senate, and Republican Congressional leaders predicted that should it get out, President Bush would veto it because of tax increases.
A White House official agreed.
Several housing and banking measures also remained unresolved in the Senate.  [ Page A1. ]
Cable TV companies' lives will no longer be quite so sweet under the new law regulating their prices, analysts said, but the industry's growth will probably not be stunted.  [ D1. ]


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


CANNILY, YELTSIN DEFENDS PROGRAM
President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Prime Minister separately defended their economic program before the Russian Parliament today, but with variations that spoke of the struggle now being waged over the further course of reform.
Mr.
Yeltsin, addressing the fall session of the legislature, acknowledged "serious errors" in economic management and assailed three members of his Cabinet by name -- Andrei A. Nechayev, the economics minister; Pyotr O. Aven, minister for foreign economic relations, and Aleksandr A. Titkin, minister for industry.


Abortion-Protest Case Resumes in High Court
The Bush Administration renewed its argument before the Supreme Court today that Federal judges do not have jurisdiction to stop Operation Rescue and other anti-abortion groups from trying to shut down abortion clinics through blockades and mass demonstrations.
Deputy Solicitor General John G. Roberts Jr. argued that the Ku Klux Klan Act, a Reconstruction-era Federal civil-rights law that Federal judges across the country have invoked as the basis for injunctions to bar the protests, does not apply to actions motivated by opposition to abortion.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about Monday's stock market trading misstated the duration of the opening slump in the Dow Jones industrial average.
The decline lasted about two hours.
In addition, charts on the front page and in Business Day showing the movement of the Dow misstated the time the market hit bottom, because of incorrect data supplied by Knight-Ridder Tradecenter.
It was 11:30.


Ruling Party Ahead In First Angola Vote
Preliminary results indicate that the governing party of Jose Eduardo dos Santos was the winner in Angola's first democratic elections last week.
But final results will be delayed further by a recount.
The recount decision was made after complaints by the apparent loser, Jonas Savimbi, the former guerrilla leader, that the elections were tainted and hints from him that the country could return to civil war.


Unitrin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Candidates on Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush  TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live," live interview, call-in questions.
Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.) THURSDAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America." (Channel 7 in New York.)


Brazilian Minister Puts Death Toll in Jail Riot at 200


Perot Starts TV Campaign With a Blast at the Economy


U.S. Solar Sensor Is Launched by Chinese Rocket
A big Chinese rocket roared into orbit yesterday, carrying an advanced American-built sensor that is expected to help electric power producers around the world avert blackouts caused by storms on the Sun.
The $1.2 million instrument, built at the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University, was given a free ride into space on a Swedish satellite named Freja, which also carried instruments from Sweden, Canada, France and Germany.
Sweden offered Johns Hopkins space on its satellite in return for access to data the instrument collects.
The satellite was launched by a Long March 2-C rocket from Jiuquan in the Gobi Desert.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; G.O.P. Appeals To Legislators For Donations
With their receipts lagging behind those of the Democrats for the third month in a row, Republican fund-raisers in recent weeks have begun asking retiring members of Congress to donate their political war chests to the party to help President Bush's re-election effort.
The new appeal for donations, reported by a significant Republican fund-raiser who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, is the latest sign of the Bush campaign's difficulty in raising money as the President has trailed Gov.
Bill Clinton in the polls.


New Delhi Journal; As Looms Fall Silent, India's Social Fabric Frays
Nobatram lazily rotated the large drum, its wooden frame creaking with age as it pulled filaments of yellow cotton into skeins of thread.
Beside him, wood-framed looms clattered and banged as sweating men slammed shuttles back and forth, laboriously weaving a rough cloth, a fabric steeped in the traditions of both the Indian village and its turbulent political history.
Now, however, the slap of shuttles on rickety hand looms is becoming fainter as the values and traditions of rural life are increasingly supplanted by urban attitudes and tastes.
Modern fabrics, mixes of synthetics and cottons, come cheaper and faster than the unrefined cloth, known here as khadi, that comes off India's millions of hand looms.


Judge Moves to Seize Assets From Reso Kidnapping Tale
A trial court judge today took control of any assets that the admitted kidnapper and killer of an Exxon executive may gain from selling his story.
Calling his decision unusual and also inviting lawyers for the kidnapper, Arthur D. Seale, to appeal it, Judge Reginald Stanton of Superior Court agreed to establish a fund to administer any money Mr.
Seale has made or may make while he awaits sentencing in Federal and state courts in about four months.


Both the Jays and A's Have Scores to Settle
The Toronto Blue Jays and Oakland Athletics have set the standard of excellence in their respective divisions for so long, they have won all the accolades imaginable in the last half decade.
But that does not mean the teams have everything they want.
In fact, as they approach the opener of the American League championship Wednesday night, it is obvious that both teams have some mighty important business left to settle.
For the American League West champion A's, that business involves returning to the World Series for a third time in four seasons, but perhaps for the last time.
The core group of players most readily associated with those winning years could soon be facing their final games in A's uniforms.


Eagles Score a Big One, And They Sure Know It
The Dallas Cowboys gazed at the Philadelphia Eagles' defense on Monday night and saw stars.
"Right now, I feel a little sore," said Troy Aikman, the Dallas quarterback, after the Eagles' 31-7 victory in which Aikman was sacked four times and was intercepted three times.
Dallas also fumbled once, was shut out in the final three quarters and finished with 80 rushing yards (only 28 in the second half).


U.N. Sets Up War-Crimes Panel On Charges of Balkan Atrocities
In a new effort to end ethnic violence in the Balkans, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously today to set up a war-crimes commission to collect evidence of possible atrocities throughout the former Yugoslav federation and decide who should be prosecuted.
The commission, first proposed by the Bush Administration, would be modeled on the Allied War Crimes Commission set up in 1943.
The Allied commission collected the evidence of Nazi atrocities that was used at Nuremberg and in other trials.


Public &amp; Private; The Gag Rules
They're doing the gag-rule shuffle, here in this upstate city where the Planned Parenthood chapter is celebrating its 60th birthday.
The annual budget for family-planning services usually includes $340,000 of Federal Title X money.
But the board members and the staff have had to cast around for months now, figuring out where they'll find that money if the Federal funds fall through.
To receive Title X money, they have to promise not to discuss abortion, not to answer questions or provide referrals.
That is something they simply cannot do in good conscience.


Parents End School Boycott In Brooklyn
The second day of a boycott at Eastern District High School in Brooklyn became the last yesterday after parents and the Board of Education came to an agreement on improvements to the school.
Last night, after a day of talks produced a 12-point promise of improvements from Carmen-Varela Russo, the head of the school board's Division of High Schools, more than 200 parents emerged from a 90-minute meeting to announce that they would allow their children to return to classes on Thursday.
Schools are closed today because of Yom Kippur.
2


Unions at Daily News Urge Delay in Vote on Contracts
Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to buy The Daily News ran into some turbulence yesterday when an umbrella group for the unions -- showing support for the local representing the newsroom, advertising and clerical staffs -- urged a delay in ratifying new contracts.
"The consensus is, hold off," said George E. McDonald, the president of the group, the Allied Printing Trades Council.
"We are asking all of the unions not to ratify until we see where this thing is going."


On Police: Practicality, Not Symbols
Mayor David Dinkins's welcome call for an informal "facilitator" process to resolve civilian complaints against police eventually could help to reduce much of the emotion and misunderstanding that now complicate the issue.
The current Civilian Complaint Review Board, composed of both independent civilians and Police Department employees, rarely satisfies either citizens or officers.
It receives thousands of complaints each year, but substantiates police misconduct in only about 4 percent.
Aggrieved citizens charge that the board doesn't take its work seriously.
Police officials respond that the vast bulk of complaints boil down to the word of the complainant against that of the officer.


Book Notes
The Art of Sniping
There was tittering and gasping at Random House Inc. when a copy of a book being published by one of its British subsidiaries, Chatto &amp; Windus, began making the rounds in New York.


Allstate Raises Storm Loss Estimate
The Allstate Insurance Company yesterday revised its estimate of damage from Hurricane Andrew upward, from $1.2 billion to $1.73 billion.
As a result of the increase in expected losses, the company said, the after-tax impact on third-quarter earnings will rise to $1.15 bilion from $700 million.


Kissinger Mistakes Role of Protesters
To the Editor:
In Senate testimony on prisoners of war and those missing in action (front page, Sept. 23), former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger blamed the antiwar movement in part for making it impossible for him to exert pressure on North Vietnam in 1973 to make a full accounting of the P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.
There was no antiwar movement in the United States in 1973 -- or 1972 for that matter.
Ask George McGovern.


Review/Film -- Feed; Presidential Candidates When They Think Nobody Is Watching
"Feed," a compendium of candid glimpses at this year's Presidential candidates, is as cruel a film as you may ever see.
The contenders are caught unawares, some during seemingly private moments just before their televised satellite feeds are scheduled to begin.
This is the time for throat-clearing, for smile-practicing, for working on the handclasps or upbeat gazes or other reassuring touches that make up a public demeanor.
"Feed" observes these studied politicians both before and after they become their familiar selves.
The result is a revealing look at these specific candidates and the political process itself, at least as it manifests itself on television.
This film, like C-Span's "Road to the White House" series, presents the Andy Warhol version of campaign posturing.
Some minor but fascinating aspect of a candidate's nature is inevitably exposed when that candidate is shown glad-handing strangers or struggling to understand the quirks of high-tech equipment that doesn't work (Senator Bob Kerrey trying to answer questions posed by an interviewer he cannot hear).
Jerry Brown, viewers of "Feed" learn, is a guy who can pick a fight over whether his necktie looks straight.


Bream's Mad Dash Pays Off
It was the first run of the 1992 National League Championship Series.
And it might well hold up as the most remarkable.
Sid Bream, the first baseman with knee braces that look like building construction facades, scored from second base on an infield single?
"Usually you have to hit the ball to the wall to score Sid from third," said Braves infielder Mark Lemke.


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Braves and Smoltz Smoke the Pirates in Opener
The triumph for the Braves was so efficient, so clinical it was almost emotionless.
The pitching was precise.
The defense was airtight.
The offense was engineered with opportunism and by the club's less luminous cast members.
It all added up to a 5-1 victory over the Pirates in Game 1 of the National League Championship Series, but the full meaning of the night's math may be even more intimidating.
Atlanta's Strengths Are Obvious
The victory appeared to reaffirm Atlanta's obvious strengths -- its pitching and its depth of talent.
And it ominously underscored once more the affliction of anemic offense that has so fatally undermined Pittsburgh's post-season challenges.
The contest was a carbon copy of the final games that decided last season's playoffs, and an extended repeat is what Pittsburgh can't bear to endure.


Presidential Candidates Ignore Banking Problem
Six weeks after the November elections, a new banking law will go into effect that will force the President to confront what will certainly be one of the most unpleasant challenges of his Administration: the plight of the nation's banks.
The insurance fund that protects deposits is already $5.5 billion in the red and is supposed to stand behind $3 trillion worth of deposits.
It will be called upon to protect thousands of depositors at hundreds of institutions expected to collapse next year.
Yet the Presidential contenders have barely mentioned the issue.


For Building in Stone
To the Editor:
There is a link between and a solution to the two problems of jobs and wildlife in the Northwest and the damage that hurricanes periodically inflict on housing in the Southeast, which you outline in "Don't Blame the Owl"and "Plan Now for the Next Andrew" (editorials, Sept. 21).


Rush-Hour Concerts To Make New Friends
When Kurt Masur conducted the New York Philharmonic's first Rush Hour Concert on Monday, the orchestra began its experiment with concerts that start early, last just over an hour and are offered at reduced ticket prices.
The concert, which began at 6:45 P.M. and ended just after 8, was tailored to suit the presumed needs of young professionals who might want to try a Philharmonic concert without having to commit a full evening to it.
If the Philharmonic had any doubts about whether there would be an audience for its new series, Monday's concert put them to rest.
By Monday morning, nearly 2,500 of Avery Fisher Hall's 2,800 seats had been sold, and just before concert time there was a line at the box office.
The Search for Youth


Anita Hill Says She's Skeptical About Specter
Anita F. Hill, the Oklahoma University law professor who accused Judge Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment, said in a television interview broadcast today that she was skeptical of recent expressions of contrition and regret by Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, who interrogated her harshly in Justice Thomas's confirmation hearings last year.
On the "Today" program on NBC-TV, Professor Hill was asked about Mr.
Specter's statements in his re-election campaign that he now better understands the issue of sexual harassment.
Mr.
Specter has said he now understands why Professor Hill's complaint "touched a raw nerve among so many women."


No Headline
People should not assume that because the palm oil is gone, the product is healthy.
That may not be true. -- DR.
JOHN VANDERVEEN, an F.D.A. nutritionist.  [ C4:4. ]


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for 14wks to July 25


Kuwaiti Opposition Members Win a Majority
Opposition candidates, many of them tied to conservative Islamic groups and all of whom have called for increased democratic rights, won a substantial majority in Kuwait's first parliamentary elections in six years.
The opposition, which had earlier said it hoped to take between 10 and 15 seats in the elections Monday, walked away with 31 of the 50 National Assembly posts, according to figures issued by the Interior Ministry today.


Strike in Philadelphia Settled on First Day
Midway through the first day of a strike against the city, the two unions representing 15,000 non-uniformed municipal employees came to an agreement with the city.
Union leaders this afternoon told the blue-collar and white-collar workers to put down their pickets and report to work at the start of their next shift.
"We are very satisfied with the contract," said James Sutton, a union leader, said at a news conference this afternoon after meeting with city officials since early this morning.
"Based on what's happening around the country, we think it's the best deal we could get. We expect our members will ratify it."
The two municipal unions are affiliated with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
The employees they represent include sanitation workers, librarians and office workers.
Mayor Edward G. Rendell said that neither side had gotten what they wanted, but that both could live with it.
"The contract is extremely fair to the work force, while at the same time preserves this city's need to grow," he said.
He said that the agreement would provide about $450 million in labor savings over the next four years.
Today's agreement provides the city with most of the savings it had initially sought and gives workers more job security.
The agreement provides no wage increase this year or next year, a 2 percent increase in 1994 and a 3 percent increase in 1995.
The city will also reduce its contribution to the union-managed health care programs by $300 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.N.
CREATES WAR CRIMES PANEL  In a move modeled on avenues of justice pursued after World War II, the Security Council voted to establish a commission to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslav federation and prosecute violators.
A1  'LIBERATION' HITS THE STREET  The men and women in this drafty underground newsroom and print shop in Sarajevo express their defiance each day that Oslobodjenje is published.
A6


Sarajevo Paper Defies War by Staying in Print
When Serbian nationalist forces began their siege of Sarajevo six months ago, Kemal Kurspahic called together the editors, reporters and production staff of the city's main newspaper and made a grim offer to those willing to work under relentless artillery, tank and sniper fire.
"I cannot promise that you will be alive when the siege is over," reporters recall Mr.
Kurspahic, the 46-year-old editor in chief, saying.
"Nor can I promise that you will get any awards or promotions. But I can promise you this: As long as Sarajevo exists, this newspaper will publish every day."


Enzon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Penn State
Before their 6 o'clock game against Rutgers last Saturday at Giants Stadium, the coaching staff headed by Joe Paterno and most of the players watched the Florida State-Miami match with purpose.
The Nittany Lions will be playing the Hurricanes on Saturday at State College, Pa., before 96,700 fans.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Rural Texas Voters Resent Congressman's Loose Banking Ways
Two years ago, Donna Peterson tried everything to get elected to Congress, even castrating a bull calf to the delight of the powerful farming bloc in this deeply rural region.
Her proud mother has the pictures of Donna's neuter-op and will work a Christian evangelical crowd with them here in the peerless gloaming of a Texas evening to further her daughter's fortunes.
"Here's Donna doing the castration," she says, as if displaying a Renaissance masterpiece.


Flu Vaccination Urged Before Season Starts
PUBLIC health officials, who were caught off guard last fall by an unusually early arrival of the flu season, are urging people to get their annual flu shots now, if they have not already done so.
They point out that it takes about two weeks for the vaccine to be fully protective against infection by the influenza virus.
While influenza itself is usually not fatal, its complications can be, making it the nation's sixth leading cause of death.


Turnpike Bonds For Kentucky
The Kentucky Turnpike Authority tentatively priced $251.3 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds through underwriters led by Lazard Freres &amp; Company.
Yields range from 4.20 percent for a bond due in 1993 and 4.85 percent in 1997, to 5.75 percent in 2002 and 5.95 percent in 2004.


A Texas Newspaper For Hearst
The Hearst Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to pay the News Corporation Ltd. $185 million in cash for The Express-News, a daily and Sunday newspaper in San Antonio.
Hearst also said that it planned to sell The San Antonio Light, a daily and afternoon paper, and that if it could not find a buyer it would close the paper, which has been losing money.


Prosecutors Fault Police On Inquiry
New York City prosecutors and the Police Department were in sharp disagreement yesterday over whether the police mishandled the investigation of a detective and a sergeant arrested for stealing money from the scene of a killing.
The prosecutors, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that police investigators from the Internal Affairs Division, the Police Department's internal monitoring unit, had inadvertently tipped off the detective that he was about to face discipline by calling his precinct station house and that the tip had prompted the detective to flee.


Hearns Has Surgery
Six-time champion THOMAS HEARNS said he had surgery on his right hand at Butterworth Hospital in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Hearns said he has been troubled by the hand since before his second-round knockout by MARVELOUS MARVIN HAGLER in 1985.
Hearns said Dr.
LESLIE WONG found a fractured bone during surgery.


On the Border Cafes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


BanPonce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonds Off As the Fed Fails to Act
Frustrated in their hopes that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates yesterday, money managers dumped many of the bonds they had piled up in the last week.
Some had counted on selling their hoards to investors fleeing the stock market, but a calm day there created no appetite for bonds.
The sharp selloff reflected some traders' beliefs that Fed policy makers, who met yesterday, might not lower their rates as soon, or as much, as had been expected.


Passive Smoking Tied to Risk Of Cancer in Autopsy Study
THE case that passive smoking increases the risk of lung cancer among nonsmoking spouses has been strengthened by a study based on autopsies.
The risk was higher among nonsmoking women who were married to smokers than among those married to nonsmokers, Greek, Italian and American researchers found in a study being reported today.


People
*
Bob Cappelli was named to the new position of president at Fairman &amp; Schmidt Inc., Chicago.
He was previously executive vice president of marketing at Hartmarx Specialty Stores Inc., Chicago. *
Marcia Silverman, chief operating officer at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, Washington, was named to the additional position of president, a long-vacant post.
And Richard Marcus, senior vice president and managing director of the public relations agency's Washington office, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president.


Penobscot Shoe Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


In Chili, Mushrooms Instead of Meat
IF you long for a meaty flavor in chili but don't want to add meat to the beans, consider substituting some wild or cultivated speciality mushrooms.
They aren't inexpensive, but instead of chanterelles, which at $15 to $20 a pound are among the more expensive, you can use shiitake, at about $9 a pound, or cremini or an assortment.
The earthy, woodsy flavor of mushrooms comes at a very low caloric price -- four cups have about 320 calories and contain no fat.
Extra lean ground beef has almost twice the number of calories and 40 or more grams of fat.


Tentative $16.5 Million Pact Is Signed in Simmons Suit
Former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon and others named in a suit by Simmons Company employees in November 1991 have reached a tentative settlement valued at $16.5 million, a Simmons union representative said yesterday.
The agreement was signed on Sept.  25 by lawyers for Simmons employees, Wesray Capital Corporation investors and members of the mattress company's management.
It is subject to a vote by plaintiffs in the class-action suit and approval by a Wisconsin judge and the Federal Department of Labor.


How to Keep Businesses Without Incentives
To the Editor:
It is a good thing that New York City and New York State did not, as your Sept. 26 report states, choose to pay more than $50,000 per job in tax benefits to keep First Chicago Corporation in the city.
Inducing a company to remain in business in New York City only makes the cost of doing business here higher for every other taxpayer.
As you report, the city offered Prudential Securities $20,000 per job in August, and the company took it.
The practice of subsidizing some profitable companies encourages all nonsubsidized businesses to look outside the city for a better deal.
Only last week, New York City lost CARE.


Now What? U.S. Study Says Margarine May Be Harmful
In response to harsh criticism in the last few years about the amount of saturated fat in the American diet, many food manufacturers have reluctantly switched from palm and coconut oils and lard to partially hydrogenated vegetable oils made from soybean and corn oils.
Now, in a stunning example of revisionist nutrition, new data show that these oils -- found in margarine, vegetable shortening and a host of products ranging from doughnuts and pies to cookies and crackers -- may also cause heart disease.
This latest nutritional flipflop may boil the blood of angst-ridden consumers, who in the face of conflicting advice want to throw up their hands and break out the butter.
Wrong.
The basic message remains the same: Eat less fat.


For Tokyo Brokers, Time of Pain
The tumult in world financial markets has been brought home to Japan in recent weeks, with share prices here dropping sharply to end a big summer rally.
But when Japanese brokers assess these ups and downs, they are generally reaching the same sobering conclusion: even another sudden rally would not change the fact that the once mighty Japanese securities industry has faltered badly and must cut costs.
"The Japanese stock market is going through its worst decline since the war," said Masashi Takehi, a managing director involved in plotting strategy at Nomura Securities, one of Japan's largest brokerage houses.
"We are downsizing and must continue to do so. But it is not sufficient just to cut costs. This is a completely different and more complicated environment than we've had to deal with before. We have no option but to change our values."


No Letup in Abuse of Pakistani Women
To the Editor:
"Pakistan Provides Legal Safeguards" (letter, Sept. 18) by the minister of public affairs, Pakistani Embassy, is no more than a declaration of loyalty to Pakistan's undemocratic laws and law-enforcing agencies.
The minister states that Pakistani law does not punish women for adultery.
He is either misinformed or trying to mislead readers.
In 1979, the Zina Ordinance was promulgated by President Mohammed Zia-ul Haq, under which anyone convicted of adultery may be punished by stoning to death or a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for 10 years (maximum) and 30 lashes in public.


Wine Talk
RAINER LINGENFELDER is an idealist.
His heroes are men of accomplishment who are also thinkers.
Accordingly, his first-born son, a 2-year-old named Karl-Friedrich, was named after Karl Friedrich von Weizacker, one of Germany's most prominent philosophers and a renowned nuclear physicist who is also a brother of Richard von Weizacker, the President of Germany.
But it is Mr.
Lingenfelder's second son, Georg, who in his father's eyes bears the most important name.
The 1-year-old probably doesn't know it yet, but he is named after Georg Scheu, the man who created the Scheurebe grape.


Executive Changes
CYTEL CORP., San Diego, named Karin Eastham vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer.
CNA INSURANCE COS., Chicago, 83 percent owned by Loews Corp., named Philip L. Engel president.


Theater in Review
Criminals in Love  TriBeCa Lab 79 Leonard Street TriBeCa Through Oct. 18 Written by George F. Walker; directed by Lee Milinazzo; set by Marion Kolsby; lighting by Eric T. Haugen; costume coordinator, Carol Brys; stage manager, Joe Kubala.
Presented by Rattlestick Productions Inc., Tribeca Lab and Milinazzo Productions.
WITH: Elizabeth Browning, Grace Campbell, Elizabeth Chapman, John McKie, Ernie Shaheen and Garland Whitt.


Bean Nostalgia
To The Living Section:
Eben Shapiro's article on the thrifty bean, "Food Industry Views the Thrifty Bean With New Admiration"  [ Sept. 2 ] , evoked a rush of nostalgia for my childhood in North Carolina during the Great Depression.


5 Shows To Specify Seating By Phone
For the first time, Broadway theatergoers will soon be able to do what audiences in Los Angeles, Denver and Atlanta have long done: know their seat locations when they order tickets by telephone.
Starting on Oct. 18, Ticketmaster, the nation's largest computerized ticketing company, will offer telephone information on seat locations for "The Goodbye Girl," the Neil Simon musical scheduled to arrive on Broadway in February, as well as five other shows at theaters owned by the Nederlander Organization, the city's second-largest theater owner.


Episcopal Priest Resigns Amid Sex-Abuse Charges
The highest-ranking Episcopal priest in the nation, who headed a national committee examining the church's position on sexuality and the priesthood, has resigned following charges that he sexually abused young men in his upstate New York congregation, church officials announced yesterday.
The allegations surrounding the priest, the Rev.
Wallace A. Frey, rector of St.
David's Church in the Syracuse suburb of DeWitt, N.Y., are expected to stir uncertainty as the 2.4 million-member Episcopal Church continues to struggle with the issue of ordaining homosexuals, a debate that dominated the denomination's General Convention last year in Phoenix.


Topics of The Times; Anti-Smoking Ads
A bill before the New York City Council would require the display of anti-smoking ads to counter commercial cigarette advertising on city-controlled property.
In a recent editorial, The Times opposed this bill based on a mistaken premise.
We mischaracterized the bill as forcing tobacco companies to pay for advertising that condemns their own product, thus infringing the free-speech guarantees of the First Amendment.
That
could
be the net effect of the bill in actual operation, though nobody can be sure.
The bill's aim, to better inform New Yorkers that smoking kills and sickens, is praiseworthy.
Although tobacco products are legal, government need not be silent about their mounting harm to productivity and public health.


Review/Fashion; A Little Bit Exotic, But Soothingly So
Balancing charm with eccentricity, Rifat Ozbek introduced one of the most satisfying shows of the spring and summer season on Monday night.
The designer, who was born in Turkey and works in London, has presented his collection here for several seasons, attracting a strong following among the avant-garde.
He often brings an exotic eastern Mediterranean and North African slant to clothes.
This time he has gone farther east, to Indonesia, for batik prints, which he uses for skirts and dresses that look sweet and gentle.


Trusteeship Can Heal Russia-Japan Rift
To the Editor:
The planned visit to Japan by President Boris Yeltsin of Russia need not have been canceled over the differences the two countries have over the Kurile Islands.
A face-saving mechanism to the Kuriles dispute was and is in place, ready to satisfy the legitimate foreign policy interests of both countries.
That mechanism is the United Nations Trusteeship Council.
Placing the disputed Kuriles under the administration of the council for an "appropriate" number of years would satisfy a number of agendas:


Windy but Proud, D'Amato Sings for Jobs
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato tied up the Senate Monday night and into today, shouting, muttering and even singing for a total of 15 consecutive hours in what he knew would probably be an unsuccessful attempt to save 875 jobs at an upstate New York factory.
The filibuster brought to a halt the Senate's attempt to finish its business for the year so members could join the campaign trail.


Challenger International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Felipe Hernandez AIDS Worker, 29
Felipe Hernandez, a former development officer of the Hispanic AIDS Forum in New York City, died on Sunday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 29 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS-related illnesses, according to the forum.


Another Gap for Europe to Close
Ever since the pound sterling and the Italian lira were forced out of the European monetary system three weeks ago, politicians, led by President Francois Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, have been insisting that Europe's plans for a single currency by 1999 remain intact.
But, with disgust with the political class now running as high as in the United States, their attempt to save face and reassure markets has failed.
In Germany, the problem has become known as the demokratishes Defizit.
The phrase refers to the "democratic deficit" between what European politicians say and what their electorates believe.
This credibility gap, aggravated by the upheaval on currency markets last month, now appears certain to block any rapid return to financial stability in Europe.


Musical Chairs in New Jersey State Agencies
Yesterday, Libertad Matos's job was investigating citizens' complaints against the state government.
Today her job was behind the locked doors of Trenton Psychiatric Hospital, checking to see that patients are not wrongly committed.
Shocks like that were felt all over New Jersey today as some 5,000 state employees adjusted to jobs they were "bumped" into by more senior workers during a wave of layoffs.
Many have suffered disastrous pay cuts.
But many of these people consider themselves the lucky ones despite demotions, the loss of familiar workmates and surroundings and the assignment to strange new tasks.


Continental Pharma reports earnings for Year to July 31


Nebraska Prices 5.75% Municipals
A $177.1 million municipal financing by the Nebraska Public Power District was tentatively priced to yield a maximum 5.75 percent for an issue due in 2004 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The bonds were all in serial form and priced to yield from 2.80 percent in 1993 to 5.70 percent in 2003.


Campus Journal; A Weekly International Classroom, Via TV Link
"Ready to make history? You can tell your grandchildren about this."
Just seconds after Mark Taylor, a professor of religion, made this pronouncement recently to 10 students in a classroom here, the group was joined by eight students from the University of Helsinki and Esa Saarinen, the chairman of the Helsinki University philosophy department.
But the nine Finns did not enter the rooms through the doorway; they appeared on two television screens.


A Belated Graduation For the Banished of '42
Soggy, pink desserts stolen from the mess hall.
That is what Chizu Liyama received as graduation gifts back in 1942.
Fancier treats were out of the question after the United States Government forced Mrs.
Liyama into an internment camp before the commencement ceremony.
But 50 years later, the University of California at Berkeley gave Mrs.
Liyama and her Japanese-American classmates another chance to graduate.
Berkeley's convocation, an annual gathering to bring in the new academic year, was changed to include a graduation ceremony for the Japanese-American alumni who missed the one of 1942.


U.N. Resolution: A Balkan War-Crimes Panel
Following is the text of the Security Council resolution adopted
today to establish a war-crimes investigation commission for the former Yugoslavia: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
REAFFIRMING its resolution 713 (1991) of 25 September 1991 and all subsequent relevant resolutions,


TAX BILL IS PASSED BY HOUSE, BUT VETO BY BUSH IS LIKELY
Before quitting for the year, the House passed a sweeping tax measure early today, but Republican Congressional leaders predicted that President Bush would veto it.
A White House official said a veto of the bill, which includes aid for cities and a variety of tax breaks and increases, was highly likely.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate minority leader, said that because of the tax increases in the bill, "I don't think the President dare sign it." Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the House minority leader, said Mr.
Bush had no choice but a veto.


Continental Air Bidders Get Deadline
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday set a deadline of Nov. 9 for all bidders for Continental Airlines to submit their proposals in an effort to move along the airline's attempt to emerge from the protection of the court.
Robert Ferguson, the chief executive of Continental, also said that the deadline was intended "to provide an absolutely level playing field for each of the indentified interested parties."


Review/Music; Putting Milhaud's Many Personalities on Parade
Seventy years ago, Darius Mil haud's music was capable of causing the occasional scandal.
Audiences were offended less, I suspect, by the cheerful dissonance or the superimposition of one key on another than by a perceived lack of ambition.
Mil haud, whose 100th anniversary was celebrated at Merkin Concert Hall on Sunday, was ambitious in a way those listeners had trouble understanding.
The 19th century had trained them that music aspired to great themes of struggle and redemption, monumentality or the sublime.
Milhaud applied a keen wit, a confident technique and an unflinching curiosity to whatever segment of the world happened to be in front of him, no matter how small or banal.


Theater in Review
Democracy and Esther  Church of the Holy Trinity 316 East 88th Street Upper East Side Through Oct. 26  By Romulus Linney; directed by Elisabeth Lewis Corley; costumes by Amanda J. Klein; lighting by Nancy Collings; set by Bob Phillips; stage manager, Cathy Diane Tomlin.
Presented by Triangle Theater Company, Michael Ramach, producing director.
WITH: Frank Anderson, Fred Burrell, Kathleen Dennehy, Kathryn Eames, Mary Beth Peil, Priscilla Shanks, Maureen Silliman, Paul Urcioli and John Woodson.


Richard Eells, 75; Professor of Business Urged Philanthropy
Richard Sedric Fox Eells, a retired adjunct professor of business at Columbia University's Graduate School of Business and a leading authority on corporate philanthropy, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 75 years old.
Professor Eells died after surgery for an arterial embolism, said an associate, Chauncey G. Olinger Jr.


Schofield Ailing and Power Pitcher Leaving
The Mets' acquisition of shortstop Dick Schofield, considered an unqualified bonus this season, became seriously more suspect yesterday with the dual announcements by the team that Schofield had undergone shoulder surgery and that the player the Mets sent to the California Angels to complete the trade for him was the highly regarded right-handed reliever Julian Vasquez.
Schofield, who can be a free agent next month, underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair damage to the rotator cuff in his right shoulder.
The Mets said he would be unable to throw seriously again until February.


For the Record, Guinness Editor Knows the Most About the Best
MARK YOUNG, editor of the United States edition of the Guinness Book of Records, is on the phone again in his Park Avenue office, this time with a caller who claims she can floss her teeth in 20 seconds.
Certainly a noteworthy record, she asserts.
Mr.
Young is not so sure.
"Being a gentleman, I won't ask you if you have a full complement of teeth," he says.
Although she insists she indeed has all her teeth, the speed flosser is about to be let down.
After all, her skill is too difficult to measure, and perhaps even a bit hazardous.
"Although it sounds like a lot of fun," Mr.
Young tells her, "it's not one we do."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  PROSECUTORS FAULT POLICE ON INQUIRY
New York City prosecutors and the Police Department were in sharp disagreement yesterday over whether the police mishandled the investigation of a detective and a sergeant arrested for stealing money from the scene of a killing.
B3.
ANOTHER SNAG FOR DAILY NEWS PLAN
Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to buy The Daily News ran into turbulence when an umbrella group for the unions, in support for the local representing writers and editors at the paper, urged a delay in ratifying new contracts.
B5.


The Pop Life
After Ice-T
Repercussions are still being felt from the furor over the rap performer Ice-T's song "Cop Killer," which set off death threats, protests from police associations and denunciations from the White House, ultimately resulting in the record being recalled by Warner Brothers Records.
Now other labels, apparently fearing other public outcries, are calling for changes in some rap songs and totally rejecting others.


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Show and Tell, Perot-Style
Ross Perot demolished his own credibility as the candidate of candor.
After his tawdry exit in July and his unconvincing reappearance in October, only one voter in a hundred thinks he has any chance to win, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Seven in 10 voters think he should never have returned to the race.
On policy questions, however, voters think better of him.
When asked which candidate was tough enough to make unpopular decisions to reduce the Federal deficit, voters put Mr.
Perot first.
Therein lies Mr.
Perot's chance to turn his quixotic adventure into a useful exercise.


New Jersey Farmers Have the Thanksgiving Table in Mind


CHRONICLE
TERRY R. TAYLOR, who has directed sports coverage at The Associated Press, was named the sports editor of the news agency yesterday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.22
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.72
2.67
5.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.83
2.78
5.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.82
5.75
7.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.40
7.34
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.42
8.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.36
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film Festival; Shush, or You'll Cause an Avalanche
"Children, heed the warnings of your parents: peril awaits the incautious wayfarer and strews grief where laughter once played!" intones a narrator in the prologue of Guy Maddin's amusing film "Careful."
That pompous voice belongs to Herr Trotta (Victor Cowie), a scientific expert on the cause-and-effect relation between sound and avalanches.
It's a subject the character ought to know well.
For like everyone else in "Careful," he lives in Tolzbad, an Alpine community of apple-cheeked villagers whose scrubbed faces belie a Freudian wasp's nest of incestuous desire and sibling rivalry.
Life in Tolzbad is so precarious, Herr Trotta cautions, that even the cries of wild geese could unleash a snowy apocalypse.


CHRONICLE
Lawyers for WOODY ALLEN announced yesterday that they intend to file a libel lawsuit against Vanity Fair magazine because of an article in the November issue that contains graphic descriptions of advances that the actor/director allegedly made toward his adopted daughter Dylan, 7.
They also said that they plan to sue MAUREEN ORTH, the author of the article, and some unspecified people named in it.
In a written statement, the lawyers, J. MARTIN OBTEN and HARVEY I. SLADKUS, said: "We are outraged that Mia Farrow in her singular goal of attempting to damage Woody Allen has again trashed in the media innocent children by further invading their privacy. The statements that are being fabricated by Miss Farrow and her friends at her request have only strengthened Mr. Allen's resolve to demonstrate in court that she is an unfit mother.


Mr. Savimbi Gets His Wish
"Our people have never experienced a democratic election," Jonas Savimbi declared correctly a year ago.
"Democracy is a new concept to most . . . We must educate an entire nation."
Angola has now held its first free election, but Mr.
Savimbi, the anti-Communist rebel leader, is trailing badly.
So he rejects the people's judgment, indignantly cries fraud and threatens to resume a 16-year civil war.
That's his idea of educating a nation?


William Eaton, 67, Law Firm's Founder And Retired Partner
William Mellon Eaton, a founder and retired senior partner of the Manhattan law firm of Eaton &amp; Van Winkle, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old.
His family said he died of a heart attack.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cone Says the Yankees Have No Lock on Him
David Cone is trying to help pitch the Blue Jays into the World Series, but he cannot avoid the Yankees.
Questions about the Bronx being his future baseball home hound Cone, even on the eve of the American League Championship Series.
Of course, Cone is responsible for part of the distraction.
When the Blue Jays played in New York 10 days ago, he spoke about his love for the city, his respect for Manager Buck Showalter and his desire to reestablish himself with the crosstown rivals of the Mets, the team that traded him almost six weeks ago.


Denholm Elliott, Actor, 70, Dies; A Star Among Supporting Players
Denholm Elliott, an award-winning supporting actor who gained a reputation as an accomplished scene-stealer in the course of his 47-year career in theater, films and television, died on Tuesday at his home in Ibiza, Spain.
He was 70 years old.
He died of AIDS-related tuberculosis, said his agent, Jean Diamond.
She did not say how he became infected with the AIDS virus.


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League in Memphis has appointed a new chief executive officer, its sixth in nine years, to take charge Dec. 1.
The 200,000 members of the national organization hope that the appointee, 61-year-old Roy Green of Santa Barbara, Calif., will provide leadership and efficiency.
He has all the right financial and management qualifications: former c.e.o. of several financial institutions, including the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas; former executive vice president of the United States League of Savings Institutions, and a frequent spokesman for the thrift industry in Washington.
He has been chairman of the board at the University of California in Santa Barbara, and has served many other organizations in a variety of capacities.


Roy Ginsburg, 48, Professor Who Led Psychiatry Institute
Dr.
Roy Allen Ginsburg, president of the San Francisco Psychoanalytic Institute and an associate professor of clinical psychiatry at Stanford University School of Medicine, died Friday at Stanford University Hospital in Stanford, Calif.
He was 48 years old and lived in Palo Alto, Calif.
He died of leukemia, which was diagnosed less than a week ago, a spokesman for the Medical Center said.


Dell Expands Marketing By Telephone
The Dell Computer Corporation said today that it had begun selling more than 650 computer software programs, printers, modems and other products through its telephone marketing system in addition to its own Dell-brand computer models.
Analysts said the broad expansion should bolster Dell's rapidly growing sales and profits, but it was unclear by how much.
Like many computer makers, Dell has routinely packaged one or more of a handful of popular software programs with newly ordered computers.


Ireland Plans a Referendum on Abortion Law
The Irish Government has gingerly begun a new national debate on abortion, one of the most divisive issues in this predominantly Roman Catholic country, by setting a referendum on the question.
With Parliament coming back into session on Wednesday, the Government today disclosed its plan for a three-part referendum on Dec. 3.
The abortion law was thrown into confusion in February by a Supreme Court decision that liberalized the law but did not make it clear to what extent abortions would be legal in the future.


DMR Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Quayle's Working Hard To Give a Better Speech
With his speech at the Republican National Convention, and in thought-provoking addresses on everything from legal reform to cultural elitism, Vice President Dan Quayle has gone a long way this year toward disproving the notion, voiced most harshly by his own wife, that he cannot deliver a speech.
But recent moments on the campaign trail suggest that Mr.
Quayle is still not sure-footed when he is forced to speak extemporaneously, as he will be in the Vice-Presidential debate on Oct. 13.
Next to his convention speech, Mr.
Quayle and his aides view the debate as their best opportunity to enhance the Vice President's image, a mission that is crucial to his political future, both this year and in 1996.


C.I.A. Admits It Erred in Statements on Bank Case
In a rare public admission of error, the Central Intelligence Agency said today that it had given incorrect information to the Justice Department and Federal prosecutors in Atlanta about a bank fraud case involving billions of dollars in loans to Iraq.
The agency also acknowledged that it had failed to provide the Justice Department with all its classified intelligence reports relating to the case.


Bush to Name Convention Speaker To National Commission on AIDS
President Bush has decided to name Mary D. Fisher, who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS and is the daughter of a prominent Republican fund-raiser, to take the place of Magic Johnson on the National Commission on AIDS, a White House official said today.
Ms.
Fisher is best known for making a speech to the Republican National Convention in which she pleaded for tolerance toward people with AIDS and said the Administration needed to do more to combat the disease.


Yamamoto Joins Field
The newest name to join the New York City Marathon field on Nov. 1 is YOSHIKO YAMAMOTO of Japan, who has the third fastest marathon time in the world this year and was the Boston runner-up.
Yamamoto, 22 years old, has trimmed almost 9 minutes from her career-best marathon time in the last two years.
She will face OLGA MARKOVA of Russia, who beat Yamamoto in Boston.


New Wave of Cubans Sails to Florida Illegally
For the first time since the Mariel boat lift brought 125,000 Cubans to the United States in 1980, refugees desperate to flee the dictatorship of Fidel Castro are arriving here steadily in large groups aboard Cuban vessels, in defiance of American and Cuban restrictions.
The authorities say nearly 1,000 refugees have arrived in the last two months, nearly half the number for all of last year.


ANGOLA'S LEADER SEEMS THE VICTOR
Jose Eduardo dos Santos and his ruling party appear to have won Angola's first democratic elections, but electoral authorities announced today that they would withhold the official results pending a recount.
The decision was made after complaints by Jonas Savimbi, the former rebel leader, that the elections last week were tainted by widespread cheating.
He hinted that there could be a return to civil war, and there were signs that diplomats and others were trying to persuade Mr.
Savimbi to accept defeat peacefully.


In Family-Leave Debate, A Profound Ambivalence
Mary Wendy Roberts, the labor commissioner of Oregon, set out in 1988 to guarantee most of the state's work force -- 47 percent of which is women -- the right to 12 weeks' unpaid leave when they give birth, adopt a child or need to care for a sick relative.
Her strategy: show lawmakers that their own families or friends had a stake.
"We'd say: 'You've got grandkids. Was your daughter able to take time off?' " Ms.
Roberts recalled.
"The work force has changed so dramatically that people making decisions can't close themselves off from it. Someone, either in their family or among people they knew, would be coming to them and saying, 'Hey, I need that.' "


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton and Gore Return to the Call-In
Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore returned to the television talk-show circuit Monday night and today, moving their joint campaign from the old-fashioned handshaking of a bus trip to the newfangled discourse of viewer call-ins.
Often, as was the case on "Larry King Live" on Monday night, the occasion was comfortable: Mr.
Gore wore blue jeans, Mr.
Clinton's mother called to say hello from Las Vegas, Nev., the broadcast originated from a livestock arena.


Reporter's Notebook; In the End, Congress Winds Down to the Prosaic
On what was supposed to be the last morning of the 102d Congress, House members walked the aisles of their vaulted chamber with bags under their eyes and plastic bags of cookies hanging from their pockets.
More than a few legislators sunk into their chairs, asleep.
It was a Congress that opened with a lofty debate on whether to go to war, devolved into a pie-throwing contest over perks and finally sputtered to an end with an all-nighter devoted to unextraordinary matters like a tax bill that few thought would have more than a modest effect on the economy.


Miami Heat Signs Top Draft Pick
The Miami Heat signed first-round draft pick HAROLD MINERto a long-term contract yesterday.
Terms weren't disclosed, but published reports said the team's offer was for five years and $7.3 million.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Carolina Power and Light Co., Raleigh, N.C., is offering $100 million of 6 3/4 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2002 at 99.517 to yield 6.817 percent through Prudential Securities.
The noncallable bonds are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.
*
Consolidated Natural Gas Co., Pittsburgh, is offering $150 million of 5 7/8 percent debentures due 1998 at 99.125 to yield 6.05 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: a kitchenware shop in SoHo.
The time: a recent Sunday.
Stephen M. Silverman overhears a customer ask a salesclerk, "Have you got any environmentally correct corkscrews?"
Dear Diary:
It is one of the first cool days of fall.
A black pickup truck is parked at Lexington Avenue and 96th Street.
The New York license plate reads "Big Dog," and there is a very large Newfoundland dog in the back seat.


First Cash Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the third paragraph of the Sports of The Times column yesterday was replaced in some copies by a revised second paragraph.
The third paragraph -- referring to the lackluster performance of the New York Giants on Sunday in their 13-10 loss to the Los Angeles Raiders -- should have read as follows: "The adage is the quintessence of the killer instinct, something the Giants football team lacks. We know the Giants do not possess enough of this commodity because it comes from an unimpeachable source: the head coach of the team, Ray Handley. He said so yesterday."


Bank Yields Are Off Again
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit eroded a bit more this week, according to new rates to take effect today.
The slide is a continuation of a downward trend in yields that began with the last interest rate cut by the Federal Reserve in July.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida publication that tracks interest rates, said the week's decline in yields was slightly steeper than in the previous week, and that last Friday's employment report, which underlined the weakness in the recovery, might have set the stage for another cut in rates.


TSR Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; Marriott Bonds Reflecting Doubt
THE Marriott Corporation's bonds continued to slide yesterday, as debt holders' negative reaction to the company's restructuring plan persisted.
Charles Bishop, a bond analyst at Kidder, Peabody, said, "They just kept widening," referring to the spread between Marriott bonds and Treasury bonds of comparable maturity.
The increased spread signifies the increased risk seen by investors in owning Marriott bonds.


60-Minute Gourmet
ALONG the bayous of southern Louisiana, shrimp are so plentiful that they could be called a staple of regional cooking.
Along with crayfish, they are the most popular ingredient for jambalayas, etoufees, gumbos and shellfish soups.
Any Louisianan worth his file knows how to judge fresh shrimp by their firmness, color and flavor.
Most of the shrimp sold in northern fish markets are flash-frozen.
They can be fine if they have been treated well and sold quickly.
Shrimp, like crayfish and other shellfish, are ideal for quick home cooking because they are done in minutes.
And if there is time, the shrimp shells can be saved to make a broth that is an excellent base for soups or sauces.


Books of The Times; Soviet Characters, Real and Fictional
Fear By Anatoly Rybakov Translated by Antonina W. Bouis. 686 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Lincoln With Big V-8 Makes Debut
The Ford Motor Company began rolling the first Lincoln Mark VIII luxury coupes off its assembly line here today, an event most notable for the debut of the car's multivalve V-8 engine intended to compete with Japanese and European luxury models.
The 32-valve engine -- with four valves per cylinder -- can generate 280 horsepower, which makes it comparable to the engines that power the most powerful Lexus and Infinti models, as well as to the Northstar multi-valve V-8 engine introduced a few months ago by the General Motors Corporation in several Cadillac models.
An Electronic Transmission


For Solarz, a Career Ends in Grief and Relief
In defeat, Representative Stephen J. Solarz is being soothed by friends and former foes.
Gov.
Bill Clinton called to let Mr.
Solarz know "I am thinking about you in this difficult time," according to the Congressman.
President Bush wrote (but his note was not divulged).
And so did countless others.
Friends.
Colleagues.
Constituents.
Even rivals and critics -- in the waning days of the Congressional session, all became soul mates in his defeat.


Review/Television; True Love vs. Politics In an HBO Comedy
He's a bachelor United States Senator entering the Presidential primaries.
She's a widow and an outspoken writer of children's books and once, back in high school, she had a crush on him.
Meeting accidentally in a Maryland coffee shop, they fall in love.
She has a dreadful sense of foreboding.
His advisers consider her a disaster.
Welcome to "Running Mates," a sort of road company Tracy-Hepburn romp, a goofy comedy starring Diane Keaton and Ed Harris.
The HBO Pictures presentation can be seen at 11:30 tonight.
The movie, produced by Marvin Worth ("Malcolm X") and James D. Brubaker ("The Right Stuff") has an unusual history.
Originally, with Rob Reiner and Mr.
Worth as the producers, it was supposed to be a feature film released to theaters just before the 1988 Presidential election.
That proved impossible for assorted logistical and financial reasons.
Determined to get the movie done for this election, Mr.
Worth went to Home Box Office.
Actually, something was gained in the delay.
A calculated resemblance between Ms.
Keaton's Aggie Snow and Hillary Clinton adds a new and intriguing dimension.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 29


Regulatory Stance Is Called Key to the New Cable Law
Life will no longer be quite as sweet for cable television companies under the new law that will regulate their prices, but analysts said today that the industry's growth would probably not be stunted.
As many lawmakers celebrated their victory Monday in overriding President Bush's veto of the measure -- the first such Congressional success since his election four years ago -- cable companies were already girding for a new battle, this time at the Federal Communications Commission and in the courts.


Personal Health
MAGIC Johnson's announcement last week that he would return to professional basketball despite being infected with the virus that causes AIDS was reason for celebration by far more than the Los Angeles Lakers and his many fans.
It was a major encouragement for the millions of people who are infected with the virus, H.I.V. and for the many millions more with whom they live, work and play.
Those struggling with the knowledge that sooner or later this virus is likely to ravage their bodies and end their lives could not have asked for a better role model in how to cope in the meantime.
And their friends, relatives, co-workers and acquaintances can look to the star player's teammates and opponents for examples of acceptance of people who are H.I.V.-positive, too.


Small Computer Maker Counts on Discontent
With his soft-spoken demeanor and the carefully curled forelock on his predominantly bald head, Kenneth G. Fisher neither sounds nor looks like the type to affect the role of giant killer.
Yet talk to him and one hears the grim determination of Mr.
Fisher, chairman of the small and little-known Encore Computer Corporation and a journeyman industry executive who for more than half his 61 years has been toiling in the shadow of I.B.M.
He has wagered his company's future on the big-stakes game that I.B.M. has ruled for decades: mainframe computers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Now Bush Is in Trouble in His 2d Home
And George Bush thought he had troubles in Texas.
Now he has to worry about Maine, where he also has a home.
It has been 24 years since a Democratic Presidential candidate carried Maine, but two recent polls by The Portland Press Herald show that Bill Clinton is not only ahead of President Bush in the Pine Tree State but that he is also widening his lead.


Calming Los Angeles, Schools Chief Is Named
Settling for the moment a confrontation between racial groups, the Los Angeles school board has appointed a black man interim superintendent and named a Hispanic competitor for the post as his chief deputy.
After the announcement late Monday, Hispanic leaders, one of whom had threatened to organize a student boycott of the schools, said they would now focus their attention on the board's coming search for a permanent superintendent who would take office next July.


Ernest Volwiler, 99, Medicinal Chemistry Leader
Dr.
Ernest H. Volwiler, a leader in medicinal chemistry who did groundbreaking work in anesthetics in the 1930's, died Saturday at the Westmoreland nursing home in Lake Forest, Ill.
A longtime resident of nearby Highland Park, he was 99 years old.
Dr.
Volwiler spent his entire career with Abbott Laboratories, where he rose from a researcher to chairman.
Assisted by Dr.
Donalee Tabern, he formulated Nembutal in 1930 and, six years later, sodium Pentothal.
The drugs are commonly used as the first anesthetic with which to put a patient to sleep for surgical or dental procedures.


DIVISION AND JEERS MAR TORY PARLEY
The first day of the Conservative Party's annual conference broke into open division today, when skeptics of Prime Minister John Major's European policy punctuated an emotional debate on European union with heckling and noisy outbursts.
As Mr.
Major looked on stonily from his seat on stage, several speakers took the podium to openly attack the treaty on European union, which Mr.
Major supports, while delegates scattered around the hall hissed and booed some of those speaking on the Prime Minister's behalf.


Lakers See Past in Future As Johnson Rejoins Team
Earvin (Magic) Johnson, already in midseason form, barely arrived in time today for his flight to training camp.
Often in the 1980's, pilots would cut their engines and wait for a tardy Johnson -- the Los Angeles Lakers would never leave home without him -- so today it was virtually routine when Johnson came scurrying into the terminal only 10 minutes before takeoff.
Dressed in sneakers, a white mock T-shirt and bermudas, Johnson swung a hard left into the airport cafeteria.


Celebrating the Etruscans, Europe's First Unifiers
Throughout the more than four centuries since the Etruscans were rediscovered by Renaissance Florence, they have been idealized by generations of heady romantics, revered as much for the mystery surrounding their pre-Roman civilization as for the beauty and delicacy of their bronze and terra-cotta objects.
Now the Etruscans are again being rediscovered, this time by politicians, industrialists and intellectuals who are eager to promote European unity.
Their aim is to show that Europe is not just an economic bloc, but also a region held together by a cultural identity.
"The Etruscans and Europe," a new exhibition at the Grand Palais here, is a result.


Gay Students Seek a Ban on Campus Military Recruiters
Connecticut's one-year-old gay rights law is facing its first major court test here in a lawsuit filed by gay students who want military recruiters banned from the University of Connecticut law school campus.
Connecticut is one of only seven states that prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
But the state also has on its books an older statute that is aimed at protecting military recruiters.


Fur Is Flying in Madison Square Park
CONCERNED that hostilities between the dog people at Madison Square Park and her own small group of squirrel benefactors was threatening to get out of hand, Jo Mary McCormick-Sakurai thought it would be good and useful to have a ceremony to bless all animals that live in or use the urban oasis.
The 74-year-old writer of children's books was alarmed because in the two years she has tried to persuade dog owners to keep their pets from chasing squirrels, tensions have escalated from scowls and angry words to a point two weeks ago when one member of the squirrel faction told the police that he had been punched by one of the dog owners.


At Miami, a Player Ponders Re-entering a Race to Fight the System
Again and again, for more than three years, Darren Krein has sacrificed his body in pursuit of national championships and personal acceptance at the University of Miami.
Krein spent his time on the scout team.
He made his mark on special teams.
He has undergone arthroscopic knee surgery.
He volunteered to move from linebacker to defensive end, where his speed became an important factor last Saturday in the decisive ability to contain Florida State quarterback Charlie Ward.


Acquisition Capability Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


New Cash Subsidies Help Trenton Lure Businesses
The cross-border battle that lured the First Chicago Trust Company's 1,000 jobs out of lower Manhattan last month was a showcase for an aggressive new program that allows New Jersey to become a patient, generous, nonprofit landlord for companies that agree to move to the state.
The state was lucky that a developer had a new building with the kind of floor plan the trust company was looking for standing empty here on the Hudson waterfront, its owners all but begging for a tenant.
New York had no such space available in a financially stable building.


First Federal Savings-Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hytek Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Mother Who Abandoned Newborn Twins Is Found
In the Brooklyn hospital where they were born, they were being called Baby A and Baby B.
That is because 18 hours after their birth on Monday, their mother walked out of the Brooklyn Hospital Center without leaving either child so much as a name.


CHRONICLE
"I feel like the Bert Parks of Capitol Hill," ROGER MUDD remarked Monday evening as for the fourth consecutive year, he served as the master of ceremonies for a literary evening to benefit the PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction.
Sixteen writers took to the stage at the Folger Shakespeare Library's Elizabethan Theater in Washington to read from their works in a program whose theme was "Illusions."
"Where else other than in Washington would we dare to devote a whole evening to illusion, especially in a Presidential year?" the veteran newscaster asked the audience, which included at least one guest who has harbored illusions of the Presidency, Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska.


First Phase of a Harlem Project Is Completed


RESULT PLUS
TENNIS McEnroe Advances  An inconsistent but opportunistic John McEnroe found his serve when it counted and used it to eliminate Andrei Olhovsky of Russia from the second round of the Sydney Indoor tournament, 1-6, 6-2, 6-0, yesterday.
Making what may be his last appearance in Australia, McEnroe struggled early against the 115th-ranked qualifier.
After breaking three times in the first set and dropping only 3 points in his own three service games, Olhovsky suddenly found himself unable to solve McEnroe's mix of spins and volleys.
While McEnroe cashed in five of his six break-point opportunities, Olhovsky squandered all but three of his 16 chances.
"I got into a better rhythm as the match went on," said McEnroe, who could face Stefan Edberg, the top-seeded player and defending champion, in the quarterfinals.
Also advancing to the round of 16 in the $1.1 million event were No. 2 Goran Ivanisevic, No. 5 Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, No. 6 Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands and Patrik Kuhnen of Germany.
McEnroe's brother, Patrick, was a first-round loser to Germany's Patrick Bauer in a third-set tie breaker. (AP) Borg Stumbles Again: Bjorn Borg's unsuccessful comeback took another turn for the worse when he lost to a 19-year-old French qualifier, Lionel Roux, 6-0, 6-4, in the first round of the $315,000 Toulouse Open in Toulouse, France.
Borg had lost all seven previous first-round matches in ATP tournaments this year without winning a set.
Roux was the lowest-ranked player Borg played on the regular circuit since coming back from retirement. (AP) SOCCER Officials Visit Stadium  A technical committee from FIFA, the world governing body of soccer, inspected Giants Stadium yesterday to determine matters such as position of television cameras and the location of advertising billboards for the 1994 World Cup.
The most significant development from the committee's visit was the determination that the dimensions of the playing field will be 66 meters wide and 103 meters long.
These dimensions are 2 meters narrower and 2 meters shorter than the average dimensions for World Cup games.
"This is the most spectacular stadium in the world," said Guido Tognoni, the top press officer for FIFA.
"Not to play on it because it's one meter or less shorter would be a sin."
Some observers have thought that the smaller field would encourage teams to play defensively, which was FIFA's big complaint about the 1990 World Cup in Italy.
Giants Stadium was the eighth stadium inspected in eight days by the committee, which will conclude its tour with a visit to Foxboro Stadium on Wednesday.
In another development, Alan Rothenberg, the chairman and chief executive officer of World Cup U.S.A. 1994, announced the appointment of Sunil Gulati to the position of senior vice president and chief international officer.


Rockefeller University Seeks to Stay in Lead of Medical Research


Review/Music; A Contest Winner by Handel Receives Its American Premiere
Handel's opera "Muzio," which received its American premiere at Merkin Concert Hall on Monday night, was written for a competition that took place in 1721 in London, between Handel and his rival for the public's affections, Giovanni Bononcini.
In a marketing feat now matched only by the packaging of rock groups or tenors, the Royal Academy of Music challenged the two composers to write an act of an opera based upon a tale by Livy. (The notion of operatic competiton was fairly common at the time. A few years later Handel was to write "Alessandro" largely as a vehicle for a vocal competition between the two premiere sopranos of the day.)
Since the libretto by Paolo Rolli had three acts (Bononcini was to write the second and Handel the third), a hapless scrivener -- a cellist nicknamed Pippo -- was found to pen the first.


Reconsider Car Ban On Staten Island Ferry
To the Editor:
As a Manhattan resident who teaches at the only branch of the City University in Staten Island, I have been waiting for the reopening of the Staten Island ferry to vehicles.
In my more than 25 years of teaching in Staten Island, there have been numerous occasions when I have not been able to reach the island by the Verrazano Bridge because of treacherous weather conditions.
Public transportation on Staten Island is notoriously unreliable, but I was always able to hold classes as long as I could take a car onto the ferry.
That the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has decided (news article, Sept. 16) to cancel future vehicle ferries -- a plan stemming from the fire that destroyed the ferry terminal -- is further proof that New York City does not care about its Staten Island residents.
If this were a careful and considered plan, it would not have hinged on an accident.
It would have been a fact of city planning.
The question is whether or not Staten Island is ever a consideration in the minds of those who plan for New York.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 2
Sept 25
Oct. 4
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.3
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
2.9
3.0
Gasoline stocks
210.3
208.2
216.5
Distillate stocks
131.5
133.1
136.8
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.3
5.4
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.7
2.5
Crude stocks
324.8
322.8
338.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
90.4
89.5
87.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Nutritious And Tasty New Flour
THERE is an excellent new flour on the market for bakers.
Made from white whole wheat, it combines the nutritiousness of regular whole wheat flour with all-purpose flour's milder flavor and ease of use.
The product, white whole wheat flour, is not made from a new type of wheat but from a strain of wheat that is different from red wheat, the kind that is generally used in this country for flour and baking.
Unlike whole wheat flour milled from red wheat, which is brown in color and has a distinctive bitterness and astringency in its flavor, white whole wheat is pale, with some golden flecks, and has a bland taste with only a slight nuttiness.


U.S. Shipyards Cost Too Much
To the Editor:
The United States shipbuilding industry is a sad example of an American industry that has failed to remain internationally competitive.
United States yards were unable to compete in the worldwide shipbuilding surge of the 1970's, and now as the world prepares to spend billions on a new generation of double-hull tankers and on renewing commercial cargo fleets, United States yards are preoccupied seeking a law to bar ships built in subsidized foreign yards from trading in United States ports until the shipowners repay the subsidies.
Chevron Shipping is among the companies building ships in foreign yards.
We have a major fleet-renewal program and would consider placing contracts with United States shipyards if we could obtain ships of equivalent quality at prices comparable to those offered by foreign yards.
However, each year we compare United States and foreign construction costs, and consistently find that United States prices are about double overseas prices for similar vessels.


Rosebud Frantz, Indian Authority And Sitting Bull Descendant, 85
Rosebud Yellow Robe Frantz, a great-grandniece of Chief Sitting Bull, who devoted her life to making American Indian culture available to other Americans, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 85 years old and had lived in Forest Hills, Queens, and Douglaston, Queens, since 1928.
She died of cancer, said Marjorie Weinberg, a family friend.


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Reclaimed Brad Goebel, quarterback, off waivers.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Released Bobby Abrams, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Named Mike Hanson director of public relations.
Resigned Darren Anderson, cornerback, to the practice squad.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Mike Jones, tight end.
Released Rafael Robinson, safety.
HOCKEY National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Traded Patrick Lebeau, left wing, to the Calgary Flames for future considerations.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Assigned Claude Vilgrain, forward, and Brent Severyn, defenseman, to Utica of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Per Djoos and Sergei Zubov, defensemen, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Mayor Fights Review Plan Over Legality
The Dinkins administration asserted yesterday that the City Council's proposal on a new board to investigate police misconduct would violate the City Charter, throwing a wrench into negotiations between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Council on the makeup of the board.
The city's chief lawyer, O. Peter Sherwood, said the City Council did not have the authority to appoint members to the police review board.
The Council's intention to make such appointments is at the heart of its proposal on how the board should be structured.


CCX Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


New Jersey Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Citicorp's Stock Hits 6-Month Low
Citicorp's stock fell to a six-month low yesterday as traders and investors showed dismay at the company's surprising announcements late Monday about its earnings and the resignation of its president, Richard Braddock.
Mr.
Braddock was the banking giant's second-ranking officer.
The company said its quarterly earnings would be lower than expected, which came as a shock because Citicorp officials had informally led Wall Street analysts to believe that its foreign currency trading had been highly profitable during the recent turmoil.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Autumnal Reprieve
ALL I am saying, to paraphrase John Lennon, is give baseball a chance.
That's right.
Bygones be bygones.
It's a whole new season.
Let's pretend this whole ugly, disputatious season never happened and just focus on the 5-1 victory by John Smoltz and the Braves over the Pirates last night in the opener of the National League championships.


Lemieux Dazzles, but Flyers Tie
The National Hockey League's new era opened tonight with a showcase game that mixed ragged play, tense moments, a poised veteran with superstar credentials, a jittery rookie with superstar potential, great goaltending, a coach who decided to return and an apparent winning goal that was nullified.
The show, a 3-3 tie between the Philadelphia Flyers and the Pittsburgh Penguins, was carried live across the United States by ESPN, the cable network that has returned to cover the league after the N.H.L.'s unsuccessful four-year fling with SportsChannel America, a carrier that reaches far fewer households.


Food Notes
Miller's Barley Beer
Having covered the market with regular, light, dry, draft and nonalcoholic beers, it looks as if the Miller Brewing Company is now taking on the fancier beers, imports and beers made by micro-breweries.
The latest entries in the Miller stable are draft, regular and light versions of Miller Reserve 100 percent barley.


Possis Corp. reports earnings for Year July 31


World Stock Prices Stabilize; Dow Off 0.81
The world's major stock markets stabilized yesterday following Monday's sharp gyrations.
Prices on European exchanges recovered some but not all the big losses of a day earlier, inspired in part by the impressive recovery on the New York Stock Exchange Monday afternoon.
Analysts said a renewed hope that the Bundesbank might cut interest rates also helped shore up prices.


Andretti Is Honored
MARIO ANDRETTI, one of the most versatile and successful drivers in motorsports history, was named last night as the Driver of the Quarter Century (1967-1991) at a ceremony in Concord, N.C.
Andretti, 52, was chosen from among 10 finalists in a vote by the 12-member driver of the year panel of motorsports journalists and former drivers of the year.


Confronted With Deficit, Suffolk Legislature Approves Plan to Borrow $35 Million
In the face of a budget deficit that would have stopped government paychecks next month, the Suffolk County Legislature today narrowly approved a plan to borrow up to $35 million.
It was a step that nobody was pleased to take, not even the 10 legislators who voted for the plan, which is part of a broader attack on the deficit involving tax increases.
The eight legislators who opposed borrowing the money said that the county should have tried harder to cuts jobs and services.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Filling Tropicana Presidency Expected to Take 2 Months
The Seagram Company said yesterday that it would probably take about two months to fill the post of William G. Pietersen, the president of its Tropicana Products division, who said this week that he planned to leave the company at the end of January.
Mr.
Pietersen, who was named to the position last January, said he planned to return to the Northeast for family reasons.
Tropicana is based in Bradenton, Fla.


On Outside Looking In: Immigrants With H.I.V.
Five years after the Federal Government decided that H.I.V. was a reason for keeping immigrants out of this country, hundreds of immigrants already in New York and other American cities where they often settle are living in a legal and emotional limbo.
In the view of the Government, immigrants infected with H.I.V. represent a financial drain on the public since they almost certainly face an expensive medical future.
State Department guidelines note that the average lifetime cost of the illness has been estimated at $85,000.


Bottom of the League Catching Up to Giants
At 2:30 Monday morning, on the Giants' team bus, somebody asked Coach Ray Handley if he knew the Washington-Phoenix score.
Handley confidently replied that "Washington killed them." After all, the last time he saw the score, the Redskins were leading the lowly Cardinals, 24-6.


Cauthen Wants Arazi
If Arazi runs in the Breeders' Cup Mile, jockey STEVE CAUTHEN wants to be along for the ride.
Cauthen is Arazi's regular rider when the 3-year-old colt races in Europe, while PAT VALENZUELA gets the mount in the United States.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- New Jersey; For Old Republican Reasons, New Jersey Leans to Clinton
In the 1950's and 1960's, hundreds of thousands of city dwellers, mostly white and mostly working class or lower middle class, left the turbulence of New York or Philadelphia behind, crossed the Hudson or the Delaware and settled in the clusters of suburbs that sprang up in New Jersey.
Many were Democrats who continued to vote for their party's candidates in state and local contests but who in Presidential elections supported Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan and George Bush, with their promises to get tough on crime.
They have been the main reason New Jersey, a place with a diverse ethnic mix and a lusty and unpredictable political past that is still a swing state for most purposes, has backed the Republican Presidential nominee six times in a row -- as steady a record as that of prim and proper Utah.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COOPER INDUSTRIES INC., Houston, said it had completed the acquisition of Moog Automotive Group, Inc. from Ifint S.A. of Luxembourg.
DYNCORP, Reston, Va., a professional and technical services firm, announced that its subsidiary Dyncorp-Viar had been awarded a $16.5 million five-year contract from the Environmental Protection Agency.


National Museum Redone, Director Is Stepping Down
When Roger G. Kennedy wanted to mark the bicentennial of the Constitution in 1987, the director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History chose to mount an exhibition chronicling one of the most extreme Constitutional violations in American history: the internment of 120,000 Japanese-Americans during World War II.
Never one to shy away from either controversy or showmanship, the 66-year-old director said today that he was stepping down after 13 years during which he transformed what had been called "the nation's attic" from a stodgy repository of old locomotives and First Ladies' gowns into a politically provocative and frequently flashy panoply of programs about topics like the origins of urban black America and the historical travails of feminism.


Ecology &amp; Environment reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


INSIDE
Opposition Gains in Kuwait
Voters gave opposition candidates a majority in the country's first parliamentary elections in years.
Page A12.
Mexico Governor Resigns
The Governor of Michoacan state, a governing-party stronghold, quit under pressure from leftists.
Page A3.
Justices Hear Abortion Case
The Supreme Court again heard arguments on demonstrators' efforts to shut down abortion clinics.
Page A14.
Immigrants With H.I.V.
Hundreds of immigrants with the virus that causes AIDS are living in legal and emotional limbo.
Page B1.


Cause of 747 Crash Is Elusive, but Boeing Urges Inspection of Pins
Federal safety officials said they had no theory yet about why a Boeing 747 jet crashed in the Netherlands, as the manufacturer urged airlines around the world to inspect the metal pins that hold the engines on that kind of plane.
Boeing officials said the inspections, to be followed by replacement of the pins with a redesigned part, were being planned even before an El Al cargo jet crashed in the Netherlands on Sunday night after both engines on one wing were damaged and came off the plane.


Mexico Politician Out; Chief Set Back
In a political setback for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, a state Governor from the governing party stepped down today after months of protests by leftists who asserted that he had won by fraud.
The departure of the official, Eduardo Villasenor, came three weeks after he was sworn in as Governor of the western state of Michoacan, the left's most important stronghold, as Mr.
Salinas sat smiling on the dais beside him.


With Turkish Support, Kurds In Iraq Strike at Rebel Bases
Iraqi Kurds backed by Turkish fighter planes are carrying out a major military offensive to drive Turkish Kurdish separatists from their guerrilla bases in northern Iraq, senior Kurdish military officials say.
The operation, which began on Friday, stretches the length of northern Iraq's mountain border with Turkey, from Syria to Iran.
Military officials estimated that about 10,000 Iraqi Kurdish guerrillas had surrounded rebels of the Turkish Kurdistan Workers' Party and cut their supply lines.


F.B.I. Investigating Possible Gaps in File On Clinton Passport
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is examining a possible theft of documents from Gov.
Bill Clinton's passport records after the State Department discovered that pages were missing from his file, Administration officials said today.
One official, who would speak only on the condition of not being identified, said the State Department had asked the bureau late last week to investigate the situation, after discovering that several pages of Mr.
Clinton's passport file had been removed.


Walton Gets N.B.C. Job
BILL WALTON is in as an insider for NBC's pre-game shows for National Basketball Association games.
BOB FERRY is out.
Walton, who had been an analyst on CBS's N.C.A.A. men's basketball tournament broadcast, has signed a two-year contract with NBC worth an estimated $150,000 annually.


An Ideological Divide; Concern Over Jobs Drives the Debate On North American Trade Agreement
With President Bush overseeing today's initialing of the North American Free Trade Agreement in San Antonio, and with Gov.
Bill Clinton cautiously endorsing the pact, its eventual approval by Congress would seem assured, were not nearly 10 million Americans out of work.
The approval of Congress, while still likely, is uncertain because of a chorus of increasingly blunt calls for the United States to pursue its self-interest more narrowly in all its trade and foreign aid policies.
"I am all for helping poor nations develop their economies, but not at the expense of workers in Ohio and the rest of the United States," said Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio.


Perot Shouldn't Participate in Debates; Saturday Voting
To the Editor:
"Fishing for Votes on Saturday" (Topics of The Times, Sept. 9) is notable for insensitivity.
While a few other countries may schedule elections on weekends, ours has a tradition of not doing so, to avoid forcing people to violate their religious beliefs by voting on their sabbath.
Those few jurisdictions in this country that have held elections on weekends have witnessed no appreciable increase in voter turnout.
I hope you and others cease your untenable efforts to link declining voter turnout to weekday elections, inconvenient registration procedures and other such red herrings.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Midweek Report
Week 6
The bye factor theory, which holds that teams tend to suffer letdowns the week before an open date, is suffering from a lack of supporting evidence this season.
Based on three weeks' experience, the record is now 8-8 for teams playing their last games before a weekend off.
The theory, articulated last season by Coach Jimmy Johnson of the Dallas Cowboys, suggests that players facing an open date are so busy planning the following week's activities that they forget to tend to business.
There is some evidence, to be sure, that the bye factor picks up strength as the season goes along.
Last weekend, for example, not counting a game between two bye-bound teams, the four others posted a composite 1-3 record.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Fastball Had Grand Slam And Gant Written All Over It
Bob Walk's 3-1 fastball to Ron Gant in the third inning left the bat in splinters.
Walk's 2-0 fastball to Gant in the fifth left the game in ashes.
Gant, the Braves' left fielder, dug in against Walk in the fifth inning today with the bases loaded and the Braves leading by 4-0 and quickly dug through his recent memory.
He remembered his broken bat.
He comprehended the jam Walk was in with a 2-0 count.
He guessed fastball all the way.


In Changing World, the Catholic Workers Hew to Their Course
A sign promising "coffee, companionship and free manual labor" brought a few regulars to the smoky auditorium where they were painstakingly hand-folding and stamping 90,000 copies of The Catholic Worker, the paper that still costs a penny and has hardly changed since its founding in 1933.
The job takes about a month.
But at Maryhouse, the 55 East Third Street "house of hospitality" for the poor where Dorothy Day lived and died, disciples of the movement she and Peter Maurin founded still hold dear such Catholic Worker traditions as the value of working with one's hands.


Gennum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Television; Personal Privacy vs. Freedom of the Press
Does NBC track CBS?
Two weeks ago, "48 Hours" carried a program about privacy that included the complaints of Arthur Ashe and Delta Burke about their treatment by press and television and showed a tabloid photographer in hot pursuit.
Tonight "First Person With Maria Shriver" carries a program about privacy that includes the complaints of Arthur Ashe and Delta Burke and catches tabloid photographers in hot pursuit.
"Total Exposure: Privacy and the Press" ventures into the fuzzy area where freedom of the press collides with an individual's right to be left alone.
Ms.
Shriver starts things off with her personal dilemma, which consists of being "as aggressive as the next reporter" at the same time that she is pained by the attention directed at her "as a member of the Kennedy family and as the wife of a famous movie star," not to mention as a network news personality.
You can send your tax-free contribution to Saving the Celebrities.


Total Research Corp. reports earnings for Year June 30


To Teach the New Policing, A New Kind of Police Teacher
Elsie Scott, charged with changing the soul of the New York City Police Department, is a rarity in the force: black, a woman and raised in the rural South.
As deputy commissioner for training at a time when the department is undertaking the new concept of community policing, her role has taken on increased significance with the departure of Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, the program's chief advocate, and the unruly police demonstration at City Hall last month that has raised questions about the officers' attitudes toward the communities that they police.


INSIDE
Israelis Fire on Protesters
At least 90 Arabs were reportedly shot and wounded by plastic and rubber bullets when soldiers fired on protesters in the Gaza Strip.
Page A3.
A's and Braves Win
Oakland beat Toronto, 4-3, in the American League opener, and Atlanta defeated Pittsburgh again, 13-5, in the National League series.
Page B31.
Critic of Academia Dies
Allan Bloom, whose book "The Closing of the American Mind" became a guide to attacks on contemporary intellectual life, died at 62.
Page B29.
Last Season for L.T.
Lawrence Taylor, the linebacker wholed the Giants to two Super Bowl victories, said that this would be his final season.
Page B31.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; Once Friendly, Schoolmate Returns as Clinton Foe
There's an American tale worthy of John Steinbeck in the story of the two Oxford-educated golden boys from Arkansas, one within reach of being elected President, the other doing everything he can to stop it from happening.
The former is Bill Clinton.
The latter is Cliff Jackson, who studied with Mr.
Clinton at Oxford in 1969 and is now telling everyone who will listen that Mr.
Clinton has lied about his draft history and is not fit to be President.


State-O-Maine reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
La India and Eddie Palmieri  Salsa Musicians Village Gate
Sometimes a prop is just a prop, but as far as props go a cigar is a pretty good one when the woman smoking it is wearing a red dress.
La India, a young singer who had a brief career in dance music, arrived in the salsa world on Monday night, performing with the pianist Eddie Palmieri.
It was clear she knew what she was doing, though her cigar smoking looked a bit tenuous.
Afro-Caribbean music is difficult: the rhythms can pick a singer or improviser up, and can also dump them, lost and confused.
La India, whose real name is Lisa Caballero, had it right, and on two tunes she shouted and pleaded and yelled, slamming rhythms around, piercing through band riffs with a high, bitter voice.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Illusory or Just Elusive? No Matter, Baker Is Seen
FLASH! There's been a Jim Baker sighting!
The President's chief of staff and chief political adviser has been little more than a ghost around the White House since he moved there from the State Department a couple of months ago.
No public events.
No press conferences.
No nothing except some closed-door work on matters of state, particularly political matters.


James Thomson, 87; Headed Merrill Lynch
James E. Thomson, who started as a message runner for Merrill Lynch and rose to become its president and board chairman, died on Sunday while on a vacation in France.
He was 87 years old and lived in Indian Wells, Calif.
Information on the cause of death was not available.
A company spokesman said Mr.
Thomson had a history of heart disease.


It's a Box. No, Ity's a Chair
WHEN Hideaki Ariizumi, a designer, and Glynis M. Berry, an architect, opened Studio a/b, a design company in Manhattan, they used poplar to make what Mr.
Ariizumi calls transformational furniture.
A box becomes a chair, a second box a trash can, and a table can squat.
"Transformation stimulates us," he said.
"It makes me somehow joyful."


1919 Lights Return to A Viaduct
ON the Pershing Square Viaduct, the elevated parkway above Park Avenue from 40th to 42d Streets, there are now eight lamps that should make preservationists rejoice and motorists see better.
In 1919, when the viaduct was built, it was lighted by eight cast-iron lamps.
In 1986, New York City's Department of Transportation repaved the roadbed and removed the lamps.
In their place went "ugly, temorary ones," said Arthur Rosenblatt, an architect and a vice president of the Grand Central Partnership, a private group devoted to improving the area around Grand Central Terminal.


A Washington District That's a World Apart
Like the wrong side of the tracks, the east side of the Anacostia River is viewed by many Washingtonians as a forbidding, fearsome place, a source of the drugs and crime that plague this city, the ghetto largely responsible for making Washington the murder capital of America.
A freeway bridge from downtown spans the river to the eastern bank where it becomes Martin Luther King Jr.
Avenue, a street whose gutted storefronts, trash-strewn lots and groups of men and women clustered aimlessly on corners seem to confirm an outsider's worst fears.
Those signs of hopelessness, the economic blight behind it all, and the violence and crime distress many of the people who live amid it, too.
But the river divides the city psychologically as well as physically, often forming a barrier to understanding between those living across from each other.
Barry Vote Mystified Many
The fact that residents in this area voted overwhelmingly in the Sept. 15 primary for former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., the convicted drug abuser and a pariah to many Washingtonians, to represent them on the City Council, a choice that mystified many people elsewhere in the capital and around the country.
On paper, the hilly, wedge-shaped neighborhood that voted for him, an area designated Ward 8 and consisting of the Anacostia and Congress Heights neighborhoods, is strikingly similar to Harlem, the Crenshaw area of South-Central Los Angeles or any one of several other big-city ghettos.
Like them, Ward 8 is more than 80 percent black and the median family income is $16,692.
Nationally, the Census Bureau reported that in 1989 the median household income for blacks was $19,758 and for whites it was $31,435.
In Ward 8, over a third of the population is under 18 years old and only 30 percent of the area's students graduate from high school.
Only about 13 percent of the houses are owned by the people living in them.
The scarcity of jobs, affordable housing and social services are painfully apparent.
Beauty Beyond Destruction
People from the other parts of town often make it a rule never to go east of the Anacostia River.
So few residents outside Ward 8 realize that beyond its bleak thoroughfares, the crack houses and abandoned public housing projects are many leafy avenues, neat brick and stucco houses, flowering gardens and porch swings.
Residents of Ward 8 know that their beautiful riverfront park is almost private, and that a bluff above the water is the best spot in town for watching fireworks on the Fourth of July.
In scores of interviews after the election, people here said frustration, anger and a feeling that the rest of Washington was ignoring and neglecting their economic and social problems drove them to seek radical change.
Many of those said they believed their best hope for that was in the flamboyant and forceful leadership style of Mr.
Barry, who was released from prison four months ago after being convicted of cocaine possession when he was in his 12th year as Mayor.
"Politicians don't want to come to this part of town, to see what's going on here," said Roy Easterling, a 26-year-old sidewalk T-shirt vendor, explaining his vote for Mr.
Barry.
Mr.
Easterling, who was born in Ward 8, went to the area's only high school, and still lives with his mother in his childhood home.
He said he was trying to save money to open his own neighborhood store.
It did not bother him that Mr.
Barry moved to Ward 8 only last summer, in order to run for the City Council seat.
"Marion Barry lives here," he said.
"I've seen him four or five times this summer. I voted for him because he's a good leader, he just got caught up with the wrong people. But I know he's rehabilitated, and he's going to do better for us."
Like everyone here, Mr.
Easterling knows the neighborhood's primary need: "Jobs. We got to have jobs."
One of the largest employers of the area's residents is the Federal Government.
Businesses are so scarce that the area does not have any restaurants, only fast-food outlets.
There are no department stores and only one major supermarket for 72,000 people.
The area does not even have a Little League baseball team.
Southeast Washington, once a relatively prosperous, racially mixed blue-collar neighborhood, began its decline after the 1968 riots that followed the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Paradoxically, the riots were briefer and less destructive in Ward 8 than in black neighborhoods west of the river.
Poorer Families Remained
Still, "the riots scared a lot of white people out, and a lot of the young black professionals, too," said Dorn McGrath, professor of urban planning at George Washington University.
Many businesses followed, taking jobs with them.
"One of the largest furniture warehouses and retail outlets in the city had to close down because their customers were afraid to come there anymore."
The poorer black families who remained did not have the economic or political clout to benefit from the redevelopment in other parts of the city that came as a result of the riots.
Rioters burned many buildings to the ground in areas closer to the Capitol.
The city invested heavily there, even building government offices to encourage recovery.
But development experts say little was done for Anacostia and Congress Heights.
In fact, by "the mid-1970's, Anacostia had to sue the city for parity in the provision of municipal services, like garbage, sewer, water, and tree maintenance," Mr.
McGrath said.
The city did not do any better by the neighborhood in the 12 years that Mr.
Barry was the Mayor.
When Mr.
Barry was asked about this in the campaign, he spoke instead about programs he had put into effect on youth employment and for the elderly.
Standing on a bluff in the ward with a commanding view of the river and the rest of Washington, Lottie Hudson waved her arm back towards the area and spoke with scorn in her voice as she mocked the city's political establishment.
"Now it's like, 'They're on that side, just leave them there,' " said Ms.
Hudson, who lived in various Washington neighborhoods before settling in Ward 8 nearly 20 years ago.
"Just do the minimum. But people are frustrated they can't get a job.
"I saw Marion Barry did a lot for youth jobs as Mayor, but I also saw him mess up," said Ms.
Hudson, who describes herself as a recovered alcoholic working as a substance abuse counselor.
She said she did not vote for Mr.
Barry.
"I forgave him as soon as he decided to do something about his problem, but I didn't forget. 'Barry Inspired Me'
Enough people apparently felt more than forgiveness.
Not only did Mr.
Barry win a 3-to-1 victory over the 16-year incumbent, Wilhelmina Rolark, but he did it with unprecedented voter turnout in his Ward.
He faces a Republican opponent in the November general election, but there are so few Republican voters in Ward 8 that Mr.
Barry is virtually certain to win.
Geraldine McCarthur, 28 and unemployed, said: "Barry inspired me. He showed that you can pick yourself up."
In fact, that notion was Mr.
Barry's central strategy, and his supporters say it had significant impact in a community where many people have experience with drugs and jails.
"A report recently showed 42 percent of Washington's African-American males between 18 and 35 were involved in the criminal justice system," said the Rev.
Willie Wilson, a staunch Mr.
Barry supporter.
"There's a bad label put on Southeast, and a lot of people are amazed at what they find when they come to this side of the river," Mr.
Wilson said.
"But this false label has also been a basis for insurance companies to have higher rates, for lenders to be unwilling to make capital investments here."
So investment comes from organizations like Action to Rehabilitate Community Housing, a nonprofit group that sells renovated houses to low-income families.


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Survey Places New York Police Last in Hiring of Black Officers
New York City was last in a survey that compared police hiring with the size of the black populations in each of the nation's 50 largest cities, a researcher who compiled the figures said yesterday.
The survey, prepared in the Department of Criminal Justice at the University of Nebraska, found that the percentage of black officers in the New York Police Department was the same in 1983, the first year studied, as it was at the beginning of this year -- 11.4 percent -- even though the force grew by 4,000 officers in that time.
The force had 2,395 black officers then and had 3,121 at the beginning of 1992.


Old Police Station to Be Home to Landmarks Commission
A robust little palazzo on the East River -- where criminals who preyed on Wall Street were once locked up and the brokers who ruled Wall Street were to have pumped up -- is to become the first permanent home of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Looking like something out of the Italian Renaissance, the five-story building at Old Slip and South Street is, of course, a landmark.
"What better place for the commission to hold court?" asked its chairwoman, Laurie Beckelman, who said she hoped to move in by June 1993.


Smith Barney Hires Ball To Chase the Well Heeled
George L. Ball, who in the late 1980's made an enormously expensive and ultimately unsuccessful attempt to turn Prudential-Bache Securities into an investment banking powerhouse, is coming back to Wall Street.
This time he is charged with plumbing a market he knows well: individuals with a high net worth.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMSHARE INC., Ann Arbor, Mich., and NCR Corp. signed a three-year joint marketing agreement.
CORNING INC., Corning, N.Y., has been selected to supply the primary mirror blank for a telescope to be built on Mauna Kea, Hawaii.


Amsco Prices Debentures
Amsco International Inc. yesterday priced for sale to the public $100 million of step-up convertible subordinated debentures due in 2002 through underwriters led by J. P. Morgan Securities.
Underwriters said the debentures were priced at par, with the initial coupon set at 4.5 percent, which will be paid for three years.
The coupon will then increase to 6.5 percent for the last seven years.


CHRONICLE
DARYL F. GATES may have retired as the Los Angeles Police Chief three months ago, but he still calls himself "chief" during his three-hour talk show on the Los Angeles radio station KFI-AM.
Mr.
Gates's continued use of the title infuriated one listener so much that he called up the show and asked why he still referred to himself as chief "when you left in disgrace?" the Associated Press reported yesterday.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM H. LUERS, president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is to be awarded Mexico's highest honor for people of foreign nationality.
President CARLOS SALINAS DE GORTARI of Mexico will present Mr.
Luers with the Mexican Order of the Aztec Eagle today at a ceremony at the Plaza in Manhattan.
Mr.
Luers, the former United States Ambassador to Czechoslovakia and Venezuela and a former deputy assistant Secretary of State, was also a founding member of the Mexican Cultural Institute.
The institute was established in 1991 in New York and Houston to encourage cultural and trade activity between Mexico and the United States.
The Museum was the scene of the landmark exhibition "Mexico: Splendors of 30 Centuries," from the fall of 1990 to January 1991.


Harold Brown Sr., 61, Investment Executive
Harold R. Brown Sr., an investment executive and organizer of a church shelter for the homeless, died on Monday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He was 61 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Serbs Capture a Remaining Bosnian Town


Athletics Gain Edge While Braves Keep Rolling
The Oakland Athletics, a team not accustomed to losing on the American League championship stage, accomplished the seemingly impossible tonight.
The American League West champions scored not once, not twice but three times against Jack Morris, a pitcher who has been equally as invincible as they have in post-season play.
Then Oakland watched its lead dissipate completely, felt the emotion seemingly swing completely around to an inspired Toronto Blue Jays team, only to steal the thunder and hopes right back from the American League East champions with one mighty swing of the bat.


Perot Ready to Start Using Short TV Commercials
Ross Perot will begin broadcasting three sober 60-second advertisements on Thursday in an effort to focus attention on the economic challenges posed by joblessness and the national debt.
Mr.
Perot does not appear in any of the three commercials.
Nor do they mention either of his opponents, President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Only at the end of the advertisements is Mr.
Perot's name even mentioned.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Talks
Bygone Gardening
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433
.
An exhibit of antique garden memorabilia, including seed catalogues and tools, will be on display in the Steinhardt Conservatory through Oct. 25.
Conservatory hours: Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2; $1 for students, children and people 62 years old and older.


Health Counsel Opposes New Gene Patents
The general counsel of the Health and Human Services Department has advised the agency not to pursue patent applications on thousands of human gene fragments, but department officials said today that no final decision had been made.
Last year, the National Institutes of Health, a unit of the department, sought patents on thousands of segments of DNA, the substance of which genes are made, even before their functions were known.
Normally, genes and their byproducts are patented only after they have been characterized in detail and their function within an organism has been described.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FACED with a room that seems too large or too small or cluttered, many amateur and even some professional designers think first of painting or wallpapering to solve the problem, or even of refurnishing or renovating.
But there is often a simpler remedy: decorating the room with molding.
To illustrate the effects molding can create, draw two vertical lines exactly the same height, two or three inches apart, on a piece of paper.
At the top and bottom of one line, draw a wide "V" with the open ends facing away from each other.
On the other, with the open ends facing toward each other.
Compare the two illustrations: even though the vertical lines of both are identical in length, the one described first appears longer.


Clinton's Rise Is a Windfall To Little Rock
It remains to be seen what Bill Clinton can do for the nation's economy, but there's no question that basing his national campaign here has done wonders for Little Rock's.
From the constantly booked-up Capital Hotel to the crowds of Clinton aides who hit Doe's Eat Place after work to the female staff members who have adopted Yvonne Head of Jan's Salon as the semi-official Clinton campaign haircutter, Little Rock is benefiting economically from Mr.
Clinton's unusual decision to base his Presidential campaign in a city that has never been confused with the nation's power centers.


Yom Kippur Observances Span Generations and Houses of Faith


No-Huddle Means No Time For Jets' Defense to Adjust
The Jets' defense, reshuffled to compensate for injuries to defensive ends Jeff Lageman and Dennis Byrd, took a deep breath going into last week's game against New England.
The players acquitted themselves admirably, coming up with seven sacks and two interceptions, in the Jets' first victory of the season.
Now, the Jets' defense can't exhale.


Tear This Out for Mouse-Trap Aid
To the Editor:
I'm a well-adjusted relocated city person who has dealt reasonably well with country life.
However, last week I faced a situation I was ill equipped to handle: At 10:30 P.M. -- a mouse in the living room.
I called a local friend and asked what to do.
"Set a mouse trap." Which I didn't have.
So I drove to the market and returned with mousetraps and bait.
The instructions were confusing and had no drawings to show how to set traps.
I knew I would have to humble myself again and ask the local person how to set a trap.


Saturday's Sneak Preview: Belmont to Breeders' Cup
Sixty-three horses from six countries were entered yesterday in the seven stakes races that will give New York one of its strongest and richest afternoons of racing Saturday in a final dress rehearsal for the Breeders' Cup three weeks later.
They will be running at Belmont Park for purses of $2.5 million, but mostly they will be running for top ranking on the way to the Breeders' Cup Oct. 31 at Gulfstream Park in Florida.
And except for some European stars like Arazi and St.
Jovite, who will fly directly to Florida from England or France, most of the cast for the cup races will assemble in New York this weekend for the cluster of stakes billed as the Breeders' Cup Preview.


Mother in Twin Case Was 'Overwhelmed'
A woman who gave birth to twins and then left them behind when she walked out of Brooklyn Hospital Center Monday night may have been distraught because she was already caring for five other children, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said, "She was overwhelmed by her situation and circumstance and she became extremely emotionally distraught."


Maoist Chief in Peru Is Sentenced to Life
Abimael Guzman Reynoso, leader of the Maoist Shining Path's 12-year war against the Peruvian Government, was convicted of treason and sentenced to life in prison.


Essay; Bush on Iraqgate
Shirt-sleeved in the White House, Larry King told President Bush on CNN that "Senator Gore and William Safire are getting into what they call -- I guess we're calling it Iraqgate."
(Pundit's Note: I am not Senator Gore's running mate. For different reasons, he and I have taken an interest in Mr. Bush's misuse of U.S. grain export guarantees as backdoor foreign aid to uncreditworthy Saddam Hussein in 1989. This wrongdoing, compounded by the deception of Congress and covered up by the unlawful obstruction of the investigation into Iraq's multibillion-dollar Atlanta bank fraud, has come to be known as Iraqgate.)


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


30 Injured in Highway Pileups in Michigan
About 30 people were injured this morning when severe fog contributed to three pileups involving 60 vehicles on U.S.
Highway 23 south of Ann Arbor.
There were no deaths, but Sgt.
James Westrick of the Washtenaw County Sheriff's Department said 12 of the injured were reported in unstable condition.


George E. Bates, 89, Investment Professor And Expert on Coins
George E. Bates, professor emeritus of investment management at the Harvard Business School and an authority on ancient coins, died Sept. 25 at his retirement home in Camden, Me.
He was 89 years old.
Professor Bates was a former editor of the Harvard Business Review and for many years was the senior American adviser to Istanbul University's Institute of Business Administration.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Named John Ziegler an adviser.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Ken Califano director of scouting.


Clinton Offers a Managed Health-Care Plan
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see you react so negatively to Gov.
Bill Clinton's health care proposal in "Clinton Waffles on Health" (editorial, Sept. 27).
A careful reading of that proposal suggests that the Governor is clearly moving in a direction so effectively advocated by you in recent months.
The Clinton proposal calls for a managed-competition model in which insurers and health maintenance organizations compete for consumer support over price and service, rather than over who can avoid enrolling higher-cost individuals.


Zinc Mine Showcases a Disappearing World
A pre-Revolutionary War zinc mine here has found new life as a scientific and historic museum and now it has found recognition on the National and New Jersey Registers of Historic Places.
Two brothers, Richard and Robert Hauck, of Bloomfield, N.J., bought 36 acres of the original 70-acre tract for $750,000 at an Ogdensburg tax sale in 1988.
The Haucks, former flower farmers, are collectors of mine artifacts with a long interest in mining history.


PICTURETEL AND LOTUS TO ANNOUNCE VIDEO SOFTWARE PACT
The Picturetel Corporation and the Lotus Development Corporation will announce a joint agreement today to incorporate Picturetel's desktop teleconferencing capabilities into Lotus's Notes software product.
The combination will allow users of Notes to hold live video conversations with others directly on their personal computer screens.
Marty Falaro, director of Picturetel's desktop business, said the company had a working prototype of the product and was seeking two or three customers to test it.


COMPANIES JOINING TO DEVELOP MULTIMEDIA TECHNOLOGY
Twelve companies yesterday announced a plan to build technology to deliver interactive multimedia services to homes and businesses.
Multimedia computer systems combine data, voice and video and are considered a future delivery method for entertainment and business services.
The project, called First Cities, is being organized by the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation and will include Apple Computer; Bell Communications Research; Corning; Eastman Kodak; Kaleida Labs; North American Philips; Southwestern Bell Technology Resources; Tandem Computers, and U S West.


Allan Bloom, Critic of Universities, Is Dead at 62
Allan Bloom, the professor of political philosophy whose book on American universities became a best-selling text for conservative attacks on contemporary intellectual life, died yesterday at the University of Chicago's Bernard Mitchell Hospital.
Mr.
Bloom, 62 years old, died of peptic ulcer bleeding complicated by liver failure, said a spokesman at the University of Chicago, where Mr.
Bloom had taught since 1979.
He had been hospitalized for several weeks.


Problems Emerge in U.S.-Japan Auto Deal
Nine months after President Bush declared that his trade mission to Tokyo had yielded a milestone agreement to sell 20,000 more American cars in Japan every year, one major deal to implement the accord appears to have gone off track.
A deal between the world's two largest car makers, under which Toyota would sell General Motors cars to the Japanese public, had been hailed by Mr.
Bush's aides during the ill-fated January trip as a prime example of how the Administration was coming home with what the President had termed "jobs, jobs, jobs" for Americans.


Currents; It's All in the Trunk
THIRTY-THREE architects and interior designers are the focus of a new book and exhibit.
The book, "Women of Design: Contemporary American Interiors," by Beverly Russell (Rizzoli, $50), tells of the interior design of public spaces: hotels, offices and stores.
For the related show, the Steelcase Design Partnership of Kentwood, Mich., asked each woman to design an interior within a seven-foot-tall steamer trunk.
The trunks go on exhibit Wednesday on the ground floor of 420 Fifth Avenue, at 37th Street.
"It's only in the last 20 years that the architecturally trained woman has made an impact in this world of interior design for public spaces," said Ms.
Russell, formerly editor in chief of Interiors magazine.
"We all know there are gender differences. In terms of interior design, and the way a woman approaches architecture, there's much more sensitivity to space, and how an interior works and how a person will use it."


Serbs Loose Inferno on a Sarajevo Neighborhood
Nobody seemed to know exactly when the bullets struck the old man, and no one in the neighborhood seemed sure of his name.
All that was certain, as he lay face down in the drizzling rain with bullets in his back, was that his fancy for feeding pigeons, even amid heavy gunfire, had made him the latest victim of the Sarajevo siege.
People in the Hrasno neighborhood, suddenly the main battlefield of the six-month-old siege, recalled seeing the slight figure appearing about midmorning every day, always alone, always in a peaked black cap, and always in a gray jacket and baggy trousers.
Always tucked under his arm was a loaf of bread in a white plastic bag, ready to be scattered for the birds.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Religion in Politics; Southern Baptist Team of Democrats Represents a New Strain of the Church
At first it seemed a mere curiosity: in Bill Clinton and Al Gore, the Democratic Party was fielding the first Presidential ticket in history with two Southern Baptists.
Then the Republicans declared their party the guardian of traditional values and sought to rebuild an alliance with the religious right, and the Democrats' religion took on new significance.
Any plan to portray the Democratic candidates as alien to churchgoing America has met at least a medium-sized snag in their undeniable church ties.
But just how the religious factor will eventually play out in the campaign, or what clues it provides to the challengers' characters or politics, is far from clear because Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Gore are a new and different strain of Southern Baptist.
In Different Baptist Mold
Unlike the last Southern Baptist Presidential candidate, Jimmy Carter, whose forthright piety made many Americans uneasy, Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Gore do not speak of being born again and having their hearts cleansed by Jesus.


Noah Bee Dies at 76; Artist and Cartoonist
Noah M. Bee, a retired New York graphic artist and political cartoonist published in Jewish newspapers throughout North America, died on Sunday at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
He was 76 years old and lived in Encino, Calif.
His family said he died of prostate cancer.


Bert Ottley; Theater Manager, 46
Bert Ottley, a former manager of the Joyce Theater, died on Oct. 1 at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 46 years old and lived in East Orange, N.J.
He died of AIDS, said a friend, Terence Womble.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; CANDIDATES TRAIN FOR A KEY DEBATE
Nearing what advisers concede is his best remaining chance to pull close to Gov.
Bill Clinton, President Bush has summoned three of his party's most caustic and quick-witted figures to help prepare for Sunday's Presidential debate against Mr.
Clinton and Ross Perot.
Aides said today that the President planned to stage a mock debate on Saturday against Republican stand-ins for his two rivals, with his budget director, Richard G. Darman, playing the part of Mr.
Clinton and his onetime chief of staff, John H. Sununu, masquerading as Mr.
Perot.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WATER METER FEES PINCH OWNERS
Many homeowners and low-income cooperative buildings throughout New York City are being pushed into financial hardship, some to the brink of sale or foreclosure, by sharply higher bills for the most commonplace of commodities: water.
The charges are a result of higher water rates and the city's new water-metering program, an effort to encourage conservation through consumer pain.
The program forces people to pay for the actual amount of water they use, rather than an estimate based on the size of the dwelling and other factors.
A1.
HOLDING TO THE OLD WAYS
At Maryhouse, the Lower East Side "house of hospitality" for the poor, such Catholic Worker traditions as the value of working with one's hands still hold.
There have been a few small concessions to the computer age.
But more remarkable are the ways in which the movement has stayed the same over the years.
B3.


Perot Shouldn't Participate in Debates; Saturday Voting
To the Editor:
There must be a way to ban Ross Perot from the Presidential debates.
He should not be allowed to participate.
Consider the following:
*
He doesn't have a chance to win or, probably, even to capture a significant percentage of the popular or electoral vote.
He has alienated the constituency he once had by gaffes and misbehaviors.
He can now only be a foil.
He is no longer (if he ever was) a serious candidate -- he might even be considered a quasi candidate or pseudocandidate.


Review/Film Festival; Dostoyevsky's 'Idiot,' by Way of Bombay
The Indian director Mani Kaul is no stranger to the New York Film Festival, which is showing his nearly three-hour adaptation of Dostoyevsky's novel "The Idiot" at 6 tonight at Alice Tully Hall.
Two years ago the festival presented "Siddheshwari," his biography of an Indian singer as part of its "Avant-Garde Visions" program.
And in 1983, it showed "Dhrupad," his documentary about a form of Indian classical music.
Both films were praised for their production skills.
"Idiot" should not win Mr.
Kaul any new admirers.
A low-budget production that was apparently made for television, it turns a literary masterpiece into a numbing soap opera as incoherent as it is technically crude.
Although the setting has been moved from 19th-century St.
Petersburg to contemporary Bombay, Anup Singh, who wrote the screenplay, has neglected to give the story a modern Indian cultural or political context.
As a result, references from the book to such things as a liberal movement that could destroy the country are simply mystifying.


FirsTier Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRO FOOTBALL: Taylor Going, Simms Out, Hostetler In for Giants; What About Handley? He Just Not Talking
Phil Simms is out with an elbow injury.
Jeff Hostetler is now the Giants' starting quarterback.
How long will this situation last? Nobody knows.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Questions Clinton's Account Of Vietnam-Era Protests and Trip
President Bush tonight accused Gov.
Bill Clinton of not telling the truth about his visit to Moscow as a student in the late 1960's and sharply criticized the Democratic nominee for demonstrating against the Vietnam War while he was studying in England.
In an appearance on the CNN program "Larry King Live" that was broadcast around the country and abroad, Mr.
Bush made one of his strongest attacks yet on Mr.
Clinton's opposition to the Vietnam War, which Mr.
Bush's advisers have long considered perhaps the Democrat's weakest point.


Bundesbank Chief Is at Eye of Currency Storm
"Do right, though the heavens fall" could be the motto of the Bundesbank, the independent German central bank.
It insists that it is doing right, and the heavens are indeed falling.
Not that Dr.
Helmut Schlesinger, the bank's president, and his colleagues here do not admit to having made a few gaffes.
His colleagues say that Dr.
Schlesinger regretted public statements he made that started a run on the pound sterling in European currency markets last month, leading to three weeks of disarray in the financial markets as well as much public shouting and finger-pointing among European officials.
Just What He Wanted, Some Say
Still, bank insiders say, the result was just what Dr.
Schlesinger wanted: a realignment of European currencies that raised the value of the German mark against most of the others, to help the German central bank push inflation down.
A revalued mark would make imports less costly and force German manufacturers to hold their prices down, too.


Somerset Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Chattanooga Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; The N.F.L.'s Annual Brawn Infusion
The Meat Market  The Inside Story of the N.F.L.
Draft  By Richard Whittingham  Illustrated. 214 pages.
Macmillan. $20.
To be afflicted with a rooting interest in a professional football team inevitably leads to an even more bizarre obsession with the process by which your team acquires its players.
That is why every April many grown-up Americans sit in front of their telephones and television sets for two consecutive days while 336 names are announced at intervals from the stage of some Manhattan ballroom.
This is the annual draft of college football players, a ritual that must be as fascinating to outsiders as watching liquid being drawn up through a straw.
Yet for serious pro football fans, happiness is at stake.


Motel Owners Complain of Yet Another Tax
It's been barely a month since Victor Pafundi had to start adding more sales tax to the bills of customers here at the Dreamer's Cove motel on the shores of Peconic Bay.
The increase, from 8 to 8.5 percent, is helping Suffolk County through a budget crisis.
Now Mr.
Pafundi and other motel and resort owners on eastern Long Island are bristling at the prospect of adding another three quarters of a percent to bills beginning next month because of a new room tax intended to promote Long Island as a tourist and convention destination.


F.C.C. Plan For Radio By Satellite
The Federal Communications Commission on Thursday will propose assigning a block of frequencies for satellites to broadcast compact-disk-quality digital sound to homes and cars.
Digital satellite radio is still little more than a gleam in the eyes of entrepreneurs, but the technology is available and proponents say it offers numerous benefits to listeners.
For one thing, they say, digital transmission produces sound that is free of static and clearer than that of AM or FM stations.
Beyond that, satellite broadcasting reaches every part of the country, allowing people to tune in even if they are nowhere near a city.


Sampson Goes Home To Get a Fresh Start
Autumn spills into the Shenandoah Valley, jumbling the mind and mood of Ralph Sampson, assistant coach.
"It's the basketball smell," Sampson said.
"When the weather changes like this, it's time to go away and play. Staying home is going to feel very strange."


Spectrum Control reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CUNY Unit For Italians Faces Turmoil
A City University of New York plan to restructure a unit largely devoted to recruiting and counseling Italian-American students has led to a bitter battle between the university's chancellor and some leading Italian-Americans.
The university plans to turn the unit, the John D. Calandra Italian American Institute, into a research center specializing in Italian and Italian-American affairs.


In Turkey, Journalists Do Their Job in Peril
To the Editor:
We, as steering committee members of the Congressional Committee to Support Writers and Journalists, share the concerns raised in your Sept 7 report on Turkish use of force against Kurds, describing human rights abuses by both guerrilla and Government forces in Turkey.
We join proponents of freedom of expression in calling attention to the danger to journalists in Turkey.
Since last February, at least nine journalists have been killed -- and many more wounded -- usually following work-related threats.
It appears Turkish authorities have not made serious efforts to investigate fully these attacks and prosecute those responsible.
Indeed, it is widely believed by journalists that Turkish security forces may be responsible for some of these attacks.


Oh Canada, the Land of Major League Angst
The nice Canadian gent sat at his desk, jotting a note.
Having just learned that his customer was a reporter in town for Toronto's almost annual American League playoff elimination, he dared ask the question that's undoubtedly on the minds of millions north of the border.
"What happens if the Blue Jays go to the World Series?" he said without looking up from his note pad.


Argonaut Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sleaze in New York's Senate Race
No sooner did Robert Abrams become the Democratic candidate for United States Senator from New York than Alfonse D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, attacked his ethics.
Vulnerable himself on ethics issues, Senator D'Amato assailed his challenger with the brashness that has become his trademark.
The Senator has identified a weakness in his opponent's fund-raising methods.
But his criticism says more about the state's lax ethics laws than about the honesty of Mr.
Abrams.


Nonpartisan Group Exhorts Women to Vote
A young woman rushes into an emergency room, clutching her baby to her chest.
She begs for help for the child but meets with empty stares and curt answers.
Frustrated, she sits down in an empty hall, rocking the baby as she waits.
A voice says: "This November, there is someone who has the power to change your life. Someone who will have a major impact on health care and poverty, education and unemployment. Someone who can make a differENCE . . . You."


Bay Area Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It All Started With Hemlines
It was October 1987 and a tense world waited to see whether the crash in the stock market would touch off a recession.
But James Annable, chief economist for the First National Bank of Chicago, was quickly reassured.
Scrutinizing figures flowing daily from the bank's large credit card operation, he and his associates found customers continuing to rack up new debt rather than hunkering down and repaying the old.


No Headline
Marion Barry lives here.
I've seen him four or five times this summer.
I voted for him because he's a good leader.
He just got caught up with the wrong people.
But I know he's rehabilitated, and he's going to do better for us. -- ROY EASTERLING, who lives in Mr.
Barry's council district in Washington.  [ A20:3. ]


90 Palestinians Reported Wounded in Gaza Clashes
At least 90 Palestinians were reportedly shot and wounded by plastic and rubber bullets today when Israeli soldiers fired on several thousand stone-throwing protesters in the Gaza Strip who were marching in support of an 11-day-old hunger strike by Palestinian prisoners.
The clashes occurred on the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur, although there was no reason to believe that the Palestinians had targeted the day for protests, which have been occurring almost daily.


Corrections
A music review on Saturday about Beethoven's "Fidelio" at Carnegie Hall last Thursday misidentified the tenor in the role of Jaquino.
He was Jon Garrison, not Peter Straka.


Tours: Garment District and More
Manhattan Neighborhoods
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at East 103d Street; (212) 534-1672
, ext.
206.
A walking tour at 1 P.M. on Sunday in the garment district will include buildings by McKim, Mead &amp; White and Ely Jacques Kahn.
On Oct. 24, there will be a tour in Harlem of sites like Striver's Row, the Apollo Theater and the Studio Museum in Harlem.
Fee, each tour, $15 (members, $10).
Preregistration is required.
Benefit Tour
Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street between Lafayette Street and the Bowery; (212) 777-1089
.
A tour of Greenwich Village and the Old Merchant's House to benefit the historic museum will be held from 2 to 5 P.M. on Sunday and again on Nov. 15 and Dec. 6.
Tickets, $15; two for $25.
Reservations are recommended.
On Oct. 22 at 6 P.M. at the house, there will be a talk on Louis Comfort Tiffany.
Tickets, $7 (members, $5).
Staten Island Neighborhood
The Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place (off Richmond Terrace), St.
George, S.I.; (718) 727-1135
.
The institute will sponsor a walking tour in the Tompkinsville section from 1 to 3 P.M. on Saturday.
The area was settled in the 1880's and includes the oldest row houses in the borough.
Fee, $7 (members, $5).
Reservations are recommended.
Farms and Gardens
Wethersfield, Pugsley Hill Road off County Route 86, Stanford, N.Y.; (914) 868-7066
.
A self-guided tour featuring horse and sheep farms and a winery will be held from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Sunday to benefit the Dutchess Land Conservancy.
The tour starts at Wethersfield, an estate with a 10-acre formal garden, stables for hackney horses and a collection of antique carriages.
Tickets, $20; children 11 years old and younger, $10.
Wilton Show House
Autumn Heritage Designer Show House
, 65 Ridgefield Road (Route 33) off Route 7, Wilton, Conn.; (203) 834-1861.
A showcase featuring 12 designers will open Saturday and run through Oct. 31 in a Federal-style house built in 1832.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. (closed Oct. 17).
Tickets, $15; 65 and older, $12.50.
Roxbury Show House
By shuttle bus from the meadow parking area on Route 67, five miles west of Route 172, Roxbury, Conn.; (203) 753-0381
.
Raven Cliffs, a shingle-style house, will be the site of a showcase featuring 12 designers, four decorative painters and four landscapers, through Nov. 1.
Open daily, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M..
Admission, including catalogue, $15; 62 and older, $12.


What's Wrong With a Choice Among New York City Schools
To the Editor:
I must disagree with "The Right Choice for City Schools" (editorial, Sept. 20), supporting Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez in his proposal to allow New York City pupils to leave the neighborhood school for another school.
You conclude that more bright children will have a chance to escape poor schools and that the abandoned school will have to do a better job to attract pupils.
I am afraid freedom of choice, especially for inner-city people, is more likely to worsen than improve a difficult situation.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.10
5.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.80
2.72
5.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.83
5.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.99
5.82
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.48
7.40
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.50
9.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.38
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Peru Convicts Maoist Rebel Leader and Sentences Him to Life
Abimael Guzman Reynoso, leader of Shining Path's 12-year war against the Peruvian Government, was convicted today of treason and sentenced to life in prison.
In a military trial closed to the public, a navy judge imposed the maximum possible sentence on the rebel leader, who was confined to a steel cage.
The 10-day trial was held at a naval base on an island two miles from here.


Trading Tips on Repairs
AN old building may possess charm, historical significance and fine workmanship.
It also usually needs repairs.
Rehabitat, a convention and trade show devoted to the restoration and renovation of buildings, opens today and runs through Saturday at the Hyatt Regency in Miami.
It is expected to attract 40 exhibitors, said Katherine Ann Cox, the show's manager.


Winfield Finds a Spot In Toronto Whirlwind
Dave Winfield is 41 years old now.
He has nasty scars sliced across both legs, an ailing back that speaks to him almost every morning and enough bothersome memories from his days in New York to write a book, which he has done.
Winfield talks easily about the bad legs and the bad back and the bad years with the Yankees when verbal and even legal battles with principal owner George Steinbrenner were normal.
He is open about the past because it reminds him of how delicious his ride through baseball has been with the Blue Jays this season.


College Student, 17, Found Slain at Home
A 17-year-old college student was found stabbed to death yesterday in her home in Wheatley Heights, L.I., the Suffolk County police said.
The body of the woman, Karen Spooner, was discovered by her brother Anthony just after midnight inside their home at 17 Woodbury Road, said a police spokesman, Officer Mark Ryan.
Ms.
Spooner was a member of the freshman class at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville, the police said.


National Community Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


David L. Maloof, 67, Maritime Lawyer, Dies
David L. Maloof, a maritime lawyer, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Maloof died of complications following heart surgery, said his son, David.


Economic Scene; Play Now, Fly Later
IF British Airways will not play fair at home, should it be allowed to buy its way into the American game?
Economists, in contrast to politicians, generally put consumers' interests ahead of producers'.
And in the case of the proposed alliance between the high-flying British carrier and money-hemorrhaging (and now strike-bound) USAir, it requires tortured logic to construct a story in which American travelers would not come out ahead from the added competition.
But it may yet be possible to have it both ways.
If pushed hard enough by Washington, economists predict that Britain will open its own skies in return for broader horizons in America.


Executive Changes
ANHEUSER-BUSCH INC., St.
Louis, appointed Michael J. Owens director of Budweiser Brand Marketing, Bob Lachky director of Bud Light Brand Marketing and William E. Braun director of Busch Marketing.
BANK OF NEW YORK, New York, appointed Natasha Gurfinkel senior vice president.


Merchants Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advantage Health reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Foreign Affairs; No More Hawks and Doves
Bill Clinton is actually doing something important in this campaign.
He is trying to replace the old hawk-dove divide by exploring new standards for U.S. military intervention.
He is also groping for a new American internationalism for a messy new world where threats are largely economic and foreign and domestic matters have become inseparable.
But it is virtually impossible to get a debate going on these ideas.
The Bush-Baker crowd, ever searching for an election-reversing glob of magical slime, chooses not to engage.
In fact, President Bush has not devoted a speech to national security in months.
Instead, he typically accuses Mr.
Clinton of being a closet dove hiding behind waffling rhetoric.


Sparring During the Campaign Between Abrams and Ferraro
During the bruising Democratic primary campaign, Geraldine A. Ferraro was bombarded with allegations that linked her or her family to organized crime.
Most of the accusations came from City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, but State Attorney General Robert Abrams raised similar questions.
Here is a look at some of Mr.
Abrams's statements:


Perot Outdraws a Playoff Game
The half-hour paid political announcement that Ross Perot bought on Tuesday night attracted a higher rating than most regularly scheduled entertainment shows on all three networks.
The Perot commercial on CBS even beat Tuesday night's National League playoff game, which followed it on the same network, as well as two shows on NBC and one on ABC.
For the half hour, Mr.
Perot scored a 12.2 rating.
Each rating point represents 931,000 homes, and the A.C.
Nielsen company said the total number of households watching Mr.
Perot was 11.4 million.
Nielsen estimated that 16.5 million people had watched the Perot commercial.


Back to the Minors; It's a Major New Market for Baseball
Let's face it: New York City was a major-league Mudville this season.
The Yankees and Mets couldn't find .500 with a calculator, and if there was ever a time to say, "Wait till next year," this was it.
But somewhere men are laughing and somewhere children shout, and all this joy -- the moral equivalent of spring training -- is percolating on the periphery of New York City.


U.S. Agrees to Compromise on Bosnia Flight Ban
The United States agreed today to a compromise with Britain and France, and accepted a proposed Security Council resolution that bans flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina but does not immediately threaten to shoot down violators as the Bush Administration had originally wanted.
The new text creates a two-stage process for enforcing the flight ban, warning the Serbs that if they continue to fly military planes in violation of the resolution, the Security Council will "consider urgently the further measures necessary to enforce this ban." A vote on the resolution is expected Friday.


Why Generals Get Nervous
There has been a spate of commentary recently over the use of American military force to deal with the vexing problems of an untidy post-cold war world.
The military has been criticized for being too reluctant to use force.
In a recent editorial, for example, The New York Times suggested that the military has a "no can do" attitude and asked whether America is getting a fair return on its defense investment.
The editorial even reached back to the famous exchange between President Lincoln and General McClellan during the Civil War.
Lincoln, frustrated with McClellan's slowness in engaging the enemy, told him, "If you don't want to use the Army, I should like to borrow it for a while."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Beats Grabb in Australia
Third-seeded Andre Agassi shrugged off a nagging cold and beat Jim Grabb yesterday to advance to the third round of the Sydney indoor tournament with a 6-4, 6-2 victory in Australia.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, No. 4 Ivan Lendl and No. 8 Wally Masur also won in their first appearances following first-round byes, but three seeded players were beaten in the $1.1 million event.
Australia's Neil Borwick, a wild-card entry ranked 214th in the world, eliminated 11th-seeded American David Wheaton, 6-0, 3-6, 6-4.
Byron Black of Zimbabwe, ranked 149th, upset No. 10 Derrick Rostagno, 7-6 (9-7), 6-7 (5-7), 6-4.
No. 16 Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan lost, 7-5, 7-6 (7-1) to Cristo Van Rensburg of South Africa. (AP) Bruguera Reaches Quarterfinals: Top-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain, No. 3 Jordi Arrese and No. 7 Magnus Gustafsson advanced yesterday to the quarterfinals of the Athens International in Greece.
Bruguera, the defending champion, defeated Argentina's Horacio de la Pena, 6-3, 6-1.
Arrese, also of Spain, beat Austrian Horst Skoff, 6-2, 6-4, and Gustafsson, of Sweden, beat Markus Naewie of Germany, 6-4, 6-3, to reach his first tour quarterfinal since July when he won at Baastad, Sweden. (AP) GOLF


Savimbi Party Indicates It Might Accept Angola Vote Results
Diplomatic efforts to resolve Angola's political crisis increased today amid signs that the former rebel group Unita may be backing away from an earlier threat to renew its 16-year insurrection against the governing party.
A senior member of Unita, Salopeto Pena, suggested that the group may accept the results of the presidential and parliamentary elections last week after all, provided that its complaints of across-the-board cheating and ballot-tampering were seriously investigated.


Panel to Study Aerial Photos for Hints on P.O.W.'s
A Senate committee investigating the fate of Americans still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War has turned its attention to reports that satellite photography may have picked up messages from prisoners as late as 1988.
The panel, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, plans to hold hearings on this issue on Oct. 15 and 16 but has not decided how much will be public, Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and the committee chairman, said in an interview on Tuesday.
The committee has been holding closed intelligence briefings on the issue, and many once-classified Government documents have been made public.


Home Video
"Basic Instinct" won't be released on tape until next week by LIVE, but the steamy thriller has already raised the temperature in video stores.
Since its release in theaters in March, the big-name stars (Michael Douglas and Sharon Stone) and box-office success of the Paul Verhoeven film have bestowed an imprimatur of sorts on all kinds of erotic material.
" 'Basic Instinct' has made it more acceptable and mainstream to show a little more eroticism," said Stuart Hersch, president of A-Vision, a division of Atlantic Records, which distributes Penthouse videos.


Old Idea Gains New Respect: Spending Way Out of Slump
Slowly, with many misgivings, Federal spending on public works is gaining a new respectability among economists, Wall Street traders and some corporate executives as a last-resort formula for generating jobs and ending the nation's economic stagnation.
In their view, other prescriptions have failed, and now with unemployment remaining stubbornly at 7.5 percent or more, they are concerned that the recovery may not take place without special help from the Government.


Bankruptcy Plea of Guilty
The former president of an upstate New York computer-leasing company that is in the process of bankruptcy has pleaded guilty to a felony charge of filing a false claim during the bankruptcy proceedings.
Jonathan W. Allen, 52 years old, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., entered the plea today before Federal District Judge Howard G. Munson in Syracuse.


New York Water Rates Pinch Low-Income Co-ops
Many homeowners and low-income cooperative buildings throughout New York City are being pushed into financial hardship, some to the brink of sale or foreclosure, by sharply higher bills for the most commonplace of commodities: water.
The charges are a result of higher rates and a new water-metering program, an effort to encourage conservation.
The program forces people to pay for the actual amount of water used, rather than an estimate based on the size of the dwelling and other factors.


Child's Own Management Consultant
JEREMY MULLMAN'S room looked good.
His bed was made.
There were no dirty socks or plates of moldy food around.
At least none could be seen.
In fact, the room was downright meticulous for a 14-year-old who has more important things, like football, on his mind.
But imperfections were spotted by Donna Goldberg, who runs the Organized Student, a personal consulting service that goes into children's rooms and works with them to make order out of semichaos.
"It's all about organization," said Mrs.
Goldberg, a librarian at the Dalton School in Manhattan.
"We don't teach it in school. I'm hoping I'm teaching the children the process of organizing, sticking with one task."


Justice for Dan Quayle's Accuser?
Just before the 1988 election, a Federal prisoner named Brett Kimberlin had permission from officials at an Oklahoma penitentiary to hold a press conference to say he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle, then the Republican candidate for Vice President.
Abruptly, on orders from Washington, the meeting was canceled and Mr.
Kimberlin was thrown in "the hole," officially for his personal safety.
Four years later, the Justice Department has yet to explain what happened.
Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, concludes that Mr.
Kimberlin was muffled to keep his accusations out of the campaign.
He offers enough evidence to keep the burden on Justice to explain.


U.S. Keeps Eye on Haiti, but Action Is Scant
United States diplomats have seemed to be at pains recently to demonstrate that they remain hard at work seeking the restoration of Haiti's first elected President.
Washington's representative at the Organization of American States, Luigi R. Einaudi, angrily told a meeting of that body's permanent council at the beginning of the month that reports that the United States had softened its stance toward Haiti's military-backed Government were "flat lies." Rumors of an impending end to United States economic sanctions were equally baseless, he said.


Oil From Burning Offshore Well Threatens Louisiana's Coastline
Pollution from an oil well that has been burning out of control since last Thursday is threatening a section of South Louisiana's fragile coastline, just recently battered by Hurricane Andrew.
The well burst into flames two days after it blew out as workers tried to renew production in a dormant well in Timbalier Bay, an estuary rich in fish and wildlife.
About 80,000 gallons of oil have escaped since the blowout, but much of that has escaped in thick clouds of black smoke visible for about 8 miles.


Chez Trigere, Turtles Prevail And Trees Beckon
OCCASIONALLY someone will ask Pauline Trigere, a woman who has never denied enjoying the company of men, whether she ever considers the possibility of marrying again or of living with someone.
Her eyes, partly obscured by her trademark tinted glasses, sweep the four and a half acres of rock gardens, pond and towering trees framing the white clapboard and shingle house where she lives in Westchester.


G.M. Faces Third Strike Threat in a Month
For the third time in the last month, the leadership of the United Automobile Workers has authorized a strike against a crucial General Motors production center, ostensibly over working conditions.
If negotiations fail, the 3,400 hourly workers at the two Inland Fisher Guide plants in Anderson, Ind., could be on strike by next Wednesday.
Since the plants supply tail lights, turn signal lights and other exterior lighting to all 28 G.M. assembly plants in North America, a strike there could cripple overall G.M. production.


Currents; Razor, Razor, On the Wall
LATER this month, Hoke 2, a product design company in Campbell, Calif., will introduce Wally (above), a razor made of black rubber that attaches to the shower wall by a suction cup ($20).
"Ninety-nine percent of women shave in the shower, and there's no place to keep the razor," said Jack Hokanson, president of the company.
"If you drop it on the tile, it can ding the razor or the tile."


LCF &amp; L Introduces Riviera Cigarettes
A campaign by LCF &amp; L in New York is introducing Riviera, the latest entry into the booming market for low-priced cigarettes.
The budget for the new menthol brand, from the American Tobacco Company, was not disclosed.
Print advertisements, outdoor ads, in-store displays and newspaper coupon inserts liken Riviera to two of the nation's best-selling full-priced menthol cigarettes: Kool, from Brown &amp; Williamson, and Newport, from Lorillard.
The Riveria ads urge smokers to "Dare to compare!"


North American Recycling Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bridge
Some years ago, at a national championship, a partnership perhaps set a world record by playing at the four-level in a 0-0 fit.
This was the result of a misunderstanding about a splinter bid, and something similar happened at the Summer Nationals in Toronto in July.
In a Swiss Team event, North was using a homemade system in which a one-club opening was artificial, showing at least 12 points with any distribution.
The one-diamond response was negative with a maximum of 12 points.
On the next round South attempted to show fine heart support with at most one diamond with a splinter jump to four diamonds.


AETNA IS SAID TO DISMISS EXECUTIVES OVER CONDUCT
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company has dismissed two executives for failing to stop incidents of lewd behavior and sexual harassment at a company outing last month.
Atena also suspended for a month two lower-level employees who engaged in the offensive behavior.
The incidents and the dismissals were reported yesterday by The Hartford Courant.


Quick Arrest Held Not Likely In Abduction
Despite an intense investigation involving dozens of law-enforcement officers, the authorities say they do not expect to make an arrest soon in the kidnapping of a 3-year-old Connecticut girl who was abducted from her bedroom last week and found the next day in a Bronx garbage bin.
"The F.B.I. is working on this as an active kidnapping case, with about two dozen agents assisting local New Haven and New York authorities," said Terry Shumard, a bureau spokesman in New Haven.
"Based on conversations with the youngster, we are following leads, and we are awaiting the outcome of forensic testing."


Money Market Fund Yields Show a Decrease in Week
Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were lower in the latest week, according to IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which tracked more than 862 funds in its current survey.
Assets of tax-exempt money funds rose by $2.3 billion in the week, to a total of $95.5 billion.
The average number of days to maturity of securities held in fund portfolios rose by 3, to 67, IBC/Donoghue's analysts said.


International Movie Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Milhaud's Opera About Columbus To Get U.S. Staging
The big rally for Christopher Columbus happens at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday, when Philip Glass's new piece, "The Voyage," marks in musical terms the 500th anniversary of America's discovery.
But between the dress rehearsal on Friday morning and the first performance on Monday night a counter demonstration of sorts -- some might call it a student protest -- takes place across the East River at Brooklyn College.
For Mr.
Glass is not the only author of a big-scale Columbus opera.
Darius Milhaud and Paul Claudel wrote one almost 65 years ago, and this "Christophe Colomb," in a brave production by the Brooklyn College Opera Theater, will play at Whitman Hall Saturday night at 7:30 and Sunday at 2 P.M.
The performances represent an intersection of anniversaries, the other being the centennial of Milhaud's birth (he died in 1974).


Abrams May Skip the Columbus Day Parade
State Attorney General Robert Abrams may skip the Columbus Day Parade on Monday, long a required appearance for New York politicians, and take his Senate campaign upstate instead.
The Abrams camp says this reflects the electoral reality that many Italian-American voters vote Republican, as well as Mr.
Abrams's need to get to as many places as he can between fund-raising calls in his battle against a far richer opponent, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Devils Surmount Mistakes as They Learn New System
With Herb Brooks conducting from behind the bench, the Devils implemented the coach's free-wheeling style with plenty of success in their season opener, but they also experienced some discord in communication, with costly results.
The Devils tested the system, which involves a great deal of weaving and criss-crossing, in a 4-3 victory over the Islanders Tuesday night.
But two of the Islanders' goals, the first while the Devils had the manpower advantage, came from crossed signals by New Jersey players, who are clearly struggling a bit as they get used to a new coach and a new season.


Maps of the Old and New Worlds
IF map aficionados had an official holiday, it might be Columbus Day.
Maps date back to the Babylonians.
But without the journeys of Columbus and his fellow explorers, the so-called golden era of map making, from the 15th through the 17th centuries, might never have happened.
"The exploration of America coincided with the time that produced the most esthetically pleasing maps," said Robert T. Augustyn, a partner in Martayan Lan, antique map dealers.


Miscellany
*
Nike Inc., Beaverton, Ore., signed a contract with Jazzercise Inc., San Diego, an aerobic-dance class company, to promote sales of its women's athletic shoes.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Ketchum Public Relations Worldwide, New York, bought an equity interest in PRAP Japan Inc., Tokyo, the fourth-largest public relations firm in Japan.


Currents; How the Iroquois Lived in Their Long Houses
LAST Saturday, a permanent exhibit of a Mohawk Iroquois village opened at the New York State Museum in Albany.
Depicting how a village would have looked in 1600, the installation includes a reconstruction of a long house, right.
"Up until 1800, a long house was the typical dwelling of all Iroquoian-speaking people," said George Hamell, an anthropologist and the museum's exhibits planner.


Cooperation With A-Plant Inquiry Is Offered
After months of struggling to keep secret why it brought so few criminal charges against the operator of a polluted nuclear-bomb plant near Denver, the Justice Department says it will discuss its internal deliberations with a House subcommittee investigating the case.
The investigations subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Technology has held seven days of closed-door hearings to try to determine why no individuals were charged, either at the Energy Department, which owns the plant at Rocky Flats, or Rockwell International, which ran it.


AT HOME WITH: Marian Wright Edelman; A Sense of Place Called Family
MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN ran her hand along the dark wood arm of the rose-colored love seat in her family room.
The feel of the smooth, heavy wood was familiar and reassuring.
She smiled, content with the memory.
Like so many things in her big gray house -- a pair of deep arm chairs, a brass dinner bell that her father rang every night, dozens of family photographs and her mother's tall snake plants -- the love seat came from her childhood home in Bennettsville, S.C.
That was the starting point for the self-assured black girl who would emerge from the segregated South to go to Yale University Law School, create the Children's Defense Fund and propel herself onto the national scene as an impassioned and relentless champion of needy children and families.


Synovus Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ireland's President Criticizes Effort on Famine in Somalia
President Mary Robinson of Ireland, who just returned from a visit to Somalia, criticized the slowness of world reaction to the famine there and said relief shipments should be doubled.
Mrs.
Robinson said she was "shamed and outraged" by the suffering she saw.
"It seems to have taken a long time for the world attention to focus on the situation," she said.


Sol J. Paul Dies at 78; A Magazine Publisher
Sol J. Paul, a publisher of magazines covering the communications industry, died on Monday at Princeton Hospital in Princeton, N.J.
He was 78 years old and lived in Princeton.
Mr. Paul died of complications after a stroke, said his daughter Celia.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  INQUIRY ON C.I.A.
AND IRAQ  Robert M. Gates, Director of Central Intelligence, ordered the Inspector General of the agency to conduct an investigation into misleading and incomplete statements to the Justice Department and a Federal Judge in Atlanta about a bank fraud involving loans to Iraq.
A1  ISRAELIS FIRE ON GAZA PROTEST  At least 90 Palestinians were reported shot and wounded by plastic and rubber bullets when Israeli soldiers fired on several thousand stone-throwing protesters in the Gaza Strip marching in support of an 11-day hunger strike by Palestinian prisoners.
A3


Court Hears Condemned Texan's Case
The Supreme Court heard arguments today about whether Texas could execute a man convicted of murder even though new evidence suggesting he may be innocent has surfaced 10 years after the crime.
At issue in the case is whether the Constitution gives Federal courts jurisdiction to hear a state prisoner's claim that he is not guilty.
Traditionally, Federal courts have considered only whether there were procedural errors in the trial.


Review/Film Festival: Zebrahead; A Racial Chameleon In a Hidebound World
By an accident of fate, Zach (Michael Rapaport) happens to be white.
But everything about Zach's interests and attitudes ties him to black culture, from the way he talks and walks to the friends he has made at a Detroit high school.
Zach takes for granted the right to will himself part of a cultural tradition other than his own.
At the beginning of "Zebrahead," Zach is seen taking racial harmony very much for granted.
He is best friends with a black classmate named Dee (DeShonn Castle) and on close terms with Dee's family.
Quiet but forceful, he conducts himself with a loner's intensity that transcends racial stereotypes.
The film, written and directed by Anthony Drazan, shows what happens when Zach falls in love with a beautiful black girl named Nikki (N'Bushe Wright), who is new to his high school.
Once this happens, he quickly finds out whether his friends' and relatives' open-mindedness matches his own.


SENATE PASSES BILL TO CHARGE MAKERS FOR DRUG APPROVAL
The Senate approved a plan today to require pharmaceutical companies to help the Government pay the cost of reviewing the safety of new drugs and to speed up the process.
The legislation, approved unanimously by voice vote, signifies a major change in the relationship between the Food and Drug Administration and the industry it monitors.
The bill, which requires the companies to pay fees to help cover the costs, has already been approved by the House, and President Bush is committed to signing it.


Justice Official Sees Weakening Of Moral Fiber
Attorney General William P. Barr has singled out Woody Allen's explanation of his affair with Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, the adopted daughter of Mia Farrow, as a graphic illustration of the rampant permissiveness that Mr.
Barr said weakens the country's moral fiber.
In a speech to a Roman Catholic group Monday night, Mr.
Barr seemed to follow Vice President Dan Quayle's lead in attacking entertainment figures on moral questions.
But unlike Mr.
Quayle, who has assailed the fictional single mother, Murphy Brown, as a poor role model, Mr.
Barr focused on a famous living resident of New York City, also the Attorney General's hometown.


In Redrawn District, Tone Is Bitter in Congress Race
Patrick J. Roma, a Republican candidate for Congress, held a news conference at his headquarters here on Monday and did what he has done almost every day for the last four months: assail his opponent, Representative Robert G. Torricelli, as the epitome of the "bloated, out-of-control, out-of-touch Congress."
The specific charge of the day was that Mr.
Torricelli, a five-term incumbent, has not one but two political action committees: one state and one Federal.


Diagnon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Clinton Offers a Managed Health-Care Plan; Not Pay or Play
To the Editor:
On Sept. 24, Gov.
Bill Clinton addressed the nation's health care crisis and described his plan for comprehensive reform of the system.
It was an impressive performance by a man concerned about the skyrocketing costs and diminishing accessibility of health care in the United States.
However, "Clinton Proposes Making Employers Cover Health Care," your Sept 25 front-page report on the speech, asserts that Governor Clinton's plan would allow employers "to enroll their workers in a public program" -- in other words, a pay-or-play system.


Sonoco Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As Parents' Hopes Rise, So Do a High School's Tensions
As parents marched outside Eastern District High School this week chanting, "No security, no classes," English melting into Spanish, their children fell into introspection.
Was it overcrowding or racial antagonism that made a fight erupt in the school cafeteria where the blacks and Puerto Ricans sit on one side of the room, and the latest newcomers -- the Dominicans -- on the other?
Why in America, which for many of them is still a new and unfamiliar second home, do the students so quickly divide up by race and learn to fear the others?
"I don't know why," said Rodrigo Calapaqui, 16 years old, one year out of Ecuador and apologetic about his halting English.
"It's stupid idea. All the peoples are alike."


Abkhazia: Small War, Big Risk
The tangled conflict now raging in Abkhazia, a frontier district of the former Soviet republic of Georgia, appears to outsiders an indecipherable blur of ethnic and factional politics.
But there is a larger pattern that warrants the world's urgent concern.
One after another, former Soviet republics are convulsed by violent struggles over power and identity.
Most of these republics have significant ethnic Russian minorities.
Most also have Russian troops serving with the former Soviet armed forces.
In Abkhazia, as in Moldova, these Russian forces are being drawn into the fighting.


Water Fight II: Anheuser vs. Coors
Anheuser-Busch Inc. is opening a second front in its war with the Coors Brewing Company, introducing commercials for another of its light-beer brands that also cast doubts on the brewing method used to make Coors Light beer.
In television spots that began running this week in the Northeast, an announcer says, "Don't buy into the Rocky Mountain water myth." The spots, for Anheuser's Michelob Light brand, echo assertions in commercials introduced in August for Anheuser's Natural Light beer, which said the Coors Light sold in the Northeast was a "concentrate" diluted with "local water."


Philips Uses Technological Tease to Sell Complex System
IT was an advertiser's dream, say executives of Philips and its agency, Backer Spielvogel Bates.
The task: developing the consumer electronics company's advertising campaign for its fledgling interactive compact disk system.
After all, it's a new and interesting product, they say.
And they've got roughly $21 million -- more money than Philips has ever spent promoting a new product -- to give wide exposure to their campaign, which begins on network television tonight.


Top-of-the-Line Drapery At Bottom-Line Prices
A NEWLY married young man who wanted to surprise his wife went into the Drapery Exchange Inc., in Darien, Conn., one afternoon and bought a large blue valance for the living room, a balloon shade that matched the wallpaper border in the kitchen and floral chintz bedroom draperies.
He spent less than $500, and they were installed by the time his wife came home from work.
A newly divorced woman not only bought window treatments for her new home but also outfitted her ex-husband's residence and bought things for the fantasy house she doesn't have yet.
She spent $2,700.


Accounts
*
Ryka Inc., Norwood, Mass., to Doyle Advertising &amp; Design, Boston, to handle the athletic footwear manufacturer's $1.5 million advertising account, previously at Grey Entertainment and Media/Fattal &amp; Collins, Santa Monica, Calif.
Also, Cone Communications, Boston, was named to handle strategic positioning and marketing consultation.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Tarrytown Hilton Inn, Tarrytown, N.Y., to Schoen, Kapelus &amp; Cipriano, Mamaroneck, N.Y., a newly formed agency, to handle the hotel's account, previously at the Johnston Group, Tarrytown.
Billings were not disclosed.


Saudi Clergymen Seek Tighter Islamic Rule
For the second time in two years a large group of militant fundamentalist clergymen in Saudi Arabia has submitted a petition to King Fahd criticizing virtually every aspect of domestic and foreign policy in the kingdom and demanding a more rigorous application of Islamic law in a country that already ranks as one of the world's most conservative Muslim societies.
The 46-page document was delivered to the Saudi Government's senior religious leader, Sheik Abdelaziz Bin Baz, who administers the kingdom's religious affairs.
It demanded revision of the nation's defense and foreign policies and the prohibition of dealings with Western financial and cultural institutions, such as banks and television and entertainment companies.


Power and Pitching Leave Pirates in the Dust
The momentum at work in the National League Championship Series has gathered a terrible swiftness.
The Braves have scored runs by the bunch, thrown shutout innings with an easy arrogance and won games in landslides.
The Pirates have been helpless in front of the onslaught and as they return to Pittsburgh for the next two or -- they hope -- three games, they can certainly feel the rumble's full implications in their bones.


PRO FOOTBALL: Taylor Going, Simms Out, Hostetler In for Giants; L.T. Says No More; This Is His Last Season
Lawrence Taylor, long considered pro football's best linebacker, said today that this would be his last season in the National Football League.
Taylor, who has publicly discussed the possibility of his retirement several times, said he no longer felt the desire to extend his career.


The Case of the Prosecutor's BMW
James M. Catterson, District Attorney of Suffolk County, drives around town in a BMW these days, thanks to a local drug dealer.
It's all legal: Mr.
Catterson's office acquired the fancy car in the course of prosecuting the dealer; state and Federal statutes permit law enforcement agents to seize and use such booty for their own purposes.
But the fact that it's legal doesn't make it right.
The controversy over Mr.
Catterson's car revives larger questions about the wisdom of asset forfeiture that gives prosecutors and police a financial interest in the criminals they chase.


Campaigns Do Their Best to Beat, Not Meet, Press
Television reporters can be so annoying! And these days, who needs them?
For under $500,000, a Presidential candidate can now buy his own program.
If that is out of reach, he can appear on "Larry King Live" to answer questions from his mom.
And if worst comes to worst, he can beat the press with his running mate on "Donahue."


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Growing Indoors
Q.
I would like to grow plants indoors and have been advised to find a miniature greenhouse.
Do you know of a source? -- Murray Melnick, Brooklyn.
A.
I suspect that it's not so much a miniature greenhouse you need as an indoor-light gardening arrangement that will enable you to grow many kinds of plants.
A setup of this sort usually consists of two or more fluorescent tubes and the reflector units needed to hold them.
Although special bulbs have been touted as the last word in light-garden technology, they are relatively costly.
But the light spectrum that most plants need indoors can be inexpensively achieved with a combination of a cool white or daylight fluorescent tube and a warm white tube.
They are typically 20 or 40 watts.


Police Academy Head Moves Toward Community Policing


Yeltsin Transfers Gorbachev Foundation Property
Apparently angered by Mikhail S. Gorbachev's criticism and his refusal to appear before the nation's highest court, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia signed a decree today transferring the buildings and property of the former Soviet leader's foundation to a Government academy, the Itar-Tass news agency reported.
It is the latest round in an increasingly acrid struggle between two proud men who were early allies yet have detested one another.
Mr.
Yeltsin's mood could not have been improved by an interview today in the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, in which Mr.
Gorbachev said that Mr.
Yeltsin "is clearly not coping with his duties."


NEW USE IS FOUND FOR ABORTION PILL
In a discovery that could reshape the debate over the French abortion pill, RU486, researchers have found it can enable women to avoid abortions by serving as a highly effective morning-after pill.
In a new study, Dr.
Anna Glasier and her colleagues at the University of Edinburgh gave RU486 or a standard pregnancy-preventing regimen of high doses of birth control pills to 800 women who requested emergency help.
Both treatments prevented pregnancy in women who had had unprotected sexual intercourse in the preceding 72 hours, they found, but RU486 caused far less nausea and vomiting.
Women who took RU486, however, were more likely to have a delay in the onset of their next menstrual period.
Highlighting a Method
Four of the 398 women in the study who took the birth control pills became pregnant, while none who took RU486 did, but that difference is considered statistically insignificant.
The investigators said that if no treatment had been given, they would have expected 17 pregnancies in each group.
The study is being reported today in The New England Journal of Medicine.


Effect of Trenton Layoffs Is Trickling Down and Far
With the dismissal of 1,500 state employees this week, the anticipated loss of 2,600 more through attrition over the next eight months and nearly 3,500 state workers taken off the payroll last year, New Jersey is in the process of paring nearly 10 percent of its work force in barely two years.
It is the biggest round of layoffs in state history and ends a decade of virtually unchecked growth as New Jersey became a national leader in providing services to its citizens -- from generous social programs to subsidies for the arts.


Hong Kong Reveals Plan to Broaden Government
Christopher Patten, Britain's Governor here, outlined his plans today for this colony in its final years before it reverts to Chinese control, announcing a series of political changes that were immediately attacked by a spokesman for the Chinese Government.
Although Mr.
Patten's political proposals were called "moderate" and even "modest" by liberals demanding more democracy here, a Hong Kong spokesman for the New China News Agency, China's de facto embassy here, issued a statement attacking the speech.
The statement said that announcing political proposals without first negotiating with Beijing was "irresponsible and imprudent," and that "the Chinese side will not be responsible for any arguments caused."


Petrovic Career as a Net May Not Go Past 1993
While they attempt to re-sign the free agent small forward, Chris Morris, and fill the vacancy created by the departure of Terry Mills, another financial and personnel crisis may be slowly developing for the New Jersey Nets.
After a workout at the Nets' practice facility in North Bergen, N.J. earlier this week, Drazen Petrovic, their leading scorer last season, said he has already received six preliminary offers from teams in Italy and Spain for next season.


Mayor Hopes He Can Draw Police to City
New York City officials, long blocked in attempts to impose a residency requirement on police officers, are working with state officials on a program of incentives to encourage new members of the force to live in the city, including possible raises or tax credits and low-interest mortgages.
Dinkins administration officials said the incentives would be aimed at both fostering closer relationships between officers, encouraging city residents to apply to join the force and helping maintain the city's middle-class tax base.


Rearranging the Population: Indonesia Weighs the Pluses and the Minuses
In the last quarter-century, more than five million impoverished Indonesians have been uprooted as part of a bold attempt by the Government to relieve severe population pressures on the island of Java, one of the most crowded places on earth.
Encouraged by the World Bank and other international relief organizations, the Government has paid for the resettlement of these millions in more remote and far-flung islands of this archipelago nation.
The moves were voluntary, and the migrant families were given land and the material to build a new home.


1858 Debates: No Makeup, No Moderator
When the most famous of all great election debates took place in 1858, they had a kindlier name: joint discussions.
There was no panel of journalists nor even a single moderator.
And they were for United States Senator, not President.
The abrasive issues surrounding Abraham Lincoln and and his opponent, Senator Stephen Douglas -- popular sovereignty, local self-government, obedience to the Supreme Court's ruling on slavery in the Dred Scott case, Union versus a House Divided over the extension of slavery into new territories -- clearly demanded discussion in the press and in person.
So Lincoln and Norman B. Judd, chairman of the Illinois Republicans' central committee, proposed a series of joint discussions.
As the underdog, Lincoln asked Douglas "to divide time, and address the same audiences during the present canvass."


Sports of The Times; Barry Bonds Is Not Yet Mr. October
THE Pirates keep letting Barry Bonds down.
They are not holding up to their end of the bargain.
That is to say, his bargain.
Having already staggered through two dreadful league series the last two years, Bonds jokingly asked his teammates to carry him through this year's championships.
But the Pirates botched it for the second straight time yesterday, by a 13-5 score, and Bonds did not help by failing to hit the cutoff man to accelerate a four-run inning and losing a blooper that opened a crushing five-run rally.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Day Out Painting the Town


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Gorka  Singer Bottom Line
For John Gorka, a singer and songwriter who looks like Billy Crystal's younger brother, the fact that he was born in New Jersey is significant enough for him to have written an amusing song about it.


Market Place; Lots of Obstacles For Citicorp Issue
WHEN Citicorp announced plans in August to sell $650 million of preferred stock that is convertible to common, it seemed an auspicious time for the beleaguered banking company to raise needed capital.
Investors had readily absorbed a record amount of other new bank stock earlier in the year, and Citicorp's own stock was flirting with $20, more than double its $8.50 low last December.
Now, two months later, Citicorp is proceeding with the financing despite adverse publicity in the last few months and a slip in its stock to $14.50, down 25 cents in yesterday's trading, and down $1 from Monday.


C.I.A. Chief Orders Investigation Of Statements in Iraq Bank Case
The head of the Central Intelligence Agency, Robert M. Gates, ordered its inspector general today to investigate the agency's misleading and incomplete statements to the Justice Department and a Federal judge about a bank fraud case involving billions of dollars in loans to Iraq.
The internal investigation is the first to be publicly ordered by Mr.
Gates since he took over as the Director of Central Intelligence nearly a year ago.
It serves as an acknowledgment of a politically embarrassing error by the agency on an issue that is dogging President Bush's re-election campaign: the Administration's embrace of Saddam Hussein in the years before Iraq invaded Kuwait.


Man Accused of Sex Abuse
A Long Island man who the police say passed himself off as a doctor was arrested yesterday and accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old female patient during an examination in his Brooklyn office.
Juan Cabrera, 43 years old, of Plandome, who the police said practiced medicine without a license from an office at 393A Saratoga Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, surrendered to the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad, the police said.
Law enforcement officials said Mr.
Cabrera exposed himself to the teen-ager on Sept. 9 and then tried to pay her to remain silent.


Big 'C' Conservative Makes Big Plans for New Jersey
A conservative Republican majority may have swept the legislature in Trenton last November, but Tom Bloomquist, a retired Coast Guard captain in this town, wants more: a home-grown New Jersey Conservative Party that he believes will restore a purer democracy to the state.
The party aims to give all its members a vote in party affairs and to "de-emphasize bossism," he said.
It will hold up the banner of initiative and referendum, the grass-roots political tools that state Republicans have sometimes supported, but not ardently enough, Mr.
Bloomquist said.
And eventually it may make the abolition of county government, as a money-saver, a rallying cry.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ray Drummond  Bassist Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue (at Perry Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
There's a spot in Thelonious Monk's "Well, You Needn't" where the harmony can handcuff improvisers.
Chords tumble chromatically, and an inexperienced improviser will get stumped, chorus after chorus.
When Ray Drummond, a bassist leading a band, played the tune on Tuesday night, soloist after soloist figured out different approaches to the rapids; it was a perfect example of how jazz, and improvisation, can take on metaphorical qualities.


Another 200-Yard Game May Be as Easy as 1-2-3
At Princeton's game against Brown on Saturday at Palmer Stadium, all eyes will focus on Keith Elias, the Tigers' halfback who runs and runs and runs.
Elias has gained over 200 yards rushing in the Tigers' last two games, and if he can do it a third time on Saturday, he will set a Princeton and Ivy League record -- though not a national one.


In the Garden and Thoroughly at Home
THE leaves are just about to perform their autumnal turns; next spring's bulbs are being snugly planted, and finally, some of the most avid gardeners in these parts are beginning to wind down.
A couple are even considering coming indoors.
That's not too surprising if you consider what might be waiting for them.
In Rye, N.Y., and Bridgehampton, L.I., respectively, the architects James Rossant and Stephen Levine have created what can only be considered this season's newest building type: the garden house.
It's a functional folly primarily for relaxing or entertaining; it could also be called a "garden-viewing house," designed to celebrate the symbiotic relationship between people and plants.


A Shrinking CBS Begins To Rent a Piece of the Rock
Black Rock, the elegant granite-clad skyscraper that William S. Paley built to symbolize CBS's view of itself as the "Tiffany network" during broadcasting's heyday, is looking for tenants.
For the first time, a shrunken CBS is marketing the 35-story Eero Saarinen building as aggressively as it promotes its shows.
A top-line Manhattan law firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, has already signed on for floors 27 through 33.
Mastercard, which is looking to lease 250,000 square feet in the metropolitan region, has put the building, between 52d and 53d Street at Avenue of the Americas, on its short list.
And CBS has hired a brokerage firm, Edward S. Gordon, to market floors 4 through 14 -- with the understanding that if Mastercard or any other large tenant needs even more space than that, it can get it.


Review/Television; A Belgian Detective With a Muted Approach
Georges Simenon's Chief Inspector Maigret comes to "Mystery" tonight at 9 on Channel 13, joining a gallery of sleuths that includes Sherlock Holmes, Hercule Poirot and Inspector Morse.
With Michael Gambon ("The Singing Detective") in the title role, "Maigret" will offer six adaptations from the 84 novels -- 500 million copies sold worldwide -- that Simenon devoted to his detective.
Simenon, who was born in Belgium in 1903, wrote his first Maigret story in 1929, even then making it quite clear that he was more interested in character than in drama.
Maigret enters the mind of the criminal, often sympathetically, trying to understand and not necessarily judge.
One famous Simenon observation: "Don't forget that the policeman was often born in the same street as the criminal, had the same sort of childhood, stole sweets from the same shop." He added: "Deep down the policeman understands the criminal because he could so easily have become one."


A TV Gofer Named Clinton With a Famous Brother
In his sneakers, Bermuda shorts, sweat shirt and gold chain, Roger Clinton looks just like any other frazzled television production assistant as he bounds into a Burbank luncheon hangout at noon.
But he isn't.
Mr.
Clinton is the younger half-brother of the Democratic Presidential candidate.
"When Bill was elected Governor I was just accepted as another person," said Roger Clinton.
"I was appreciated for what I was. But now it's like, there's no escape. You're inundated with so many things, rumors and speculation. You want to leave town but then you think, no, accept it, just accept it and you'll be fine with it."


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brighton Journal; Tories in Their Tower, The Jobless at the Gate
This windswept seaside resort has been divided into two completely different worlds this week, where the people seem at times to be speaking two completely different languages.
There is the world behind the fencing and metal detectors and phalanxes of police officers where the governing Conservative Party is now assembled in its annual conference, a convocation of earnest and well-dressed people whose conversation is littered with phrases like Maastricht and subsidiarity and the exchange rate mechanism.


Man Indicted In an Attempt To Kill Wife
A Manhattan real-estate executive has been indicted on charges that he plotted to have his wife killed in a twisted murder scheme that detectives said included the killing of his wife's best friend to make it look like a robbery.
Wayne Brison, a spokesman for Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, indicated yesterday that a grand jury had indicted 47-year-old Robert Goldberg of Hazlet, N.J., on charges of attempted murder.
Mr.
Brison declined to give further details.


Vacant President's Post Filled by Bristol-Myers
Bristol-Myers Squibb named Charles A. Heimbold Jr. its president yesterday, making him heir-apparent to Richard L. Gelb as chief executive of the $11 billion-a-year diversified health-care company.
Mr. Heimbold, 59 years old, will join Mr. Gelb in an untitled office of the chairman.


Fischer's Attack Beats Spassky's in a Slugfest
Bobby Fischer won the race toward checkmate yesterday in Game 16 of his exhibition match with Boris Spassky, and now leads their series 6-3.
It was the first game he had won since the match moved from Sveti Stevan to Belgrade, and it came after a loss and 3 draws.
Fischer has now passed the halfway mark to gaining the $3.35 million winner's prize.
He needs four more victories; the loser's share is $1.65 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal spending on public works is gaining a new respectability among economists, Wall Street traders and some corporate executives as a last-resort way to generate jobs.  [ Page A1. ]


Senate Opens a Path to Adjournment
The Senate today apparently found a legislative path toward adjournment, as filibustering senators dropped objections to votes on a tax bill and a Western water projects bill that had blocked all other action.
With votes on those bills and an energy bill scheduled for Thursday, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said he hoped to adjourn for the year that night, or, at the latest, on Friday.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE 8-year-old boy came home from day camp a few months ago, and told his mother that he had a secret he wanted to share but that she mustn't tell anyone, not even his father.
"I have a girlfriend," he confided.
When the mother asked the girl's name, he answered softly, "I don't know." It seems that earlier that day their eyes had met for a few seconds over a lunch of tuna fish and peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.
For the 8-year-old boy, it was his first taste of romance and courtship.
Their relationship was now special.
In a sense, it had been his first date.
For children in the United States, the process of dating often begins in early adolescence.
Although children in elementary school usually choose to socialize with members of the same sex, by junior high school they often go out in mixed-sex groups of a half-dozen or more friends.
By the time they're 15 or 16, most have gone out as a couple.


Review/Ballet; From Italy, Pirouettes And Lots Of Props
At the end of "Blank Pages," the best piece presented by the Florence Dance Theater, a soloist, Marga Nativo, looked at a musical note impressionistically drawn on a huge pad of paper.
Here, at least, Miss Nativo faced the music.
The same could not be said of the rest of the program, which signaled a failure to understand that her company had, in fact, made a decidedly premature United States debut.


Indictment Of First Investors
The First Investors Corporation, a mutual fund company known for high-pressure sales tactics, has been indicted on one count of securities fraud -- unlawfully offering or selling two junk bond funds, the Office of the Commonwealth's Attorney in Richmond announced yesterday
The one-page indictment, believed to be the first embodying a criminal charge against a mutual fund company, says the violations occurred between Jan. 1, 1985, and Dec. 31, 1989.


Knicks' Roll Call for Camp
Free agents Eric Anderson, Terry Dozier, Louis Jeter and Gary Waites will join the Knicks for training camp tomorrow in Charleston, S.C., increasing the team's camp roster to 15 players.
Anderson, a 6-foot-9-inch rookie from Indiana, averaged 11.5 points and 7.3 rebounds for the Knicks' summer league team.
Jeter, a 6-8 rookie from Ohio University, also played for New York's summer league squad, averaging 9.2 points and 3.6 rebounds.
Both Dozier, a 6-9 forward, and Waites, a 6-2 guard, played in the Continental Basketball Association last season.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


When Pets Are Caught In the Middle Of a Breakup
Renee Palmer admits that her divorce proceedings were, on the whole, quite civilized.
Still, she was on tranquilizers most of the time, and it had nothing to do with money or property.
Well, maybe property of a sort: you see, there were these two cats.
One was a black alley cat named Caviar; the other, a fluffy white Persian, a walking rug with one blue and one yellow eye, named Napoleon.
Mrs.
Palmer, who lives in Manhattan and owns a decorative-painting company, said they were hers; her about-to-be-divorced husband said they were his.


CHICAGO BOARD OF TRADE SETS OCT. 23 TO TEST NEW SYSTEM
The Chicago Board of Trade yesterday set Oct. 23 as the date it will begin an electronic trading system for new products.
The system, Project A, will start with zero-coupon bond futures, zero-coupon note futures, barge-freight rate index futures, and options on Treasury bond futures not currently listed in the trading pits.


Raids by Microsoft Uncover Caches of Counterfeit Software
The Microsoft Corporation said today that it had confiscated $9 million worth of counterfeit versions of its MS-DOS software in a recent raid on a Sunnyvale, Calif., printing company.
Microsoft seized the counterfeits last month as one of several raids around the nation the company has conducted with Federal and local law-enforcement agencies.
Microsoft, based in Bellvue, Wash., said the Sunnyvale raid uncovered the most copies of counterfeit software it has found so far.


Hope Wanes on Fed Easing of Rates
Bond traders and economists all but gave up hope yesterday for the prompt Federal Reserve easing that had seemed so certain a mere week ago.
The economy remains so weak, however, that many still expect the Fed to lower interest rates after the election.
Money managers said the falling value of the dollar and the nearness of the election most likely stayed the Fed's hand.
"It is traditional to the Fed's view not to operate before an election if they can avoid it," said Neal M. Soss, chief economist at First Boston and a former vice president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank.


Tough Anti-Tobacco Law Is Passed by City Council
The New York City Council overwhelmingly passed a landmark anti-tobacco law yesterday that makes it more difficult for minors to buy cigarettes and requires anti-smoking messages to counter tobacco advertisements in bus shelters and on taxicabs and other spaces owned or licensed by the city.
The law also bans smoking in public and private schools, outlaws the sale of loose cigarettes and requires store owners to ask for proof that customers buying cigarettes are over 21.


Diner's Journal
Follonico
Haute Tuscan is the theme of a handsome new Chelsea restaurant named Follonico, after a town in Tuscany.
The chef and owner, Alan Tardi, trained in that region of Italy and also worked in Manhattan at Lafayette, Chanterelle and Les Madri.
Considering the quality at Follonico, prices are reasonable across the board; but as the menu is designed for four courses (antipasto, pasta, meat or fish, and dessert), the tab can add up.
Two courses and dessert make an adequate meal.


Dal Canton Answers Braves' Call for a Warmup Pitch
PITTSBURGH, Oct. 8 -- The light was flashing on Bruce Dal Canton's answering machine Tuesday night.
The message was an hour or two old.
The request, though, was out of another era.
The Atlanta Braves wanted him to pitch.
Dal Canton, who has not pitched in the major leagues since 1977, has a quality the Braves wanted.
Not to pitch for them, mind you, but to throw at them, the knuckleball.


New York Race Stalled?
There's a chance that the 1993 Indy-car schedule, due to be released a week from today, might not include the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York, according to A. WILLIAM STOKKAN, the chairman and chief executive officer of IndyCar, the race's sanctioning group.
Although he remains optimistic that the race will be held as planned on July 11, Stokkan said Monday that there are unresolved issues between the race's promoter, Motor Marketing International, and landowners along the proposed course.


Creative Artists Gains at Coca-Cola
For the first time, the Coca-Cola Company has discussed the process involved in creating the global campaign to be introduced next spring for its flagship Coca-Cola brand.
Its disclosures indicate that the Creative Artists Agency has gained a far more influential role in that process that initially believed.
C.A.A., the Beverly Hills, Calif., talent agency led by Michael Ovitz, was named last year as a creative consultant to McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the brand's longtime flagship shop.
C.A.A.'s hiring was a signal that Coca-Cola was beginning to seek ideas from sources other than McCann and McCann's parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
That is important because the move has encouraged other agencies to hope they might loosen Interpublic's grip on Coca-Cola's estimated $367 million in billings.


Packing a Perfect Pumpkin After It's Picked


Robinson Pact Settled
DAVID ROBINSON and the San Antonio Spurs yesterday resolved a contract snag that had loomed over the start of training camp.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, although RED McCOMBS, the owner of the Spurs, said the All-Star center will be "amongst the highest paid and might be the highest paid" player in the league.


Halfway Responses to All-Out War
The horrors keep piling up in Bosnia: 150 Muslim women, some of them teen-agers, are raped by Serb thugs and compelled to go through with their pregnancies . . . 500 Muslims are forced to flee from their homes in a Sarajevo suburb as part of a Serb campaign of ethnic cleansing . . .
Serbs intensify air and artillery attacks on defenseless Bosnian towns.
And how do the U.S. and other United Nations Security Council members respond?
With a toothless study of war crimes and timid surveillance of Serbian flights over Bosnia.


Market Place; Confusing Deal From Taubman
CALL it the try, try again method of bringing a company to market.
The documents for the offering of A. Alfred Taubman's glittering shopping mall empire, announced in August amid great excitement on Wall Street, have gone back to the drawing board.
Seems that while institutional investors were intrigued about buying into Mr.
Taubman's malls -- among the healthier real estate properties in the country -- details of the deal left many of them cold.


Kerry Repudiates B.C.C.I. Panel Assertion
Senator John F. Kerry, who heads the Senate subcommittee investigating the activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, yesterday repudiated the conclusion the subcommittee reached last week that former Senator John Culver had played a key role in the bank's lobbying campaign to quash Congressional scrutiny.
Mr.
Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said Mr.
Culver's contacts with Congressional staff members had been made at the request of his law partners, who were representing B.C.C.I., and were "neither improper or unusual." He minimized those contacts as a "limited part" in B.C.C.I.'s attempts to halt the investigation.


ALZHEIMER EFFECT TIED TO CHEMICAL
Researchers say they have the first evidence that two primary abnormalities seen with Alzheimer's disease, low levels of a chemical that carries signals between nerve cells and the formation of hard plaques in the brain, may be directly related to the disorder.
Work with cell cultures suggests that low levels of the brain transmitter chemical acetylcholine, a common symptom of Alzheimer patients, contribute to formation of hard deposits of amyloid protein that also clog the brain tissue of most patients with the disease, scientists said today.


BILLS SENT TO BUSH AS 102D CONGRESS WRAPS UP ITS WORK
Trying to end a grinding, unsatisfying session, the 102d Congress finished its main work today as the Senate passed bills dealing with taxes, energy, Western water resources and public health.
After two years in which their public image was determined far more by scandals, confrontations and vetoes than by their legislative output, the lawmakers were trying to adjourn, finally, on Friday after sending President Bush a packet of popular bills.


Umpires Scrub a Run, Then Cone Scours the A's
The Oakland Athletics, thinking they could steal a game from the Toronto Blue Jays, instead literally had the book thrown at them tonight.
The bizarre turn of fortune resulted in a 3-1 defeat and with it, a lost opportunity for the A's to take the first two games of the American League Championship Series.
Oakland, failing in the art of the steal largely on a technicality found in the major league rule book, saw a big run against a tough David Cone taken off the scoreboard in the fifth inning of what had been a scoreless game.
The A's then faltered while Cone never did, carrying his shutout into the ninth inning.
Though the A's did rally late, Cone &amp; Company carried the evening, largely because one of Toronto's more enigmatic hitters, Kelly Gruber, awoke at the plate.
He provided the winning margin with a two-run home run, and he doubled and scored the third run.


Miscellany
*
Three celebrities with lengthy lists of commercial endorsements added more to their rosters.
Willard Scott, the weatherman on NBC's "Today," is becoming the spokesman for Days Inns of America Inc., Atlanta.
Joe Montana, the San Francisco 49ers quarterback, is endorsing Pine Mountain fire logs for the Pine Mountain Corporation, Piedmont, Calif.
Terry Bradshaw, the former Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback who is now a broadcaster, is becoming the spokesman for Furrs/Bishop's Inc., the cafeteria chain in Lubbock, Tex.


Review/Film Festival; Kaurismaki's View of Bohemian Life in Paris, Sans Puccini
From the look and manner of his films, Aki Kaurismaki would seem to be like the "Li'l Abner" character who walks the earth shadowed by a small dark cloud.
The cloud follows him with the fidelity of a severely depressed hound dog.
It's almost affectionate.
Yet the cloud isn't big enough to block out the sun completely, and life lived in the penumbra can sometimes be astonishingly rich.
Well, if not rich, then not so poor, though melancholy.


INSIDE
Retailers Selling More, But See No Real Vigor
The nation's chain stores reported their strongest monthly sales gain of the year, but retailers and analysts hesitated to interpret the September increase as a sign of a sustained rise in consumer spending.
Page D1.
Germany Acting on Rates
Amid criticism, the German central bank has pushed down some interest rates in a shift that has helped stabilize global markets.
Page D1.
Ferraro Dislikes D'Amato Ad
Geraldine A. Ferraro said she would try to stop a commercial for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato that shows her faulting his Democratic foe.
Page B1.
Cone and Blue Jays Win
David Cone pitched Toronto to a 3-1 victory over Oakland, tying the American League playoffs.
Page B9.
Willy Brandt Is Dead
The former West German Chancellor, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate for his work to overcome the division of Europe, was 78 years old.
Page A23.


A's Can't Wait for Second Chance
When the Oakland Athletics' hitters were asked about David Cone after tonight's 3-1 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays, their answers were basically the same: Wait 'til next time.
"One game is enough, that's all I need," Rickey Henderson said.
"I'll get him next time."


Municipal Issue By Fort Worth
A $129.4 million municipal financing by Fort Worth for both Tarrant and Denton Counties, Tex., was tentatively priced for sale to the public through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Yields range from 3.50 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4.60 percent in 1997, 5.50 percent in 2002, 5.95 percent in 2007 and 6.10 percent in 2010.


Review/Dance; Circling A Floor Of Leaves
Yves Musard and Christina Jones, two very different choreographers, were the latest entries in the Movement Research series at Judson Church on Monday night.
Open to the public at no charge and providing an unpressured setting that is congenial to works in progress, the series aims more for experiment than finished work.
Mr.
Musard's "Vessel," however, will probably remain as it is.
What looks like minimal activity is enacted within a deliberate structure.
In this case, it took the form of Mr.
Musard's repeated circular trajectories on the floor, usually while inching along in a pushup position.
The ground was strewn with dry leaves that Mr.
Musard had scattered as he entered.


3 Who Escaped With Colombia Drug Lord Give Up
Three leaders of the Medellin cocaine trafficking ring, including the brother of its fugitive leader, surrendered to the authorities today, stirring expectations that the ringleader, Pablo Escobar, would also give himself up.
Roberto Escobar and two other lieutenants in the Medellin organization, Juan Jairo Velasquez and Otoniel Gonzalez, said they were surrendering to avoid police persecution.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton's 4-Point Plan To Win the First Debate
Gov.
Bill Clinton landed in this rainy, cold, windswept city today to huddle with top aides to try to figure out how to embarrass George Bush, quash Ross Perot and leave St.
Louis on Sunday night the victor of the first debate.
"I'm going to try to hole up in my room and read my briefing books and get my voice back and practice a little," Mr.
Clinton said in a hoarse voice before he disappeared.


For Children
New Jersey Children's Museum  599 Industrial Avenue Paramus, N.J.  (201) 262-5151 Recommended ages: 1 to 8


Yellowknife Journal; Town's Neighborly Spirit Dies in Mine Explosion
Never before has there been labor strife like this in Canada's north, and it has so divided this community on the jagged north shore of Great Slave Lake that some, like J. W. Sigvaldason, a local publisher, are likening it to the tensions of the American Civil War.
"This strike and now the mine explosion have literally set family against family, brother against brother," said Mr.
Sigvaldason, owner of The Yellowknifer and News North.
"It has wrecked old friendships, and our small-town friendly atmosphere. It will take years for Yellowknife to heal."


Replays Make Timely Disappearance
In Mr.
Couch Potato Head Land, the question of the baseball post-season was: How many replays would CBS run?
Last season, so many ran that it seemed every tape machine in America had been rounded up like lost doggies.
Last year's humongous replay concerto peaked at 133 for an N.L.C.S. game.
But attention must be paid to CBS's return to live baseball in Games 1 and 2 of the National League Championship Series and Game 1 of the American League playoffs.
Heavens to peacock, these games could have been done by NBC.


Review/Film; 3 Old Friends On the Run From Death
In the prologue to "Breaking the Rules," Neal Israel's tear-jerker about the reunion of three childhood pals, one of whom is dying of a rare leukemia, the film flashes back to 1982, when they were growing up in the suburbs of Cleveland.
Phil, the daredevil prankster of the trio, has conceived an initiation in which he and his best friends, Gene and Rob, must take a spin in a Laundromat washing machine.
Once they've completed the ritual, they dub themselves the Chosen Ones.
Their theme song is a wobbly a cappella version of the Miracles' early-60's hit "You Really Got a Hold on Me."
In a movie as formulaic as "Breaking the Rules," it almost goes without saying that Phil (Jason Bateman), the trio's spark plug, is the one who is dying.
A decade after the washing-machine incident, he engineers the reunion of the Chosen Ones by inviting them to a bogus engagement party.
Things are tense, since Gene (C. Thomas Howell) once stole Rob's girlfriend and the two haven't spoken since.
But incredibly, Phil persuades them to drop everything and join him on a cross-country jaunt to Los Angeles.
Phil's one dream before dying, he says, is to be a contestant on "Jeopardy."


Trading in Hachette Halted Amid Rumors of Hostile Bid
Amid intense speculation over a hostile bid from a rival European media group, trading in the shares of the troubled French communications giant Hachette S.A. was suspended today on the Paris Bourse.
The suspension came with Hachette trading at 158.7 francs a share, or about $31.60, an increase of almost 12 percent over Wednesday's price and 34.5 percent above Monday's closing price of 118 francs.
During the week, in a generally depressed market, 1.23 million Hachette shares, or about 6 percent of the company's stock, have changed hands.


F.C.C. Awards Licenses and Dispute May Result
The Federal Communications Commission handed out several coveted licensing plums today, potentially worth tens of millions of dollars each, to three companies developing advanced pocket-telephone services.
As part of a recently adopted policy to reward technological innovation, the agency tentatively awarded "pioneer preferences" to three companies, which will entitle them to a license in the market of their choice to offer personal communication services.


Perot: Raising Alarm on the Deficit
The Perot campaign began broadcasting three 60-second commercials about the state of the economy on Thursday.
They are being shown nationwide on eight cable networks and on ABC, CBS, and NBC -- mostly during sporting events -- between now and Monday.
A representative advertisement is titled "Red Flag." ON THE SCREEN A red flag, rippling slowly, fills the screen, providing the backdrop for white-lettered text that rolls upward.
A deep-voiced announcer reads the script, accompanied by the militaristic roll of a snare drum.
At the end of the ad, the campaign's red "Perot" logo briefly flashes.


Energy Bill Is No Panacea
The energy bill is far from a panacea for a country addicted to foreign oil.
News analysis, page A16.


USAir and Union Tentatively Settle Strike
Federal mediators said yesterday that USAir Inc. and its machinists' union had tentatively settled a four-day strike by union members.
The airline, which has been operating about 60 percent of its flights, said that it hoped to return to normal operations by Monday.
The terms of the settlement will not be disclosed until members can vote on the settlement.
USAir officials said that leaders of the International Association of the Machinists and Aerospace Workers had told the company that they would recommend that their 8,300 members ratify the pact.


COMPAQ STOCK RISES 8% ON SALES AND JOBS FORECAST
The Compaq Computer Corporation's shares rose more than 8 percent yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, after the company announced that it expected to report record sales for the third quarter and would eliminate about 1,000 jobs over the next several months.
Compaq shares closed at $36.25 yesterday, up $2.75, on volume of more than two million shares, making it the third-most-active issue on the Big Board.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about sausage makers in New York City misstated the address of Salumeria Biellese, a Manhattan delicatessen and sandwich shop that makes French and Italian sausage.
It is 378 Eighth Avenue.


Schwinn Files Under Chapter 11
Under pressure from its creditors, the Schwinn Bicycle Company, America's oldest bicycle manufacturer, said yesterday that it had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code.
The two-wheeler of choice for many growing baby boomers during the 1950's and 1960's, by the late 1970's Schwinn's durable but bulky models lost their cachet in a market more interested in bicycles that were lighter, sleeker and sophisticated.
Analysts said Schwinn was also slow to respond to the growing popularity in the 1980's of mountain bikes, which now account for six of every 10 bicycles sold in the United States.
A Steady Drop In Sales
From a peak of 28 percent in the 1960's, Schwinn, based in Chicago, has seen its share shrink to about 8 percent of what today is a $2.5 billion to $3 billion market.


Pirates Are Hanging by Wakefield's Fingertips
It was always in the gathering Florida twilight that the traditional game of catch between father and son would turn experimental.
For the father, the mother of invention was always the same.
Hunger.
"We'd throw for a while, and then he'd start to get tired," Tim Wakefield said of his dad.


Peru's Security Forces on Alert after Rebels' Sentencing


Art in Review
Norris Embry Snyder Fine Arts 588 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Oct. 17
Norris Embry's painting is sometimes referred to as outsider art, a term used for the work of insane and self-taught artists.
Mentally unbalanced Embry certainly was, but as this show suggests, he was also a cosmopolitan artist, fluent in the traditions of international modernism and himself inspired by outsider art of an earlier time.


At the Bar; When a California Legal Magazine Portrays Gay Lawyers, The Response Is X-Rated.
Last month, the cover story of California Lawyer magazine carried the headline "Gays at Law: Life in a Straight-Laced Profession." Copies of the publication, an independently produced magazine that contains the official monthly newsletter of the California Bar Association, went out to all 133,500 lawyers in the nation's most lawyered state.
As remarkable as the subject matter was the packaging.
On the cover was a portrait of a pair of gay lawyers from two of San Francisco's most prominent law firms, Andrew Mead of Heller, Ehrman, White &amp; McAuliffe and Nancy Koch of Farella, Braun &amp; Martel.
Inside was a full-page photograph of Keith Wetmore, managing partner of the San Francisco office of another giant firm, Morrison &amp; Foerster, who is also gay, plus pictures of other gay and lesbian lawyers with their domestic partners.


Zoltan L. Bay, 92, Major Figure In Developing Radar Astronomy
Zoltan L. Bay, a pioneering physicist in the United States and his native Hungary, died Sunday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 92 years old.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


Art in Review
'Telling Tales'  Equitable Gallery 787 Seventh Avenue (at 52d Street) Through Dec. 5
This is the first exhibition at the Equitable Center since the Whitney Museum branch moved out, and the gallery, now under corporate management and the host to traveling shows, does have a different feeling.
Where the Whitney had recently concentrated on contemporary political art, the work in "Telling Tales," all from the collection of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, is 19th-century narrative painting of a distinctly conservative bent.
It's pretty bland stuff, primarily of interest to the cultural historian.  (Some of the academy's best paintings in the genre didn't travel to New York.) But by means of thematic arrangement and good wall texts, "Telling Tales" points up some of the complex currents moving under these placid surfaces, and manages to be a more politically savvy show than it at first appears.


On Stage, and Off
How to Make a Romanian Accent
"Mad Forest," Caryl Churchill's play at the Manhattan Theater Club about the social paroxysms in Romania brought on by the demise of Nicolae Ceausescu, begins in virtual silence and ends in noisy chaos.
Acts I and III, before and after the fall, consist largely of vignettes, storytelling by accretion and implication.
In Act II, called "December," the actors take on different roles, gather on stage to address the audience and tell, in staccato bursts, from rapidly shifting perspectives, what happened during Christmas week 1989, when Ceausescu was toppled and killed.
It's a daring interlude, startling and confrontational.
One unnerving quality is that the actors speak in Romanian-accented English, a circumstance some critics have found a contrivance and some audience members a burden.
This week, three cast members sat down to explain it.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS PREVAILS ON HOUSING PLAN
The Dinkins administration yesterday prevailed in its plan to build 20 studio apartments for the homeless mentally ill, after City Council leaders decided not to try to override a mayoral veto.
The Council's leaders said they yielded after the administration convinced them that appropriate social services would be provided to residents of the housing, planned for the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
B3.
THE MAYOR AND THE POLICE
Although both sides have tried in the last week to defuse the bickering, the gulf between Mayor Dinkins and much of the police force he commands is still large, perhaps worse than at any time in recent memory.
B2.


Constitution Wins in Impeachment Case
To the Editor:
"Let the Senate Alone Impeach" (editorial, Sept. 28), on the decision by Judge Stanley Sporkin of the United States District Court to set aside the impeachment conviction of Alcee Hastings, the Florida Federal judge, offers a combination of concepts dangerous to constitutionalism.


OUTLOOK UNCLEAR ON TAX DEDUCTIONS
Until next year, many individuals and businesses will be left dangling in uncertainty over how much they owe the Internal Revenue Service this year, how much they should be withholding or whether to proceed with important investments.
That is because it will be left to the next Congress to reinstate several tax breaks that expired on July 1 -- items affecting the taxability of educational benefits, research and development expenses, jobs for inner-city youths, medical insurance for the self-employed, low-income housing, and more.


Ed Blackwell, 63, Jazz Drummer Known for Warm Textures, Dies
Ed Blackwell, one of the most important drummers in jazz, died on Wednesday at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.
He lived in Hartford and would have been 63 years old tomorrow.
He died of complications of renal failure, said his manager, Kunle Mwanga.


Dinkins and the Police Try to Ease Bickering
Although both sides have tried in the last week to defuse the bickering, the gulf between Mayor David N. Dinkins and much of the police force he commands is still large, perhaps worse than at any time in recent memory.
The Mayor is clearly frustrated by his inability to convince much of the police rank and file that he has always supported them.
Nearly every day, Mr.
Dinkins recites like a mantra his reasoned response to each of the grievances cited in recent weeks by police officers.


Reviews/Theater; Amnesia in the World of Advertising
In his plays, Percy Granger has revealed a sharp-edged comic perspective on competition in the work place, whether that arena happens to be academia, as in "Eminent Domain," or television, as in "Scheherazade," a witty sendup of the world of soap operas that was presented last season at the Ensemble Studio Theater.
Some years ago at the Ensemble Studio, Mr.
Granger gleefully savaged unaccountable executives in advertising in a one-act work titled "The Dolphin Position." A full-length version of that play is now running at the Primary Stages Company.
The protagonist is Jerry Tremendous, a partner in Tremendous-Pill, an advertising agency with vast international resources and a callow antiwoman streak.
One day, Jerry wakes up and discovers a strange, stylish woman and a precocious 8-year-old boy in his home and wonders what they are doing there.
They are, of course, his wife and son, and the husband has come down with an attack of amnesia.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend


Beginning a Strategy; Although Limited, Energy Bill Offers Basis for Wider Action in the Future
The energy bill that Congress finally sent to the White House today is far from a panacea for a country addicted to foreign oil.
But it lays potentially important building blocks for a serious energy strategy in the future, bringing consumers closer to the day when they can choose to drive battery-powered cars and live in homes heated by wind or solar energy.
The legislation overhauls and expands the Government's role in the energy marketplace, carving a place for wind- and solar-power producers in the utility industry and instructing the Energy Department to enter into joint ventures with private companies to market electric motor vehicles.


Poll Shows Tight Race in Texas In a Sign of Vulnerability for Bush
Underscoring the Republicans' vulnerability even in states they once counted on, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that President Bush is locked in a tight race with Gov.
Bill Clinton in the critical state of Texas.
The poll shows Mr.
Bush with a narrow edge in Texas, with the backing of 41 percent of the voters to 37 percent for Mr.
Clinton, a lead that is within the poll's margin of sampling error.
It also shows that Ross Perot, who was widely expected to be more popular in his home state of Texas than almost anywhere else, has the backing of a modest 11 percent.


For Cone, Bizarre Is Still The Norm
David Cone walked from the Blue Jays' bullpen to their dugout before tonight's game, and 51,114 fans howled.
The cheers actually escalated with each step, and even Cone wondered why.
The giddy fans were reacting to the picture on the scoreboard that showed relief pitchers David Wells and Mike Timlin wearing the cone heads that were first made famous on "Saturday Night Live." Cone glanced back, noticed the gesture of support on the world's largest video display board, and waved to his teammates.


Rapid Transit Bonds Priced
The Southern California Rapid Transit Authority brought a $162.2 million bond issue to market yesterday and tentatively priced it to yield a maximum of 6.60 percent for bonds due in 2008 and 2009.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vietnam War; Campaign Focus on Vietnam Reviving Debates of the 60's
In the fall and winter of 1969, several important things happened in the life of a bright, ambitious young man named Bill Clinton.
After months of elaborate effort, he finally beat the draft for the Vietnam War, drawing a number high enough in the new national lottery that he would never be inducted.
He became, in a small way, a figure within the antiwar movement, helping to organize one of the largest marches on Washington the movement ever produced and serving as a chief organizer of two small demonstrations in London.
He took a trip through the Scandinavian countries, Russia and Czechoslovakia.


Constructing Modern Idiom on a Base of Tradition
In a time when poetry has reveled in its freedom, deploying unmetered, unrhymed lines across the page, the formal properties of Derek Walcott's work are instantly visible to the eye.
To open his "Collected Poems" is to find oneself in the presence of a writer for whom English poetry is no oppressive burden, to be cast off like the colonial past of Mr.
Walcott's native St.
Lucia, but a vibrant tradition, to be plundered and recast in his own contemporary idiom.
Couplets and quatrains unfurl with a stately regularity, suffused with echoes of Shakespeare and Keats, T. S. Eliot and W. H. Auden.
"Art is History's nostalgia," Walcott writes in "Omeros," an epic-length modern "Odyssey" composed in terza rima.
In his work, the voice of his English precursors resonates, animated by his own people's voice, a rich Creole patois mimed in "The Schooner Flight": "I go draw and knot every line as tight/ as ropes in this rigging, in simple speech. . ."


People
*
Chris Marriott was named to the new position of senior vice president and management supervisor on the Mercedes-Benz of North America account at Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York.
He was previously vice president and management supervisor at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York. *
Susannah Pask was named publisher of CEO/International Strategies magazine, New York, succeeding Thomas Braun, who left.
Ms.
Pask was most recently publisher of Metropolitan Home magazine, New York.


Review/Film; Steven Seagal on a Ship in Hot Water
The intoxicating premise of "Under Siege," the new Steven Seagal action movie, is that 30 men, disguised as caterers and as the members of a rock combo, accompanied by the Playmate of July 1989 as a sort of front, could seize the great United States battleship Missouri at sea.
Once firmly in charge, they stand ready to nuke Honolulu while conducting sales, via a cellular telephone, of the ship's other nuclear-tipped Tomahawk missiles to the highest bidders on three continents.


Mr. Bush's Campaign Mode: Nasty
President Bush's attacks on Gov.
Bill Clinton have grown more bitter by the day.
Now Mr.
Bush is impugning Mr.
Clinton's patriotism with absurd charges that date back to the Vietnam War.
That's not just nasty, it's demagogic.
It also consumes time that Mr.
Bush might better spend telling voters why they should re-elect him.
Mr.
Bush's assaults escalated last week when he campaigned in Florida.
He charged Mr.
Clinton with having "weak knees and sweaty palms" and said that electing him would be tantamount to replacing "the American eagle with a chameleon in the White House."


H. Gardner Ingraham, Lawyer, Is Dead at 80
H.
Gardner Ingraham, a lawyer whose career in New York City spanned nearly four decades, died on Tuesday at his home in Northport, L.I.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Ingraham died of heart failure, said a son, Robert E., of Northport.


U.S. Report on Mengele Reaffirms His Death
A long-delayed Justice Department report on Josef Mengele, the German doctor who carried out experiments on victims at the Auschwitz death camp, has reaffirmed earlier findings that the fugitive Nazi criminal drowned in Brazil in 1979, and it debunked accounts of American complicity in his escape at the end of World War II.
But the report, in preparation since 1985 and issued yesterday, confirmed that Dr.
Mengele was in American custody for at least six weeks in two separate prisoner of war camps after World War II and was routinely set free, possibly under his own name, despite being carried as a war criminal on at least two wanted lists.


Times Appoints 5 to Key News Posts
Five major newsroom appointments at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
R.
W.
Apple Jr. will become The Times's Washington bureau chief on Nov. 4, succeeding Howell Raines, who was recently named editor of the editorial page.
Mr.
Apple, who is now chief Washington correspondent, will also keep that title.


In Bout With Yeltsin, Gorbachev Loses Office Space
The feud between Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia reached new depths of ugliness today when the Soviet Union's last President was barred from his private offices by a cordon of armed policemen.
"The police have blocked the building as if it were a nest of spies," Mr.
Gorbachev said as he stood outside the offices today.
"I feel ashamed for the authorities."


Bowe Is Lightening Up
DICK GREGORY is trying to make RIDDICK BOWE somewhat less of a heavyweight for his title fight against EVANDER HOLYFIELD on Nov. 13.
Gregory -- an author, lecturer, comedian and new-age nutritionist -- joined the Bowe camp last month in South Fallsburg, N.Y.
Tomorrow, Bowe will shift his training site to Reno for a month of high-altitude workouts before the championship bout in Las Vegas, Nev.


Jets' Top Rookie Expects Separation is Temporary
If you want to talk about rotten luck, look no further than tight end Johnny Mitchell.
The Jets' first-round draft pick signed his contract on time, got into training camp, worked hard and was ready to contribute to an explosive offense.
So, what happened in his first professional game?
Mitchell streaked down the field against a Falcons defender in the new Georgia Dome, caught his first pass -- a 23-yarder -- and separated his left shoulder when he fell on the ball and the Atlanta defender fell on him.


Art in Review
Alfonso Ossorio Whitney Museum of American Art 945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street) Through Nov. 29
Alfonso Ossorio, who died in 1990 at the age of 74, is best known for the clogged, theatrical wall reliefs that he began to make in the mid-1950's.
Even by today's standards, these reliquary-like works are exuberant models of excess and bad taste, whose crowded surfaces include glass eyes, bones, fake jewels, shells, deer antlers and much else.
Equally pertinent to the sagas of Surrealism, Abstract Expressionism and assemblage, Ossorio's reliefs form an important, nearly all-purpose footnote to the history of postwar art.


At Fork in Road, Czechoslovaks Fret
Slovaks and Czechs are awaiting Jan. 1, when this country is to split in two, with regret, resignation and a remarkable absence of animosity.
Premiers Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic and Vladimir Meciar of Slovakia agreed on July 23 to dissolve the two republics' 74-year marriage after the failure of talks over Slovakia's demands for sovereignty within the federation.


Rabbi Philip Paretzky, Talmudic Scholar, 75
Rabbi Philip Paretzky, a professor of Talmud at the Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary in Manhattan and a member of the faculty there since 1963, died on Sunday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 75 years old.
He died of a heart attack, according to Sam Hartstein, a spokesman for the seminary.


Citicorp Sees Payout Likely Again by 1994
Citicorp is likely to resume paying a dividend on its common stock in 1994, John S. Reed, the company's chairman, said yesterday, adding that the company had solved enough of its problems so that investors should expect a strong rebound in profits even before then.
In a meeting with banking analysts and investors, Mr.
Reed described Federal regulators as "a pain," but added that on balance, regulators' criticisms have helped make Citicorp a better company.


Pop/Jazz; Songs From Many Schools, All From Life
Irma Thomas looks good in gold.
On the cover of "Time Is on My Side: The Best of Irma Thomas" (EMI), a compilation of her 1960's soul hits that was released early this year, she's wearing a gold dress of fringed lame, with the straps just slightly off her shoulders.
Ms.
Thomas was young when the picture was taken, probably in her early 20's, and her face has an expression of unbreachable confidence.
She's pointing her finger, as if about to tell someone just what she thinks of him.
The light sparkles white and sharp off the gold of her dress.
And last Friday night at Tramps, where she is performing again tonight, Ms.
Thomas wore a glittering gold-sequined jacket over a multicolored sequin top.
She looked younger than her 51 years, and every aspect of the performance demonstrated a supreme control.
Her movements were smooth and graceful.
She knew exactly what to give the audience and when to give it.
Her voice glided through the words and melodies with a sure and practiced ease.
Even when she cut loose and reached for a strong, steady high note, it was with the absolute knowledge of the power a singer can communicate.


Court Rules on Right to Screen Local School Board Selections
A state appeals court has ruled that New York City's Schools Chancellor has the power to review the selection of school superintendents by local boards.
The Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, contends that the ruling gives him a veto over a local board's choice for superintendent.
But the boards say the decision only means Mr.
Fernandez can establish criteria and procedures for the selection, and then can voice an opinion over the choice.


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Colorado 6, Missouri 0
Pat Blottiaux kicked two field goals as Colorado overcame a cold drizzle and stubborn Missouri, 6-0, in a mistake-filled Big Eight Conference opener last night in Columbia, Mo.
Colorado (5-0) extended its unbeaten streak to 23 games against Big Eight teams.
Although the Buffaloes' first game at Missouri since the infamous fifth-down game of 1990 produced an eighth straight victory over the Tigers (1-4), it didn't come easily.
The first-ever night game at Missouri was played in a steady rain, gusting winds and 46-degree temperature that quite likely contributed to the problems of both teams.
The Buffaloes committed four turnovers and were far off their previous season average of 36 points. (AP) TENNIS  Agassi Is Aced Out
Andre Agassi's reputation as owner of the best return of serve in the game took a beating yesterday at the Sydney Indoor tournament in Australia.
Patrik Kuhnen, ranked 106th in the world, served 23 aces in a 6-3, 6-4 victory over the third-seeded Agassi, ranked No. 7.
After the loss, Agassi said that a thigh injury suffered 10 days ago would force him to miss next week's tournament in Tokyo.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, the defending champion, faced break points in his first three service games before defeating 15th-seeded Richey Reneberg, 6-4, 6-2. (AP)


Steven P. Grunewald; Tenor, 30
Steven P. Grunewald, a tenor, died last Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 30 years old.
Mr.
Grunewald died of complications related to H.I.V. infection, said his brother, Theodore J. Grunewald of Manhattan.


Holiday on Monday
The Columbus Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
PARADE Sunday, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 77th Street.


Not All Junk Bonds Join the Comeback
To the Editor:
The strength of the original-issue junk bond market (Business Day, Sept. 23) should not surprise anyone.


Alaska Highway Journal; Taming a Harsh Land, and Prejudice
The Army sent Richard Trent into a subarctic forest with scant clothing, bad equipment and commanders who doubted his intellect.
What he did there, along with several thousand other black soldiers, defied the forces of nature and human prejudice.
They built like mad.
They bulldozed forests, laid logs five deep across bogs and stood chest deep in freezing water to bridge rivers.
Their role in constructing the fabled Alaska Highway was so impressive that a military report predicted it would be told and retold through the ages.


Art in Review
'Some People'  Tom Cugliani Gallery 40 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 31
The tendency of artists to make pictures of friends and family, but mostly friends, is honored by this touchingly beautiful and intimate group show.
Organized by the artist Jack Pierson, it ranges through several generations of painters and photographers, starting with Alex Katz, who is represented by a small painting of his wife, Ada, and a nearly life-size cutout of the poet and critic Frank O'Hara, both from the late 1950's.
It ends with the indolent yet oddly innocent color photographs of the young Marcelo Krasilcic, a recent graduate of New York University, which portray the artist and his friends lolling around hotel rooms in Portugal and Brazil.
In between are images of many denizens of the worlds of art, music and performance.
The dealer Pat Hearn is present, vaguely, in a foggy Polaroid by Mark Morrisroe; the gaunt visage of the artist Tom Rubnitz, who recently died of AIDS, is backed by a wall of vibrant orange in a 1992 painting by Stephen Tashjian.
Billy Sullivan's bright 1982 pastel of Rene Ricard, another poet and critic, has a youthful, almost childlike freshness.
Adjacent, David Armstrong's portrait, a black-and-white photograph of Mr.
Ricard reclining bare-chested in a white leather coat, projects a more worldly mood.


Dinkins Wins on Housing For Homeless Mentally Ill
The Dinkins administration yesterday prevailed in its plan to build 20 studio apartments for the homeless mentally ill, after City Council leaders decided not to try to override a mayoral veto.
The Council's leaders said they yielded on the issue because the administration had convinced them that appropriate social services would be provided to residents of the housing, which is planned for the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Quayle Distorts Democratic Platform on Gays
To the Editor:
Vice President Quayle's assertion that the Democratic Party platform calls for affirmative action as a remedy for anti-gay discrimination, reported in "Quayle Contends Homosexuality Is a Matter of Choice, Not Biology" (news article, Sept. 14), is not true.
Rather, the platform calls for an end to discrimination based on sexual orientation.
There is a difference, and I suspect that Mr.
Quayle knows it, but is willing to distort the Democratic platform and Gov.
Bill Clinton's position to keep his job.


Edwin Roberts, 73; Retired as Executive Of Retailing Chains
Edwin G. Roberts, a retired retailing executive who headed large store chains from New York to Chicago and Los Angeles, died Tuesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 73 years old.
He apparently died of a heart attack, said his son Brian.


Retailers Report Gains But Remain Cautious
The nation's chain stores yesterday reported their strongest monthly sales gain of the year, but retailers and analysts hesitated to interpret the September increase as a sign of a sustained rise in consumer spending.
Once again, the phrase of the day was "cautiously optimistic," because of exceptional factors like a later-than-normal Labor Day and a sudden drop in temperatures nationwide.
Department and specialty stores that do the bulk of their business in apparel reported unusually strong sales.
Federated Department Stores Inc., which operates chains like Abraham &amp; Straus, Bloomingdale's and Lazarus, posted a 6.6 percent rise at stores open at least one year, a closely watched indicator of retail performance.
Mervyn's, a unit of the Dayton Hudson Corporation that sells moderately priced clothing, saw comparable-store sales climb 11 percent. 'Some Broad-Based Strengths'
And Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and Circuit City Stores Inc. reported strong sales of consumer electronics and appliances, big-ticket durable items that are of little interest to shoppers in a weak economy.


COMPUTERLAND REORGANIZES, CREATING TWO NEW UNITS
The Computerland Corporation said yesterday that it would reorganize its business to focus on two major areas: company-owned service and sales, and franchising and distribution to independent computer resellers.
As part of the reorganization, the Pleasanton, Calif., computer retailer will lay off about 40 of its 1,200 workers.


Ferraro Wants D'Amato Ad To Be Stopped
Geraldine A. Ferraro said yesterday that she would try to force Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato to stop showing a new campaign commercial that includes a news clip of Ms.
Ferraro criticizing the fund-raising tactics of State Attorney General Robert Abrams, Mr.
D'Amato's Democratic opponent.
The ad, in which a narrator labels Mr.
Abrams "hopelessly political," is one of two tough new commercials the D'Amato camp began broadcasting yesterday as the Republican incumbent escalated his media war on his Democratic challenger.


Dr. Benjamin B. Greenberg; Orthopedic Surgeon, 85
Dr.
Benjamin B. Greenberg, an orthopedic surgeon, died on Oct. 1 while vacationing in La Baule, France.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Dr. Greenberg died of a heart attack, said his son, Dr. Robert A. Greenberg.


At Belmont, a Classic Before the Classic
Even Nick Zito was impressed: The five top prospects for the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic, the world's richest horse race, will compete tomorrow in the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup at Belmont Park, the world's richest tuneup race.
"I think," he said, "you throw a blanket around this whole field. They'll all be there."


Chevron Head Backs Gas Tax
The chairman of the Chevron Corporation said today that he would support a "dramatic" tax increase on gasoline if it were part of a "serious plan" to cut the Federal budget deficit, and if the money could not be spent on new Government programs.
Kenneth T. Derr, speaking at a luncheon meeting here to business leaders from Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware, made the remark in response to a question.
He did not say precisely how large a tax he would support.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AVON PRODUCTS INC., New York, said it was extending the expiration date of its tender offer for Avon Japan stock until Oct. 22.
BORDEN INC., New York, announced the acquisition of Kamps G.m.b.H., a privately owned retail bakery chain serving Dusseldorf, Germany.


Clinton Fires Back
Bill Clinton said criticism of his past antiwar activities showed that the Bush campaign had "sunk to a new level." Page A20.


Hurricanes Refine Their Tough Tactics
The Miami Hurricanes and Penn State Nittany Lions are on the field at Beaver Stadium, as more than 90,000 fans wait for the kickoff.
It is high noon, and the referee is about to conduct the coin toss, and the time has come for the captains to shake hands.
Uh, captains . . . . Captains?


Caldor May Bid to Reopen Alexander's Stores
The Caldor Corporation, a leading discount retailer in the Northeast, indicated yesterday that it was considering making a bid to acquire and reopen 6 of the 11 department stores in the New York area that Alexander's closed in bankruptcy last spring.
Two weeks ago, Bradlees Inc., another major discount retailer, said it had offered $82 million for the same six stores -- two in the Bronx, two in Queens, and one each in Yonkers and Valley Stream, L.I.
But that offer was subject to approval by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan that is supervising Alexander's affairs, and Alexander's said that any higher bids would be considered.
Welcome in Bronx and Queens


China Worried by Clinton's Linking of Trade to Human Rights
If the Presidential campaign isn't going so well these days for President Bush, the Chinese leaders seem to think it's going even worse for them.
Most horrifying of all to the Chinese leaders, there is the prospect that next month United States voters will elect Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has called for linking China's trade privileges to its human rights record.
Mr.
Clinton sent shivers down octogenarian spines here this summer when he called for "an America that will never coddle tyrants, from Baghdad to Beijing."


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Yale
Fordham visits the Yale Bowl tomorrow for only the second time.
The first time, 42 years ago, the present Yale athletic director, Ed Woodsum, caught a touchdown pass as the Elis handed the Rams their only defeat of the 1950 season, 21-14.
Four years later the Fordham president, Lawrence McGinley, terminated the program and football was not revived as a varsity sport until 16 years went by.
Now, the Rams are saddled with a nine-game losing streak and an anemic offense -- 109 yards and 3 first downs against Penn -- plus uncertainty at quarterback.
Army
There are some seats available tomorrow for the autumnal splendor at West Point and the contest against Lafayette, a team the Cadets defeated five times in the 1980's and by a 56-0 score in 1990.
Mike McElrath, Army's super free safety, had better get on his horse because the Leopards' Tom Kirchhoff has had 10 touchdown passes in four games.


Review/Film; Gerard Depardieu as Columbus: Idealist, Dreamer and Hustler
Much in the way that the mind and motives of Christopher Columbus continue to elude historians, the drama of his life continues to baffle those who would make coherent movies about him.
First there was Ilya and Alexander Salkind's "Christopher Columbus: The Discovery," the inadvertently funny swashbuckler seen here in August.
Now comes the far more ambitious "1492: Conquest of Paradise," directed by Ridley Scott, written by Roselyne Bosch, and starring Gerard Depardieu as a very intense, conflicted Columbus, caught midway between the known world of historical facts and the film makers' imaginations.
The film, which actually begins some years before 1492 and ends some years later, starts off with a lot of solemn and quite conventionally effective scene-setting as Columbus's son and biographer, Fernando, recalls his father, the dreamer of impossible dreams.
"I want to travel all over the seas," the father tells the young Fernando as they stand in handsome profile gazing toward the western horizon.
"I want to get behind the weather."


A New Mental Disorder Appears in Abuse Cases
In a complaint last month against a woman who was once honored at the White House for her work with children, the California Department of Social Services described how three children in her care had died, suffering heart attacks or suffocating from overdoses of medication.
The state's complaint, based on a confidential medical report, accuses Yvonne Eldridge, 40 years old, of Walnut Creek, of causing or contributing to the deaths of the three children and of harming others.


BONN POLITICIANS VOW A CRACKDOWN AGAINST VIOLENCE
Acknowledging shame over the failure to halt a rising tide of right-wing violence against foreigners, German politicians of all parties vowed today to support a crackdown, but differed over whether new police powers were needed.
Only two years after the unification of the country brought hopes of an end to the legacy of World War II, many speakers in a parliamentary debate today agreed that because of the violence, Germany was fast losing its reputation for law-abiding democracy that it had struggled to build over the last four decades.


New Jersey State Assembly Gets Its Paperwork in Order


Reviews/Theater; Male Menopause, in All Its Flattering Aspects
Female menopause may make for best-selling books in the United States, but in that smoke-filled men's club known as the English theater, male menopause still hogs center stage.
"The Holy Terror," Simon Gray's play at the Promenade Theater, is an uncompromisingly whiny example of a genre that has in the past produced such distinguished dramas as "The Real Thing" and "Betrayal." Mr.
Gray doles out his protagonist's self-lacerating confessions, professional crises and petty adulteries as mechanically as a bartender might assemble the ingredients for an astringent martini (with no twist).
Heaven knows this two-hour evening, much of it a monologue, is dry.
You feel nothing for Mark Melon (Daniel Gerroll), a ruthless, philandering London publisher who is patronizing to everyone, from the elderly literary aristocrat (Michael McGuire) whose firm he usurps to a gay psychiatrist friend (Anthony Fusco) to his indolent teen-age son (Noel Derecki) and his long-suffering wife (Kristin Griffith).
Though Melon's publishing house harks back to the age of Pound and Eliot, the people who come and go in the psychic wasteland of "The Holy Terror" are more inclined to talk of "office pokes" than Michelangelo.


Art in Review
Harry Callahan Aaron Siskind Pace/MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Through Oct. 24  Aaron Siskind  Robert Mann Gallery 42 East 76th Street Through Nov. 21


Port Authority to Buy Land at Aqueduct
In a move intended to help New York State balance its budget, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday agreed to purchase 23 acres of Aqueduct race track in Queens for $40 million.
Although Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has wanted to sell all or part of Aqueduct for several years to provide the state with cash, it took this year's budget deficit and some cajoling on Mr.
Cuomo's part to persuade the State Legislature and the New York Racing Association, which operates Aqueduct, to go along with the deal.


Philadelphia Mines New Tax Sources
Cities are trying almost anything this year to raise revenue without raising tax rates.
St.
Louis sells permits for parking on downtown streets, Hampton, Va., requires a fee to gain access to its computerized real estate files and San Antonio just began charging $400 to rescue people who become trapped in their cars while trying to ford flooded streets.
But probably no city is being more aggressive in cutting costs, raising fees and expanding the tax base than Philadelphia.
Struggling against a deficit that could grow to $1 billion by 1996, Philadelphia has already frozen the pay of 15,000 workers for 30 months and replaced hundreds of traffic lights with stop signs.
Earlier this week the city settled a strike with its workers in a contract that saves it nearly $400 million in compensation and benefits over the next four years.


Review/Film Festival; Mad-Dog Violence on TV: Sensationalism or Spoof?
How can "Man Bites Dog" affect the escalating level of violence in the movies and on television?
Is it part of the problem or the solution?
Or is it merely a sensationalistic cinematic prank unworthy of serious discussion?
Such debate is likely to be stirred up by the Belgian movie's New York Film Festival screenings this evening at 6:15 and tomorrow at midnight in Alice Tully Hall.
Two things can safely be said about this pseudo-documentary of a serial killer, which won the International Critics' Prize earlier this year at the Cannes Film Festival.
The film, directed and co-written by its three young producers, who also appear in it, is jam-packed with graphic violence.
And its gun-toting, speed-rapping subject, Ben (Benoit Poelvoorde), has the edgy charisma of James Woods in one of his more maniacal star turns.


Quayle Distorts Democratic Platform on Gays; Oregon Bashing
To the Editor:
"Behind the Hate in Oregon" by Michelangelo Signorile (Op-Ed, Sept. 3) grossly misrepresents my state.
Yes, Springfield, Ore., did pass an antigay ordinance.
This city has a voting population of about 32,000, with maybe 19,000 voting at that election.
The population of Oregon is close to three million.
The tiny percentage voting "yes" at the Springfield election would hardly justify saying that "a once tolerant, progressive state" is being transformed "into a repressive, frightful place" and that we are embarking on "ethnic cleansing."


U.S. Indicts County Chief In Newark
The Essex County Executive, Thomas J. D'Alessio, was indicted on Federal mail fraud charges today, accused of raising money on the pretext of advancing his political career but spending it instead on multimillion-dollar real-estate ventures and a vacation.
The United States Attorney, Michael Chertoff, said Mr.
D'Alessio, a former Essex County Sheriff, and his co-defendant, Joseph Thor, a lawyer who has served as Mr.
D'Alessio's campaign treasurer, deposited money from a March 1989 fund-raising dinner in a Newark bank account that was used for private investments.
Both defendants live in Nutley.


Rock to Blues to Country. At the Post Office.
Rock-and-roll heaven will come to local post offices next year, along with Broadway angels and some honky-tonk heroes.
Hank Williams, Buddy Holly, Dinah Washington, Patsy Cline and others, are to appear on 29-cent stamps.
Standing under an electric-blue guitar at the local Hard Rock Cafe, the Postmaster General, introduced by a postal official as Marvin (Rockin') Runyon, today unveiled the commemorative stamps to be issued next year.


Sports of The Times; Handley In a Giant Tailspin
CONTROL.
In the National Football League, a head coach must be in control.
Of his players.
Of his assistant coaches.
Of his relationship with the front office.
Of his relationship with the news media.
But more than anything else, an N.F.L. head coach must be in control of himself.
Week by week, day by day, Giants Coach Ray Handley seems to be losing control.
When trailing the Dallas Cowboys, 27-0, at halftime recently, some of his established defensive players understood Handley to say that he would insert some younger players in the second half.
They had to chase him down and talk him out of it.


Britain Plans All-Out Inflation Fight
In a bid to reassure nervous markets and restore confidence in the Government's battered economic policies, the Chancellor of the Exchequer committed the nation today to a tough anti-inflationary strategy, aimed at keeping long-term retail price increases below a target of 2 percent a year.
Speaking at the annual Conservative Party conference in this coastal resort, the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, promised tight curbs on public spending, including limiting salary increases for the public sector.


No Headline
In his literary works Walcott has laid a course for his own cultural environment, but through them he speaks to each and every one of us.
In him, West Indian culture has found its great poet.
THE SWEDISH ACADEMY, awarding the Nobel Prize to Derek Walcott.  [ A1:1. ]


Discovering the Old World of Maps
THE star of new exhibitions observing the 500th anniversary of the first Columbus voyage to America is not the Admiral himself.
It is that work of art and information so familiar as an instrument and record of the continuing discovery of the world: The map.
This emphasis on maps may reflect the current fashion of toppling heroes from their pedestals.
It could be a diplomatic evasion because so much about Columbus is in dispute, from his origins and motivations to his character and responsibility for the brutality against American Indians.
But no one questions the historic import of his exploits.
He changed the map of the world.


Ban on Eavesdropping Scanners Advances
Congress has passed a law that bans the manufacture or importation of radio scanners that can listen in on cellular phones.
Such eavesdropping, an increasingly popular pastime among possibly millions of ham radio operators and other hobbyists, has unnerved cellular customers and outraged privacy advocates.
The bill was passed by the House of Representatives Tuesday, approved by the Senate Wednesday, then sent to the White House for the signature of President Bush, who did not oppose the legislation.
Holes in the Law?
Legislation passed in 1986 made it illegal for people to listen in on cellular conversations but did not ban the manufacture or importation of radio scanners.
The scanners are routinely produced with a block on cellular frequencies, but eavesdropping enthusiasts could easily snip a wire, flip a switch or remove a resistor to restore the eavesdropping function.


Advertising; Columbus Voyage Is a Hard Sell After 500 Years
This time, Columbus really seems to have fallen off the edge of the earth.
There were expectations a year or two ago that hoopla over the 500th anniversary of his arrival in this hemisphere would be so widespread as to be inescapable.
Instead, as America heads into this Columbus Day weekend, one must search as assiduously as any explorer to find promotions or advertising with Columbian themes.


Backed by Zell Investment, Carter Hawley Re-emerges
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the department store chain, emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings today with stronger financing and a leaner executive suite.
But it still faces a deteriorating economy in its principal California market.
As part of the reorganization agreement, the Zell/Chilmark Fund infused an additional $50 million today into the reorganized retailer, which owns the Broadway, Weinstocks and Emporium chains in California and Broadway Southwest in Arizona.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Uses Hookup to Talk All Over New York
In most places they listened intently as Gov.
Bill Clinton spoke about the need for change, the rightness of his economic policies, his hopes for a better future.
And he issued a heartfelt thanks to all those New Yorkers trying to help him and Senator Al Gore prevent President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle from winning a second term.
"One lady actually wept when he was finished," said Joseph Board of Scotia, N.Y., a professor of law and comparative politics at Union College and the Albany Law School.


CHRONICLE
When MATILDA CUOMO heard about all the attention being paid to the design for a stamp honoring Elvis Presley, she thought of the years she had spent trying to get the postal service to issue one for Francis Bellamy.
"I like Elvis, but it seemed so unfair," she said the other evening on the telephone.
Francis Bellamy?
Mrs.
Cuomo has been determined to acquaint the public with the man who wrote the Pledge of Allegiance 100 years ago.
She has spent the last seven years working for his recognition.


Brooklyn Bishop Issues Sex-Education Guidelines
At a time when New York City has come under attack for its new schools curriculums dealing with homosexuality and the AIDS virus, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Brooklyn introduced broad guidelines yesterday urging parochial schools, teachers and parents to become more aggressive in teaching "healthy ideals" about sexuality to children.
The guidelines, included in a 66-page booklet that generally reiterates core church teachings, are intended to strengthen sex education programs already taught in parochial schools in Brooklyn and Queens to counter the pressure young people face from their peers, the media and other sources beyond the family and the church, Bishop Thomas V. Daily said.





Review/Film; Literal Interpretation Of Paying Parents Back
The first and only funny scene in "Alberto Express" finds the story's hero, at the age of 15, confronted by a father who pleasantly produces an adding machine and a mountain of bills.
The father, played with comic serenity by Nino Manfredi, has kept track of every last diaper and schoolbook he ever had to buy for his son, and would now like Alberto to pay back a total of more than 30 million lire.
He assures his son helpfully that there is no hurry.
Alberto need not repay his debt until he himself is ready to have a child.
Cut to Alberto (Sergio Castellitto), now grown up and living in Paris, married to a wife named Juliette (Eugenia Marruzzo) who is due to have a baby the next day.
A broke, panicky Alberto abandons his sleeping wife and hops aboard a train to Rome, hoping to solve his family problem once and for all.


New Tool for Detecting Dark Matter
New observations of a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, nature's way of magnifying remote astronomical objects, have encouraged scientists to think they now possess a promising tool to dig into the mystery of dark matter, the invisible material that presumably accounts for at least 90 percent of the mass of the universe.
Astronomers studying photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope announced yesterday that they had detected a striking example of a gravitational lens bending, concentrating and focusing light from a distant galaxy into images that are bigger and brighter than would otherwise be the case.
This lensing effect offers an indirect way of determining the amount and distribution of dark matter in galactic clusters.


Hewlett-Packard Sets Charge for Cut in Jobs
The Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it will take a special charge of 40 cents a share in the current quarter to cover a voluntary employment-reduction plan.
The company said it expects about 2,700 employees, 2,000 in the United States, to leave the company in early 1993 as part of the severance-incentive plan intended to balance its work force and cut expenses.
Hewlett-Packard stock closed today at $53.375 a share, down 25 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts had anticipated the job cuts since August, when the company posted disappointing earnings for its third quarter, ended July 31, and said that it would take steps to further reduce expenses.
Hewlett-Packard carried out similar programs in 1986, 1990 and 1991; it currently has 90,900 employees.


Handley's Behavior Is Quietly Questioned
Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch, the co-owners of the Giants, said yesterday that they were leaving "the football operation" in the hands of General Manager George Young, but their concern over Coach Ray Handley's run-ins with the news media was evident.
Young was at a league meeting and could not be reached for comment.
But a National Football League official said that Young had spoken with Handley and that the coach agreed to soften a policy on media access that was apparently formulated in anger.
It was not clear what that new policy would be.


Lemieux and Penguins Find a New Toy
The Pittsburgh Penguins appeared to toy with the Islanders for two periods tonight, drawing them into a run-and-gun game, letting them tire themselves out and gaving them some false hope.
Suddenly, entering the third period with a 3-3 tie, the two-time defending Stanley Cup champions unloaded a four-goal bombardment and crushed the Islanders, 7-3.
It was New York's second defeat in two games.


Tests Are Crown Hts. Issue
Tests showed that bloodstains on the blue jeans of the teen-ager charged with the stabbing death of a visiting rabbinical scholar last year, and similar stains on a knife the police say was found in the defendant's pocket, matched the blood of the victim, two experts testified yesterday in Brooklyn.
But several tests were inconclusive.
The defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., 17 years old, is charged in the stabbing death of Yankel Rosenbaum, 29, who was attacked in Crown Heights on Aug. 19, 1991.


Walcott, Poet of Caribbean, Is Awarded the Nobel Prize
Derek Walcott, the West Indian poet whose luminous writings evoke the cultural diversity and richness of the Caribbean, won the Nobel Prize in Literature yesterday.
The Swedish Academy of Letters said in its formal announcement in Stockholm that Mr.
Walcott, who is 62 years old, was being honored for his "melodious and sensitive" style.


Brown-Forman Picks Altschiller
The Brown-Forman Beverage Company said yesterday that it had named Altschiller Reitzfeld in New York to handle advertising for its spirits brands like Canadian Mist, Early Times and Southern Comfort.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, was previously handled by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, which was dismissed in March.


Willy Brandt Dead at 78; Forged West Germany's Reconciliation With the East
Willy Brandt, whose life spanned the defeat of his German fatherland in two world wars and who won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to overcome the cold-war division of Europe, died last night.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Brandt, who had been under treatment for intestinal cancer for the past year, had spent recent weeks at his home in Unkel, near Bonn.


Review/Film; Bus Driver and Mafioso In a Comedy of Terrors
Roberto Benigni, one of Italy's most popular comic actors, has been creeping up on American audiences with a certain amount of self-effacing stealth.
He was first seen here as the bewildered tourist who finds true love in the Louisiana bayous in Jim Jarmusch's "Down by Law," then as the gabby, hilariously unobservant Roman cab driver in Mr.
Jarmusch's "Night on Earth."
With the opening of "Johnny Stecchino" (Johnny Toothpick) today at the 68th Street Playhouse, Mr.
Benigni reveals himself to Americans as the triple-threat phenomenon for which he is so beloved on his home grounds.
He's all over the place in "Johnny Stecchino," an engagingly loose, very Italian comedy, which he wrote (with Vincenzo Cerami) and directed, and in which he stars in a dual role.
If the film seems somewhat less breathless in New York than it does in Rome, it may be because reading English subtitles keeps interrupting the mad flow of sound and image.


California to Decide if Doctors Can Aid in Suicide
Losing a desperate battle against ovarian cancer, Darlena Risley died in the arms of her husband eight years ago after agonized discussions about his helping put her to death if the pain became unbearable.
Her death in a rented apartment by the sea in the Bahamas, where the couple had gone in search of an unproven cure, has now led to a measure on the November ballot.
If it passes it will make California the only jurisdiction in the world to sanction in law what some doctors do privately in the shadowy regions where law and medicine uncomfortably intersect: assist terminal patients to a speedy and painless death.


Accounts
*
The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co., Montvale, N.J., to the Tom Attea Co., New York, to handle creative development for the A.&amp; P., Super Fresh, Kohl's and Waldbaum's supermarket chains in the United States, previously at Bozell New York.
Attea, which already handles the company's Canadian advertising, was awarded the account, with billings estimated to exceed $10 million, without a review.
Bozell will continue to handle media planning and buying.
A campaign for A.&amp; P. by Attea, carrying the theme "The great store just next door" began running this week.


Debentures Priced by USX
The USX Corporation yesterday priced $300 million of 21-year debentures for sale to the public through an underwriting group led by J. P. Morgan Securities.
Due in 2013, the debentures have a 9 1/8 percent coupon and are priced at 99.795 to yield 9.15 percent, or about 70 basis points more than the Treasury's 30-year bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Why Ban Other Troupes From the Delacorte?
To the Editor:
Your excellent Sept. 21 article on the direction the New York Shakespeare Festival is taking following the death of Joseph Papp does not mention one intriguing fact that I learned while attending a free performance of "Measure for Measure" in Central Park on Sept. 19.


Tribute to Glenn Gould
An all-day tribute to the pianist Glenn Gould, on the 10th anniversary of his death, is to be presented tomorrow at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The commemoration is to begin at 1 P.M. with a lecture by Tim Page, a music critic for New York Newsday and a Gould scholar.
Two series of screenings, at 1:30 P.M. and 4 P.M., are to follow, showing Gould performing and discussing works of Bach, Beethoven, Strauss and Schoenberg.
The closing program at 8 P.M. is to feature the first New York performance of Gould's String Quartet and a video of Gould playing Bach's "Goldberg Variations." Tickets are $20 for the entire day, or $5 each for the lecture and screenings and $10 for the concert, if purchased separately.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


Review/Fashion; Recalling the Love-Bead Era
From the moment the Beatles impersonators in black suits sprang down the runway carrying bright lacquered guitars at the beginning of the Complice show, the spring and summer fashion openings here began to make sense.
Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana's work for Complice surpassed the collection that bears their names, which was introduced earlier in the week.
The designing team made sense of the hippie-look revival that has dominated the shows here.
They interpreted the clothes of the period for today.
Many women who grumbled that they never wanted to see those styles again now wish they were young enough to wear them.
And of course, there is a whole new generation to be seduced by them.


U.S. WAS WARNED ON BAGHDAD LOANS
Federal prosecutors investigating a multibillion-dollar loan fraud involving Iraq twice warned policymakers in Washington that pending policy decisions would be favorable to the Baghdad Government, but the warnings were disregarded, according to a memo disclosed today.
One such case came with the Kuwait invasion, when Western nations froze Iraq's assets and Baghdad began to default on $1.9 billion in loans guaranteed by the United States under an Agriculture Department program, the Commodity Credit Corporation.


Getaways With Murder
IT was genuinely a dark and stormy night; the rain fell in torrents -- except when it was checked by a violent gust of wind.
There was lightning, too.
The hostess at the inn was pale.
"The radio says there has been a prison break," she said.
"And, I should tell you, there has been a murder that the police say is just like the Zodiac killings."


Mild-Mannered Avenging Shopper
SHE'S casual, patient, low key, middle aged and virtually nondescript, and works very hard at it.
Sometimes she's savvy.
Sometimes she's infuriatingly dim.
Sometimes she's irate or demanding.
She knows just the color jacket she wants and none of these are it.
Nope, not one.
Not a very good selection, is it?
Do you have any others in back?
Other times this woman is downright sheepish, waiting and waiting and waiting for a clerk to notice her waiting.
Chances are, however, the sales clerk won't notice the stopwatch in the woman's purse.
So when the woman asks about VCR's, the clerk says, "They're over there." And resumes chatting with a colleague.


Abroad at Home; Death At Bush's Door
At a private meeting last month former Secretary of State George Shultz spoke in passionate terms about the human disaster taking place in what was Yugoslavia.
He deplored the American Government's failure to do more to stop Serbian attacks on Bosnia.
There are many ways for the United States to influence the Serbs, Mr.
Shultz said -- many more options than we have tried.
One possibility, he said, is to bomb Serbian munitions depots.


On My Mind; Here We Go Again
We all know now.
We know that Western businesses, with the approval or connivance of Western governments, sold Saddam Hussein weapons, materials and techniques that empowered him to start the gulf war and move to within a few years of becoming a nuclear-weapon power.
A scandal; terrible. We are upset. We urge investigations.


No Headline
The Rev.
Joseph M. Kitagawa, a theologian who was instrumental in establishing religion as an independent discipline on America's campuses and in introducing the religions of Japan to the West, died Wednesday in Chicago.
He was 77 years old.
He died of pneumonia at the Bernard Mitchell Hospital after suffering a stroke earlier this year, said Jeff Makos, a spokesman for the University of Chicago.
Dr.
Kitagawa was the former dean of the university's School of Divinity.


Clinton Says Desperation Is Fueling Bush Criticism
Gov.
Bill Clinton today dismissed President Bush's criticism of his participation in anti-war demonstrations as accusations from a political opponent who was "apparently desperate."
"His campaign has sunk to a new level," he said. "It's just amazing."


National Gallery Names Senior Curator
Edgar Peters Bowron has been named senior curator of paintings at the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
This is the first major appointment made by Earl A. Powell 3d, who became director of the National Gallery last month.
"The board of trustees just voted on the appointment," Mr.
Bowron said in a telephone interview yesterday.


A Summer-Style Outing on an Autumn Day


Review/Film -- A River Runs Through It; Fly-Fishing: Art, Religion and Life
"IT is those we live with and love and should know who elude us," Norman Maclean's father tells him in "A River Runs Through It," a mesmerizing family memoir fueled by sense of place, force of memory and love of nature.
On the page and now on the screen, this tale of the author's youth in Montana is told obliquely, attempting to fathom a stern father and a reckless younger brother by capturing the vigorous masculine rituals they shared.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Moderator and Panel Are Selected for First Debate
After several journalists vowed to reject any offer to question candidates in the nationally televised Presidential debate on Sunday, the sponsors today turned to four reporters who were not likely to balk: each one had served on a debate panel in the past.
The campaigns also settled on other details, from stage angles to makeup to the color of the backdrop, that may not seem consequential to viewers but were the subject of painstaking negotiations.
And the campaigns drew lots to decide who would make the opening statement (Ross Perot) in the first debate and who would make the closing statement (President Bush).
They also drew lots to decide who will stand where (Gov. Bill Clinton will be in the middle, with Mr. Bush stage left and Mr. Perot stage right).
Moderator Appointments
The bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates announced that Jim Lehrer of the PBS program "MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour," will moderate the first of the three debates at Washington University in St.
Louis.
The questioners will be Ann Compton, a White House reporter for ABC News; John Mashek, a White House reporter for The Boston Globe, and Sander Vanocur, a freelance journalist who has worked for ABC and NBC.


Restaurants
Few establishments today merit the label "cool" -- that is, a place inherently stylish, individualistic and possessing an unstudied self-confidence.
Jezebel, the languid Southern restaurant in Clinton, on the fringe of the theater district, is definitely cool.
Open nine years, this popular, out-of-the-way spot is the creation of Alberta Wright, a former antiques dealer who has transformed her sizable dining room into a charming pastiche of Southern bric-a-brac.
Palms and other assorted foliage tower overhead; diaphanous shawls hang from every ceiling pipe; more than a dozen antique chandeliers glitter in the night; iron patio chairs surround tables with colorful mismatched cloths, and candles flicker in the shadows.
A jazz pianist shows up nightly around 9 to entertain the well-dressed crowd.


2 Off-Duty Officers Wounded in Gunfight With Robbers
Two off-duty New York City police officers were shot, though not seriously wounded, in a ferocious gun battle yesterday with two robbers who ambushed them and a third officer as they delivered a weekly cash payroll to a New York Telephone building in the Bronx, the police said.
Witnesses described a scene of chaos in which the three officers, moonlighting as security guards, exchanged round after round of fire with the robbers, who were armed with a shotgun and a semiautomatic pistol.


Executive Changes
BRE PROPERTIES INC., San Francisco, an equity real estate investment trust company that owns a diversified portfolio of properties, named Byron M. Fox executive vice president.
CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT CO., Pittsburgh, named George R. Johannes executive vice president of finance.


Florio Proposes Chartering Of Parent-Teacher Schools
Barely two years after pushing through a controversial public-school financing plan known as the Quality Education Act, Gov.
Jim Florio today proposed another revolution: creating "charter schools" that would be independent of central administrations and exempt from many rules and regulations.
"Charter schools can encourage innovation by loosening the administrative straitjacket on teachers and allowing them to use their professional judgment and take responsibility for the results," Mr.
Florio said in a speech before the State Board of Education.
"The difference between schools-as-usual and charter schools is like the difference between the old G.M. assembly line and the new Saturn team assembly."


CHRONICLE
In May, ELIZABETH SACKLER, president of the Arthur M. Sackler Foundation, called REUBEN SNAKE, a nationally known leader of the American Indian rights movement, and said, "Reuben, how about having a sunrise ceremony in Central Park?"
As a result, tomorrow between 7:30 and 10:30 A.M., more than 3,000 people are expected to gather to watch leaders and members of Indian nations and tribes from all parts of the country conduct a ceremony that, as Miss Sackler explained, "is intended to welcome a new day and thank the sun for providing another day." The ceremony will be held in an open-sided 40-foot-high tepee in the Mineral Springs area of Central Park on 72d Street near the West Side.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Senate passed bills dealing with taxes, energy, Western water resources and public health, as the acrimonious 102d Congress tried to end a grinding, unsatisfying session.  [ Page A1. ]
The energy bill lays important building blocks for conservation and alternative energy strategies, although it is far from a panacea for a country addicted to imported oil.  [ A16. ]


Review/Photography; 'Songs of My People,' A Black Self-Portrait
With a tour that will cover 30 cities in the United States and Europe, a catalogue published by Little, Brown &amp; Company and an HBO special co-produced by Quincy Jones Entertainment and Blackside Inc., "Songs of My People" is as much an event as it is a photography exhibition.
Now at the Museum of the City of New York, "Songs of My People" features the work of more than 50 black photojournalists and is billed as a self-portrait of American blacks.
Organized by Eric Easter, a black writer and media consultant, and D. Michael Cheers and Dudley M. Brooks, two black photojournalists, "Songs of My People" is clearly modeled after the highly successful "Day in the Life" books, for which teams of photographers descend on a given country to record everyday life.
In 1990, the photographers in "Songs of My People," many of whom work for newspapers around the country, met at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington and were assigned to cover various aspects of black American life.
According to a text panel, more than 65,000 photos were taken in the course of the project; these were edited down to 214 pictures in the book and 150 in the show.


D'Amato: Abrams and Texas
Each time Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has broadcast television commercials in his Senate campaign against State Attorney General Robert Abrams, his staff has released them to reporters in advance.
But this week he simply began broadcasting a series, including these two 10-second attacks with no announcement.
Yesterday his campaign issued two others but would not immediately make videotapes available PRODUCER
Russo, Marsh Associates of Sacramento, Calif. THE TELEVISION SCRIPT
Announcer: "Bob Abrams lobbied to raise his own pay. Now he wants to raise taxes on middle-class families. Bob Abrams: Hopelessly liberal." ON THE SCREEN
A family of father in T-shirt and son is seated around a breakfast table as the mother stands between them, holding a plate.
They listen to the announcer's disembodied voice, their mouths agape.
At the words "raise taxes," the mother drops the plate and it clatters to the floor and smashes.
ACCURACY
Before the 1986 election, when the State Legislature was consdering pay increases for state officials, reporters asked Mr.
Abrams whether he favored one for himself, and he said he did, as did State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, the state's top Republican.
But Mr.
Abrams's aides say he never lobbied for a raise.
The Legislature eventually increased his annual salary to $110,000, from $85,000.
Mr.
D'Amato contends that Mr.
Abrams's support for a pending Congressional proposal for national health insurance would mean higher personal income taxes.
Mr.
Abrams says that he has never supported the financing scheme in the bill and that he favors a plan to be financed through a payroll tax on employers (in lieu of the private health insurance premiums they now pay) and new taxes on alcohol, tobacco and corporations.
He has explicitly said he does not favor new taxes on the middle class.
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT
Announcer: "Bob Abrams demanded a 6 million-dollar-a-year luxury office suite. Now he wants to raise your taxes. Bob Abrams: Hopelessly liberal." ON THE SCREEN
Color picture of Mr.
Abrams, which flip-flops and shakes up and down as the words "6 million luxury office" and a giant dollar sign are superimposed over his face.
ACCURACY
In 1985, when state offices were being moved out of the World Trade Center in Manhattan so the state could take advantage of the real-estate boom by renting out the space at lucrative rates, Mr.
Abrams proposed moving his office to a building at 195 Broadway that would have rented for a total of $6.9 million a year, $750,000 more than another building that the state had proposed but whose space and small floors Mr.
Abrams said were ill-suited to his agency's needs.
Eventually, Mr.
Abrams chose a third building, at 120 Broadway, for an average annual rent of $6.87 million a year, the cheapest of four buildings he reviewed, and about $300,000 less than the next most costly option, his staff says.
SCORECARD
With virtually no detail or supporting information, these two ads tar Mr.
Abrams as a man whose personal greed translates into insensitivty toward working Americans.
They are also so funny that they hardly seem nasty, though they are.
They could hurt Mr.
Abrams, but it is not clear how much they would help Mr.
D'Amato since they only disclose his name in silent type, the minimum to meet legal requirements.


A.T.&amp; T. Subject of F.C.C. Order
Responding to complaints by rivals that A.T.&amp; T. was not playing fair, the Federal Communications Commission ordered the company today to change what it tells customers about using their long-distance calling cards.
Long-distance credit cards are now indispensable for most travelers, but one enduring effect of the breakup of the Bell System has been mass confusion in making credit card calls from pay telephones.


Senate Rivals Set 3 Debates
A spokesman for Robert Abrams said last night that the state Attorney General had agreed to three debates with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
The debates are to take place Oct. 15, at 7 A.M., on the Don Imus program on WFAN radio in New York City; Oct. 17, at 7 P.M., on WRGB television in Schenectady, and Nov. 1, at 11:30 A.M., on Gabe Pressman's News Forum program on WNBC-TV in New York City, said the spokesman, Timothy Gilles.


Marketing Blitz Aims to Show Companies Connecticut Hospitality
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. unveiled a $2.7 million marketing campaign today to sell Connecticut to businesses throughout the nation and the world.
The campaign, which is to include advertisements in many business magazines and newspapers, seeks to counter the image of Connecticut as a place where doing business is costly and cumbersome, and to promote its budget-balancing measures as a sign that it is a "state that thinks like a business."


Disillusioned With Government, Judge Is Thorn in Side of U.S. Prosecutors
This week when Judge Marvin H. Shoob of the United States District Court in Atlanta publicly criticized the Government's handling of a case involving illegal bank loans to Iraq, it was not the first time.
In the early 1980's he ordered the release of more than a thousand Cuban refugees until the Government could come up with a reason to detain them that was not "a disgrace."
For the last 18 months, Judge Shoob has presided over a case involving $5 billion in loans to Iraq made by the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro of Rome.
The Government has charged that the Atlanta bank manager was the mastermind of the scheme, but it is Judge Shoob's feeling, and he did not hesitate to express it, that the bank's top officials were deeply involved.
A Soft-Spoken Man
"It defied logic to believe that one man down here in a little branch bank in Atlanta could orchestrate $5 billion in loans" the judge said in an interview.


Rangers Can't Miss With Open-Net Truths
It has been only five month since I wept with Adam Graves in the hellish bowels of the Pittsburgh Civic Arena, cringing as the crowd chanted, "1940, 1940." The Penguins dumped the Rangers out of the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs and Adam choked out, "We'll talk more later, O.K.?"
I patted his shoulder and said: "Next season. Take care of yourself."


P.&amp; G. Touts Concentrated Detergents
Continuing to think small, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company yesterday introduced concentrated liquid versions of Tide, Cheer and its other detergent brands.
Similar products are already available in Europe, and the company introduced concentrated powders in the United States in 1990.


Gorbachev Barred From His Office in Moscow


Candidates on Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush  TODAY: 8:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).
Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 7:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).


Ewing Eyes a Ring, but Also Some Unfamiliar Faces
Patrick Ewing's left ankle is still tender five months after he injured it during the playoffs, and perhaps that is a sign he does not heal as quickly as he once did.
The Knicks' franchise player turned 30 years old in August.
For that reason, and others, Ewing does not want to celebrate any more birthdays without a National Basketball Association championship ring.
"I've always felt that urgency, but this is my eighth season," Ewing said today as the 1992-93 Knicks gathered at SUNY-Purchase before departing for Charleston, S. C., to begin training camp on Friday.
"We need to win it soon."


Art in Review
Francisca Sutil Nohra Haime Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through Oct. 17
Francisca Sutil is one of several New York painters who believe in the efficacy of the monochrome, but too often perpetuate the convention without adding much that's new.
Nonetheless, in her seventh solo exhibition in Manhattan, she has pushed her art to a place where it begins to have its own integrity.


Quayle Distorts Democratic Platform on Gays; Not Hereditary
To the Editor:
"Easy Gay Bashing, the Quayle Way" (editorial, Sept. 16) condemns Dan Quayle's encouragement of gay bashers, especially in the Republican Party.
But your comment that "researchers remain uncertain whether sexual preference is 'chosen' or inherited" should be clarified.


A Roundabout Way to Get Water


Israel Eases Its Terms on Meeting Palestinians in Regional Parleys
In a gesture intended to preserve the momentum of the Middle East peace talks, Israel tonight withdrew its previous objections to the participation of Palestinians from outside the occupied territories in discussions on regional issues.
The concession means that, barring any other disputes that may arise, Israel will attend separate panels scheduled in the next few weeks on Middle East refugee problems and economic development.
The Israelis until now have boycotted both forums because Palestinians living outside the West Bank and Gaza Strip have been allowed to take part.


Youth's Wounds Mend As Family Speaks Out
Martha Caesar used to hear police sirens in the night and pray that her son, Howard, was somewhere far from the scene.
Though she knows he is home in bed when she hears them now, she still feels unsettled.
"It reminds me of the night Howard was shot by the cops," Mrs.
Caesar said.
"Of when he was almost killed."


Williams Rebounds, All the Way to Nets
A journey that has taken Jayson Williams from Jamaica, Queens, to Phoenix (on paper, anyway) to Philadelphia, all in two years, brought him closer to home today when he reported to the training camp of his third National Basketball team, the New Jersey Nets.
"I was close to home, in Philadelphia, and now I'm closer," said the former St.
John's University star, who was raised in lower Manhattan.
"Pretty soon, I'll be back in the projects."


Review/Art; Putting the Spotlight On Fairfield Porter
The art of Fairfield Porter (1907-1975), although never lacking for a strong and vocal constituency, remains poorly known by a large part of the art public.
Porter's images, drenched as they often are in the effulgent light of the summer sun and redolent of salt air from the ocean, can at first seem as casual and unchallenging as the work of a gifted Sunday painter.
But they are neither.
In his uncorruptedness of feeling and his bedrock commitment to the history and craft of painting, Porter was a deeply, invigoratingly serious artist, as the latest exhibition of his paintings and prints, at Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries, makes clear.
Always out of sync with the mainstream, Porter has become an inspiration to many artists who likewise labor on the sidelines.
During the 1960's, when representation made a comeback in the form of Pop Art, his reputation began to spread, until it became clear that his personal kind of work really had nothing in common with the commercialism of Pop.
Not until 1983, eight years after his death, was he the subject of a major retrospective, organized by the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.


Land of Magic in Heart of Queens; Others See Grit; Colombians Find Bogota on Roosevelt Ave.
Once, there were myths.
But along came radio, then television and finally cable, and story telling seemed to die in the soft blue glow of the cathode ray tube.
But if you lament the passing of legend, consider a walk with Jaime Manrique beneath the rattling rails of the elevated subway that enclose Roosevelt Avenue like a zipper -- into a place called Little Colombia, Queens.


Books of The Times; Memory Used as Link Not to Past but Future
The Orient Express By Gregor von Rezzori Translated by David Cameron Palastanga. 181 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Aram, the protagonist of Gregor von Rezzori's new novel, has the "finely chiseled, darkly shaded adolescent face" of the young Marcel Proust, and his story, like "A la Recherche du Temps Perdu," is concerned with the search for lost time.
As in Proust's masterpiece, the hero is given to involuntary assaults of memory: like Marcel, he recalls his youthful idealized love for a young girl and his subsequent and more worldly pursuits of other women; and like Marcel, he tries to come to terms with these earlier romances during a trip to Venice.


U.N. Aides Assert Serbs Booby-Trapped a Dam
United Nations officials here say they have found evidence that the Serbs have rigged this huge hydroelectric dam with explosives whose detonation could lead to an uncontrollable rush of water onto downstream villages.
United Nations peacekeeping troops took control of the 200-foot-high structure in Serbian-held Croatian territory in mid-September.
A demolitions specialist from the peacekeeping force said he was certain that the dam, which has turned a stretch of the Cetina River into a lake 12 miles long, is booby-trapped with explosives in a well leading into a underground channel that must be opened to insure that winter floodwaters do not increase pressure on the dam to dangerous levels.


U.N. to Send Fact-Finding Mission to Georgia


Corrections
A letter in the Metropolitan Diary column in The Living Section on Wednesday, reporting an overheard conversation, referred incorrectly to the hair salon near which the conversation was said to have taken place.
It is the Louis-Guy D Hair Salon.


Morton W. Royse, 96, Foreign Conflict Expert
Morton W. Royse, a scholar who was an expert on international conflict, died Sept. 21 at his summer residence in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He was 96 years old and also lived in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Mr.
Royse died of complications resulting from a failure of the digestive system, said Kerry W. Konrad, his grandson-in-law.


First, Fight the Slump
To judge by the urgings of the Presidential candidates, no one would know that the U.S. economy is stuck, stagnating.
They all talk about the long-term problem of spurring growth, which is surely a theme worth attention.
But what about the present moment?
The current slump traps millions in unemployment and threatens the jobs of millions more.
What should be done about that,
now?
Sunday's debate provides a superb opportunity for all three men to end their peculiar silence.


Louis Smadbeck, Real-Estate Executive, Dies at 72
Louis Smadbeck, a leading New York real-estate executive for more than four decades, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 72 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Waccabuc, N.Y.
The cause of death was lung cancer, his family reported.


Perot Delays Ad on Proposals
Ross Perot, who has campaigned only through television advertising and talk shows since joining the Presidential race a week ago, has delayed the broadcasting of a 30-minute program describing his painful prescriptions for eliminating the Federal debt.
Perot aides suggested earlier in the week that Mr.
Perot would use 30 minutes of television time on Friday night to promote his economic proposals, which include heavy tax increases and deep cuts in entitlement programs.
Instead, the aides said today, Mr.
Perot will use the Friday-night slot he purchased to rerun a 30-minute presentation in which he dissects the causes of the recession.


Rangers Are a Mystery on Ice
Coach Roger Neilson doesn't want the Washington Capitals to have any advantages when they face his team tonight in the Rangers' season opener at the Capital Centre.
So until game time, he won't name his starting goaltender.
Or announce his lines.
Or pretty much reveal anything about his game plan.
Who will skate on Mark Messier's line?
Who will be between the pipes, John Vanbiesbrouck or Mike Richter?
Will Alexei Kovalev skate with fellow Russian Sergei Nemchinov?
Will the National Hockey League's new anti-fighting rule lead Neilson to dress only one of his two tough guys, Tie Domi and Joe Kocur?


Brooklyn Parents End High-School Boycott
After a two-day boycott, students returned yesterday to Eastern District High School in Brooklyn, where they were met with tightened security and smaller classes -- measures that angry parents demanded after a violent cafeteria brawl in the school last week.
About half the school's 3,200 students arrived for classes, and the day went smoothly, said James S. Vlasto, a spokesman for Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
On Monday and Tuesday, the school was nearly empty.
Wednesday was the Yom Kippur holiday.
Normal daily attendance is about 75 percent.


A New Vision of Baseball's Glory Days
To the Editor:
After reading about the final days of this baseball season in your sports pages, I had a terrible dream.
I dreamt that Babe Ruth came to home plate wearing purple batting gloves, that Joe DiMaggio played centerfield flashing a diamond earring, and Ty Cobb ran the bases with a gold chain dangling from his neck.


Police Are Paid by Us And Accountable to Us
To the Editor:
The most striking feature of "Righteous Anger Spilled Over at Police Rally" (letter, Sept. 25) by Phil Caruso, Patrolmen's Benevolent Association president, is its irrelevance.


CHRONICLE
His name is familiar -- HOAGY BIX CARMICHAEL -- and so are the songs in the show he narrates every Thursday evening during October at Tatou, on East 50th Street.
They were written by his father, the legendary Hoagy Carmichael.
Hoagy Bix Carmichael, a movie and television producer, is planning to bring a musical called "Hoagy and Bix" to Broadway next fall.
In the meantime, he said, "I don't want people to forget this is happening." He continued: "The idea is for backers to be there, for publicity. It is sort of kicking the whole thing off. These are tough times, and if the marquee doesn't say Andrew Lloyd Webber, people don't line up."


The Art Market
Matisse or Money
The Everhart Museum in Scranton, Pa., with the encouragement of Sotheby's, is proposing to do something considered blasphemous in museum circles.
The museum wants to sell its most valuable painting, Matisse's "Pink Shrimp," from 1920, to help cover operating costs.
And the Museum of Modern Art's current blockbuster Matisse retrospective may help the Everhart to sell it.


Nonvirulent H.I.V. Strain Found in Infected Group
Scientists have found five people who were infected with the virus that causes AIDS by blood transfusions from one donor and then did not develop any evidence of illness 7 to 10 years later, suggesting that it was a nonvirulent strain.
The donor has also remained a symptomless carrier of the virus, known as H.I.V., the scientists from Sydney, Australia, are reporting tomorrow in The Lancet, an international medical journal.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  GERMANS BACK CURBS ON VIOLENCE  Acknowledging shame over the failure to halt a rising tide of right-wing violence against foreigners, German politicians of all parties vowed to support a crackdown, but differed over whether new police powers were needed.
A1  Report reaffirms that the Nazi criminal Joseph Mengele is dead.
A8


BMW Dealers Narrow Review
The newly formed association of metropolitan New York BMW dealers has narrowed the review on its account to two finalist agencies, advertising executives said yesterday.
The two finalists were identified as Ally &amp; Gargano and Cox Landey &amp; Partners, both in New York.
A decision on the account, which Adweek has estimated at $3 million, is expected later this month.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.06
5.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.77
2.80
5.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.87
2.90
5.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
5.99
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.48
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.58
9.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Honda's Nationality Proves Troublesome For Free-Trade Pact
In a factory here covering the area of 19 football fields, Honda is making engines with American and Japanese parts that will be put into Civics assembled in Canada.
Question: what nationality is the engine, and, ultimately, the car?
The answer has bedeviled American and Canadian officials for three years and is at the heart of a shin-kicking battle that could bog down Congressional approval of the recently negotiated North American Free Trade Agreement.


Double Standard on Refugees
Hundreds of Cubans have been landing in Florida in recent months, escaping the repressive Castro regime and economic privation.
Under streamlined procedures, the new arrivals have been allowed to remain in the U.S. as legal immigrants and political refugees, receiving help from relatives and volunteer agencies.
Contrast this benign welcome with the harsh treatment of Haitian refugees, also fleeing a repressive and impoverished land.
Many have been intercepted at sea and forcibly returned to Haiti, where they risk violent retaliation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; New Questions About Perot-Bush Link on Vietnam
Ross Perot's re-entry into the Presidential race and the release this week of testimony he gave to a Senate panel last summer has reawakened interest in his involvement with President Bush in efforts to resolve the issue of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.
In a closed session on July 1, Mr.
Perot told the counsel for the Senate panel that in 1986, Vice President George Bush asked him to look into a report that a man imprisoned in Singapore was offering to sell, for $4.2 million, a videotape of Americans being held in slave labor in Laos.


The Spoken Word
PRE-CONCERT LECTURES, Avery Fisher Hall.
"Three Faces of Stravinsky: Fairy Tale Music, Rhythmic Mosaics and Neo-Classicism," by Jonathan Kramer, a composer and professor of music at Columbia University.
Today at 10 A.M.; also, Tuesday at 6:30 P.M. at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
Free for concert ticket holders.
Information: (212) 875-5656.
STORYTELLING AND CONCERT, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Rhymes and Fables," a jazz symphony by Charles Schwartz based on Mother Goose stories, with the singer Jon Hendricks and the trumpet player Freddie Hubbard.
Cab Calloway narrates.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


TV Weekend; Many Ways to Say Happy Birthday
Tonight at 9 on Channel 13, "Great Performances" gives itself a classy20th birthday party with a 90-minute package of commissioned works subtitled "Celebrating Creativity, American Style."
Aimed in various ways at showing how the arts enrich us all, the assortment of pieces is generally ingratiating and inevitably uneven as it tries to include something for everyone.
Wendy Wasserstein's ode to the theater, "Kiss, Kiss Dahlings," directed by Gerald Gutierrez, is slight and obvious, but Blythe Danner, Nancy Marchand and Cynthia Nixon are lovely as three mother-daughter generations seen in three different eras.


Here's the Rub: Simms May Require Surgery on Elbow
The news from the Giants' camp on Phil Simms is not good.
Coach Ray Handley said today that the 36-year-old starting quarterback might face arthroscopic elbow surgery that would sideline him for six weeks.
At the same time, Lawrence Taylor reaffirmed his decision to retire from pro football after this season, even as some of his teammates refused to take his word at face value.
Asked if anything could change his mind, Taylor said, "At this point, no."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Escalates Attack on Clinton For His Anti-Vietnam War Protests
President Bush tonight escalated his attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton for his antiwar activities in London 23 years ago as the Republican campaign pressed its effort to portray the Democratic nominee as unpatriotic and incapable of safeguarding the nation's security.
"I can't understand someone mobilizing demonstrations in a foreign country when poor kids, drafted out of the ghettos, are dying in a faraway land," Mr.
Bush said at an elaborate fund-raising dinner here that was linked by satellite to similar dinners across the country.


Two Officers Are Indicted In Assault
Two police officers were indicted yesterday in an assault on a Brooklyn youth.
The charges stem from a fight on a subway car during the rowdy aftermath of the police demonstration outside City Hall last month.
The officers, who were off duty, fought with the youth, 18-year-old Ywunas Mohamed, aboard the train after he slashed another off-duty officer with a box cutter, the authorities said.
The indictment says that the officers broke Mr.
Mohamed's jaw after they had handcuffed him.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 C.I.A. SAYS IT DECEIVED COURT
C.I.A. officials have admitted to Congress that, at the urging of the Justice Department, they deliberately misled prosecutors in Atlanta about how much their agency knew about a multibillion-dollar bank fraud involving Iraq, officials said.  1


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Cook Shoots a 62  John Cook shot a 10-under 62 yesterday and took a five-shot lead through three rounds of the Las Vegas (Nev.) Invitational, a five-day, 90-hole event.
On the TPC at Summerlin, Cook went nine under with an 18-inch tap-in for birdie-4 on the 13th.
The Lions (1-4) scored less than six minutes into the game with the only points they needed on Dave Johnston's 23-yard field goal.
FDU-Madison (2-2) managed a total of only 104 yards on offense. (AP) HARNESS RACING  Armbro Keepsake Wins  Armbro Keepsake held off Baltic Striker in the final strides at the Red Mile in Lexington yesterday to become the third filly in the past four years to win the Kentucky Futurity, the third jewel in trotting's Triple Crown.
Armbro Keepsake, driven by John Campbell, held off the fast-closing Baltic Striker, driven by Mike Lachance. (AP)


Bosnia's High-Level Officials Are Largely Absent
After six months of the Sarajevo siege, the Bosnian Government has been seriously weakened by the prolonged absences -- in some cases, by the effective desertion -- of a lengthening list of Cabinet ministers and senior officials.
In a capital where about 400,000 people have been trapped by the encirclement of Serbian nationalist troops, the effect on morale has been severe.
Among other things, the fact that many top officials have quit the city, and taken their families with them, has caused bitterness in the ranks of the Bosnian Army and police, whose largely volunteer forces have been taking heavy losses in the siege.


Start Schools Upgrade At the Lower Levels
To the Editor:
"Worried that the New York City School system cannot prepare its students for the new City University academic requirements, members of the Board of Education have asked Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez to report to them this week on the subject" (Sept. 15, news article).


When It's Moving Day, Here's How to Handle It
The very thought of moving can move one to emotional distress, from deciding what to pack and what to dispose of to finding a trustworthy moving company that will deliver your belongings safely to your new home.
But moving need not be traumatic if you plan the adventure, keeping these matters in mind:
ESTIMATES AND REFERENCES -- Get three to five estimates; then choose one in the middle.
Don't trust the lowballer: that one may be desperate enough to lie.
Find out how long the mover's been in business, and get references.
Check for complaints filed with the state transportation department, local consumer affairs office or the Better Business Bureau.


The Steeplechase Marvel One Year From a Hospital
New York's Super Saturday of seven stakes races will be run at Belmont Park today as the Breeders' Cup Preview, but one of the races will be the real thing: the Breeders' Cup Steeplechase.
It will co-star the only woman ever to saddle the winner of a Breeders' Cup race and a 7-year-old gelding who underwent extensive surgery last year and was pronounced a long shot even to survive.
The trainer is Janet Elliot, the daughter of a British army officer who settled in Ireland and the only woman to win a national training title in this country.
She did that last year, breaking an 18-year winning streak by Jonathan Sheppard as the ranking money-winner in steeplechase racing.
And that was five years after she had made history as the trainer of Census, the winner of the first Breeders' Cup Steeplechase.


Chip Rulings Seen 2 Ways
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that rulings by the judge in a long-running copyright-infringement suit with the Intel Corporation would limit the impact of a June jury verdict that went against Advanced Micro.
Advanced Micro said the rulings meant it could proceed with introducing its clone of Intel's 486 chip by the end of the year.
Intel disputed that, saying the chief effect of the rulings was to deny Advanced Micro's motion for a new trial.


JUSTICE DEPT. ROLE CITED IN DECEPTION IN IRAQ LOAN CASE
Central Intelligence Agency officials have told Congress that, at the urging of the Justice Department, they deliberately withheld information from Federal prosecutors in Atlanta about a multibillion dollar bank fraud involving Iraq, Government officials said today.
The disclosure contrasts with statements made on Tuesday by the C.I.A's chief lawyer, who said the misinformation was an honest error.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds increased by $6.60 billion, to $386.32 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The assets of the 378 taxable retail money market funds were up by $4.33 billion, to $308.21 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased by $2.26 billion, to $78.11 billion.


Knicks Are Again Unsettled At Point
If any friction exists between Doc Rivers and Greg Anthony in their battle to become the Knicks' starting point guard, it has not surfaced on the court.
There is only one subject they must avoid.
"Greg's a Republican, and I simply cannot understand that at all," said Rivers.
"But he's a nice guy, and I think we'll get along just fine. As long as we don't discuss politics."


Rest of Simms's Season (Career?) Is in Doubt
Phil Simms will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his throwing arm Monday to remove bone chips from his right elbow.
He may be ready to return after three or four weeks, but in truth, at age 36, the Giants' starting quarterback may have played his last game of pro football.
Today, in announcing the surgery, Coach Ray Handley said Simms would go on injured reserve.
That meant he would have to sit out a minimum of four weeks.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN NORIT CO., Atlanta, named William D. E. Phillips executive vice president.
APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL INC., East Millstone, N.J., named Swep T. Davis president of the environmental sciences group.
CROWN BOOKS CORP., Landover, Md., appointed Glenn E. Hemmerle president and chief executive.
SIERRA PACIFIC RESOURCES, Reno, named John E. Taulbee senior vice president and chief financial officer.
In addition, Richard Fortmann was named senior vice president of strategic planning and administrative services besides his duties as president of Sierra Energy Co.
OPTICAL DATA CORP., Warren, N.J., which publishes videodisks, appointed Patrick Donaghy president and chief operating officer.
ZAPATA CORP., Houston, a producer of natural gas and oil as well as fish meal, appointed Thomas H. Bowersox executive vice president.


Review/Film Festival; Recording Eight Years Of Change In Hoboken
Nora Jacobson's "Delivered Vacant," showing at the New York Film Festival today at 6 P.M., is a big, long, ungainly documentary about the gentrification of Hoboken.
Though not neat, it is a fine, rich film, a large lode of raw material accumulated by Ms.
Jacobson over an eight-year period beginning in 1984.
That's when young upwardly mobile New Yorkers, having discovered Hoboken's charms and comparatively cheap rents, began moving across the river in droves, and when property owners and land developers jumped in to reap the profits.
The result was an upscale feeding frenzy.
The first victims: Hoboken's longtime blue-collar residents, the newer immigrant families from Latin America and the Indian subcontinent, and the elderly pensioners, mostly retired merchant seamen and railroad men, who filled the city's rooming houses.


Candidate Faces Issue Of Suicide
In an unusually public discussion of a personal problem, Nydia Velazquez held a news conference yesterday to describe how an accumulation of personal problems sent her into a deep depression that drove her to attempt suicide last year.
Surrounded by her sister, nieces, friends and political supporters at her campaign headquarters in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, the Democratic candidate in the 12th Congressional District also said that she had asked the Manhattan District Attorney and the State Attorney General to investigate the release of her hospital records detailing the suicide attempt.


Review/Photography; Lone Wanderer's View Of an Exotic Asia And Its Odd Details
The vision of Asia that Leo Rubinfien offers in "A Map of the East," the exhibition of his color photographs now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, has little to do with familiar stereotypes of that varied continent.
Mr.
Rubinfien makes few references to symbols of the region's cultural heritage, whether tea ceremonies or pagodas, or to modern tokens of prosperity, like traffic jams and skyscrapers.
Instead, he presents Asia from the vantage point of a lone traveler fascinated by the sheer otherness of the lands he visits.
Rather than providing a considered overview of Asia, Mr.
Rubinfien has created an idiosyncratic travelogue made up of oddly resonant details of the sort usually glimpsed out of the corner of an eye.


Danish Proposals Seek a Solution To Impasse Over European Union
European Community countries moved closer today to a shared view that a treaty on European union would have to put some limits on the power of the community's bureaucracy in Brussels.
In a discussion paper published today, the Danish Government pointed out that all over Europe, citizens were demanding that their national and local elective bodies have a greater say in European laws and regulations, most of which have up to now been worked out by the community's executive commission in Brussels.


U.N. Bans Flights in Bosnia But Is Silent on Enforcement
The United Nations Security Council voted overwhelmingly today to ban all military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina but did not authorize enforcement of the ban.
Instead, the Council asked the United States and other countries with advanced intelligence capabilities to monitor Bosnian airspace and report any breaches.
It promised to "consider urgently the further measures necessary to enforce this ban" if violations are detected.


Father Is Charged With Murder In Death of His Infant Daughter
Yesterday, almost 24 hours after a 2-month-old Manhattan girl was rushed to the hospital with a fatal brain hemorrhage, her 20-year-old father was arrested and charged with killing her, the police said.
The infant, Apple Miranda, died of child abuse syndrome, in which a series of injuries in various stages of healing were compounded by the hemorrhage and swelling of her brain, said a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner, Ellen Borakove.
Among the injuries were broken ribs, the police said.


For Chicago High School Sports, a Crash Course in Survival
When the Chicago Board of Education cut $13 million from the budget for its school reading program last year, there was no great public outcry, even though 300 teachers were being laid off.
"Not one phone call, not one protest from any parent," said Ted Kimbrough, the Chicago School Superintendent.
"All we got was staff complaints that they could not keep the reading program going."


METRO DIGEST
MALNUTRITION AMONG THE ELDERLY
Because they lose their teeth or their sense of taste as they age, or because they cannot climb three flights of stairs to their apartments with a cane in one hand and a shopping bag in the other, the elderly, particularly the poor, are more likely than younger people to eat badly; and eating badly makes the healthy elderly sick, and the sick elderly die.
While some estimate that 50 percent of all elderly Americans open themselves up to a host of diseases by not eating enough of the foods they need, very little is really known about the problem.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
MANHATTAN SCHOOLS TO SECEDE?
A plan that would effectively let Manhattan secede from the New York City school system is being circulated by Borough President Messinger.
The proposal is intended to free the borough's schools from the Board of Education bureaucracy while taking advantage of extra state money.
Page 24.
CITY ASSAILED IN CONTRACT CASE
A New York judge has castigated city officials for taking a $1.2 million city contract away from a builder, saying that City Comptroller Holtzman had no evidence other than "innuendo, speculation and guilt by association" to suggest that the contractor had ties to organized crime.
Page 25.
CANDIDATE TELLS OF SUICIDE ATTEMPT
In an unusually public discussion of a personal problem, Nydia Velazquez, a Democratic Congressional candidate from Brooklyn, held a news conference to describe how an accumulation of personal problems had driven her to attempt suicide last year.
Page 25.
A father is charged in infant's death.
Page 27.
Daily News asks judge to void contract. Page 25.  REGION  2 INCINERATORS  GET INFUSIONS
Babylon and Huntington, L.I., which built multimillion-dollar incinerators, are plagued with a garbage problem that has other townships rejoicing: there is a glut of low-cost places to dispose of trash.
Both towns took steps this week to shore up the plants' fiscal stability.
Page 26.
TRYING TO GAUGE VOTERS' FRUSTRATION
In the new Sixth Congressional District in New
Jersey, both candidates are keenly aware of running in the shadow of the proverbial 800-pound gorilla that is the 1992 Presidential race.
The Republican, State Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos, is trying to focus voter frustration on his opponent, Representative Frank Pallone Jr., whose old district was wiped off the map.
But Mr.
Kyrillos recognizes that much of the frustration is aimed at President Bush as well -- not good news for his campaign.
Page 26.
RECORDS IN AU PAIR CASE TO BE UNSEALED
Mount Pleasant, denied access to sealed records involving a Swiss au pair acquitted of killing a 3-month-old baby, has been told that it can get the records now that woman has filed notice to sue the Westchester County town.
Page 26.
A WEDDING ON THE 50-YARD LINE
Rori Myers and Jim Lockman met when they were both members of the Yale Precision Marching Band.
So it seemed natural for them to hold their wedding during the band's halftime show.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25
Holiday Schedules 24


There's Plenty at Stake In Outcome of Rematch
The leaves are just now changing in Happy Valley, and the final choices of bowl games remain months away.
And yet the University of Miami will receive answers on Saturday to questions that will determine a direction for this college football season.
Will the Hurricanes still be able to consider themselves the heavyweight champions of college football?


Astronomical Tool May Help Map the Invisible
New observations of a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, nature's way of magnifying remote astronomical objects, have encouraged scientists to think they now possess a promising tool to dig into the mystery of dark matter, the invisible material that presumably accounts for at least 90 percent of the mass of the universe.
Astronomers studying photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope announced Thursday that they had detected a striking example of a gravitational lens bending, concentrating and focusing light from a distant galaxy into images that are bigger and brighter than would otherwise be the case.
This lensing effect offers an indirect way of determining the amount and distribution of dark matter in galactic clusters.


La Russa May Send Weiss To Bench
The Oakland A's could go back to their Game 1 infield when they play the Toronto Blue Jays here in Game 3 of the American League Championship Series on Saturday afternoon, which would put shortstop Walt Weiss back on the bench.
Manager Tony La Russa said he wanted to talk to his players first before announcing his decision.
If La Russa makes a change, Mike Bordick would move from second base to short, and Lance Blankenship would play second.
On Thursday night in Toronto, Weiss was at short and Bordick played second.


South Africa Finda U.S. History a Guide
To the Editor:
"How South Africa Delays Democracy" (letter, Sept. 8) by Clifford Rechtschaffen states that the South African governing party seeks to maintain a permanent veto by insisting that a supermajority of 75 percent in the popular vote be required to approve any new constitution.
That type of majority, he says, is unprecedented, not only in this country, but also in South Africa, where simple majorities approved the three constitutions adopted in this century.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Columbus Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Tomorrow, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 77th Street.
Monday, the Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended Monday and Tuesday for Columbus Day and for the first and second days of Succoth.
SANITATION No collections, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices closed; municipal option to close.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven Line on regular schedules with additional evening service.
Traffic Alert  TODAY
Third Avenue between Sixth and 14th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Cooper Square fair.
MONDAY  Broadway between Battery Place and Murray Street will be closed from noon to 7 P.M. for the Christopher Columbus street fair.
Christopher Street between Greenwich Avenue and Seventh Avenue South will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Christopher Street fair.
TOMORROW
First Avenue between 34th and 41st Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the First Avenue street fair.
Madison Avenue between 23d and 42d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the We Care About New York street fair.
Amsterdam Avenue between 77th and 86th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Victims Services Agency street fair.


U.S. and Europe to Try Again on Trade Disputes
Trade negotiators from the United States and the European Community will meet here starting Sunday in yet another attempt to settle the longstanding disputes that have blocked progress in broader world trade talks.
But in comments this week, officials on both sides did not seem prepared to compromise.
While some European officials said the talks offered the best chance yet for breaking the deadlock, officials in France, whose agricultural policies are at the heart of the dispute, warned that they would block any concessions to the United States.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Paul A. Olshansky, Chiropractor and AIDS Educator, 39
Dr.
Paul A. Olshansky, a chiropractor and an AIDS educator, died Thursday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Dr. Olshansky died of AIDS, said his companion, Michael Fanelli.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about garden houses reversed the first references to two architects' projects in some copies.
James Rossant designed a house in Rye, N.Y., and Stephen Levine was the architect for a house in Bridgehampton, L.I.


Richard B. Farnham, Horticulturist, 91
Richard B. Farnham, the former head of the New York Horticultural Society and past director of the annual International Flower Show, died on Wednesday at the Social Circle Nursing Home in Social Circle, Ga.
He was 91 years old.
The cause of death was not specified.


Mr. Perot's Xenophobia
The charts Ross Perot displayed during his campaign commercial Tuesday night made a persuasive indictment of the Bush and Reagan Administrations' failure to confront the nation's economic problems, and most notably the soaring national debt.
But in a half-hour blizzard of detail, facts are easily distorted, as they were when Mr.
Perot accused 76 unnamed former officials of aiding America's economic enemies.
The thrust of his blatantly xenophobic argument was that any official who subsequently does work for a foreign business or government is "like a general switching armies in the middle of a war . . . because we're in a business war now, folks." In other words, it's O.K. to go to work for Chrysler, but not for Hyundai.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Of Knights and Presidents: Race of Mythic Proportions
The candidates are rehearsing talking points on everything from Arkansas fowl to the spotted owl.
But it is an edgy time for the men who will meet in St.
Louis on Sunday night, because they know that they cannot fully prepare for the most important, least tangible dimension of Presidential debates.
On the surface, Presidential campaigns are a din of competing issues and a display of contrasting styles.
But there is also a subliminal battle, played out in rituals like debates and photo opportunities, in which the candidates strive to show that they are superior in the knightly virtues of temperance, loyalty and courage.


No Impropriety in Call On Iraq Investigation
To the Editor:
William Safire suggests in his Sept. 10 column that the Legal Adviser's office at the Department of State interfered in an investigation of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro by the United States Attorney's office in Atlanta.
He is wrong, as the very memorandum he cites demonstrates.


Candidates Seek Right Strategy in a New District
This is the way it went on the campaign trail in the Sixth Congressional District this week: State Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos, a Republican, explained his positions on the issues to 15 listeners at a luncheon of the Belmar Kiwanis Club while Representative Frank Pallone Jr., a Democrat, stood on the banks of the Raritan River to receive the endorsement of environmentalists before an audience of eight reporters and photographers.
The crowds are not always that small, of course, and the pace of the campaign is expected to pick up in the three weeks before Election Day, but both camps are keenly aware of running in the shadow of the proverbial 800-pound gorilla that is the 1992 Presidential race.


Rain Forces a Style Change in the Garment District


Review/Theater; Henry VIII With Laughs and Music
With countless books, movies and plays based on his life, Henry VIII is the most overexposed of English royals, including those living in the 20th century.
Henrys have come in all sizes, from fat (Charles Laughton) to lean (Nicol Williamson in Broadway's "Rex").
But until now, he has never resembled Sir Launcelot.
This is the case with the new musical "Six Wives," in which Steve Barton, last seen in the romantic lead in "Phantom of the Opera," plays Henry -- at least the young Henry -- as a handsome hero.
By the time he gets to Queen No. 6, he has been slightly padded, but at no point does he simulate the Rabelaisian robustness of life and cinema.
The Edward Thomas-Joe Masteroff chamber musical (at the York Theater Company) begins with Henry addressing the audience confidentially.
He mentions the familiarity of the king's life and wonders why there is need for still another version of his story.
Good question, Henry.
Then he says what will occur onstage is "all truthful, all historical, all chronological." I would have preferred all singing.
The book is ploddingly predictable, except for one out-of-sequence appearance by a later wife who is impatient for her turn.
While Mr.
Barton holds himself to the role of Henry, Tovah Feldshuh and Kim Crosby play all the queens (three Kates, two Annes, one Jane).


Pope Arrives in Dominican Republic
Pope John Paul II arrived here tonight on a five-day visit planned around the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the Americas.
In a 10-minute arrival statement, the Pope, looking slightly drawn, likened his visit to that of the first missionaries.
Then, in a seeming allusion to the bitter dispute over Columbus's legacy, he said he had come on the 500th anniversary of Christianity in the New World "without a spirit of triumphalism, or false shame, but giving thanks to God."


Review/Pop; From Japan, It's the Beatles, Or So It Seems
In 1964, the Beatles made their New York concert debut at Carnegie Hall.
On Thursday night, the Flying Elephants did the same thing, wearing Beatles-style suits, wielding the same kind of guitars and bass, and playing Beatles songs.
With a chamber orchestra on stage (to back songs like "Yesterday" and "All You Need Is Love") and a guest appearance by Leon Russell (an apparition in long white hair), it was an odd, sweetly surreal event, not least because the group comes from Japan and sings in heavily accented English, some of it apparently learned phonetically.
At times the concert had the flavor of a Monty Python sketch, perhaps titled "Meet the Japanese Beatles."
The Flying Elephants' leaders, Yoneou Abe on guitar and Koji Kimura on bass, were born in the 1950's and have learned the vocal timbres and inflections of John Lennon and Paul McCartney, respectively; Mr.
Kimura even shows some of Mr.
McCartney's winsome facial expressions.
With Tokuo Hayashi on guitar and Takefumi Teshima on drums, they played faithful renditions of Beatles songs, early and late, with the dedicated competence of a "Beatlemania" road company.
They also played a few original songs, including "Now My Love" and "Pretty City Girl," with Beatles-style chord progressions behind stretched-out melodies that, somewhere in the distance, hinted at Japanese songs.


Fed Has Brightened Its View Since August
Federal Reserve officials were markedly more downbeat about the economy in August than they are now, interviews, public statements and the minutes of the August meeting of the Fed's main policy-making committee show.
The officials saw some glimmers of hope for a pickup in the economy at the Aug. 18 meeting, but dwelled at length on several stubborn factors that were impeding a strong recovery, according to the report of the meeting released today.
The officials seemed particularly worried about the debt burdens weighing on consumers and businesses, the lack of consumer confidence and the sluggish growth in the money supply.


New York a Long Shot For Goodwill Games
The opening ceremonies can be staged on Ellis Island.
Nassau Coliseum, an arena with a tradition of icy championships, can house the figure-skating competition.
Radio City Music Hall, jazzy showcase, can play host to rhythmic gymnastics.
There can be volleyball at Madison Square Garden, judo at the Paramount Theater, road cycling in Central Park and soccer at Giants Stadium.


Hidden Malnutrition Worsens Health of Elderly
Dr.
Howard Fillit has come up with a low-cost way to fend off, and even reverse, what most people view simply as the inevitable ravages of age: He feeds people.
Up to 40 percent of the scores of very sick, elderly patients Dr.
Fillit sees at Mount Sinai Medical Center are malnourished, he said, even though they -- and their families and nursing aides, when they are lucky enough to have either -- usually do not realize it.
In many cases, he said, their bad diet has caused, or at least severely worsened, their pneumonia, their heart trouble or even their dementia.


Retirement Set at Carter Hawley Hale
Philip M. Hawley, chairman and chief executive of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., said today that he would retire from the department store chain on Jan. 31.
He will remain on the company's board and help search for his successor.
The new top executive will have to contend with the challenge of attracting customers to the company's Broadway, Weinstocks, Emporium and Broadway Southwest stores amid a steep recession in the West.


Bush Softens Attack On Trip by Clinton
President Bush muted his accusation that Gov.
Bill Clinton was hiding details of a trip to Moscow in 1969, at the Vietnam War's height.
Mr.
Bush said he now accepted Mr.
Clinton's assertion that the visit was a tourist excursion unrelated to his antiwar activities while a student at Oxford University in England.
But he said he would not stop criticizing Mr.
Clinton's role in antiwar protests that year because "I feel strongly about it" and asserted, "The American people probably agree with me."


Bridge
One of the immortal characters of P. G. Wodehouse, Psmith of the silent P, used to point out that one should not confuse the improbable with the impossible.
On the diagramed deal from a rubber bridge game, West fell into that error with disastrous consequences.
The circumstances were reported by Joseph Pastor of Manhattan, who held the South cards and heard a Precision Club bid, strong and artificial, on his left.
One would expect him to show his clubs after the one-spade response, but he concealed his seven-card suit altogether, with a favorable impact on the eventual play.


Sports of The Times; Darling's 'Chess' Comeback
AT age 32, his career is again as green and golden as his Oakland Athletics uniform.
Ron Darling talked about how he's been "blessed" to be "in the right place at the right time," about how "seven and a half years with the Mets just wore me down." But to describe what kind of a pitcher he is now, he used a New York memory.
"You know the chess tables in Central Park, where one guy is playing five guys at the same time," he said.
"That's me, only I'm playing nine guys."


Wakefield Makes the Braves Knuckle Under
With Barry Bonds's bat acting like it were anchored at the bottom of the three rivers outside the stadium, the Pittsburgh Pirates tonight rode the fluttering waves of Tim Wakefield's knuckleball back into contention for the National League pennant.
Wakefield, a stunning success in his two-month rookie season, gave up home runs to Sid Bream and Ron Gant but little else in a five-hitter as the Pirates squeaked past Atlanta, 3-2, slicing the Braves' playoff lead to two games to one.


Toward Understanding Arts and Humanities
The National Cultural Alliance has announced a national survey and a campaign to stimulate understanding and support of the arts and humanities.
The survey, to explore public perception of the arts and humanities, is to be conducted by Research and Forecasts Inc., a national public opinion consulting company, and financed by the Getty Grant Program.
The results are to be released in December.


Yes, but Do You Really Need 10 Screwdrivers?
For dabblers in home repair, plentiful hand tools can give a deep but deceptive sense of security.
Gleaming wrenches and screwdrivers hung on garage walls or stacked in closets can bring to mind visions of heroically restoring a child's broken doll carriage, curing sagging doors throughout the home and stopping the irritating tap-tap of dripping faucets -- all in one afternoon.
These fantasies, however, can be dangerous: they frequently tempt the unwary to overbuy.
"People often consider themselves heavier tool users than they are," said Michael Austin, a product manager at the Black &amp; Decker Corporation.
"Or they might overbuy as a gift, or buy something that's more expensive than they need, simply for their own gratification."


Dow Falls To a Low For Year
Stock prices retreated broadly yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average tumbling to its lowest level of the year.
Rising interest rates, the disclosure by the Ford Motor Company late Thursday that it expected a loss, and uncertainties surrounding this weekend's Presidential debates led investors to issue sell orders.
By the closing bell, the Dow was down 39.45 points, or 1.24 percent, to 3,136.58, putting the widely watched market barometer at its year's low.
Volume of 178.9 million shares was relatively light.
For the week, the Dow lost 64.03 points.


Family Court Works Despite the Heavy Load
To the Editor:
"We Have a Style of Child Custody Justice to Fit Every Purse" (letter, Sept. 6) by Ed Cheney does serious injustice to New York State's Family Court.
For the last two years I have worked as a volunteer in Family Court, Manhattan, and I can assure readers that child-custody cases do not sit for years unattended.
Neither do visitation cases, foster-care cases, support cases, neglect and abuse cases.
I can also assure readers that the interests of parents and children are not virtually ignored.
They receive undivided, highly qualified, professional attention.


Amsterdam Journal; Plane Crash Exposes a Dutch Ghetto
All day, the curious make the 20-minute metro ride from the center of the city to the apartment building where an El Al cargo jet crashed on Sunday evening.
Many stand and watch as cranes continue to lower lines into the scorched gap the plane tore in the building, searching for bodies among the rubble.


Riots and Reading Lips
When President Bush toured the smoldering streets of Los Angeles in May, he called on Congress to establish enterprise zones around the country to attack urban blight.
But nearly seven months later, he is about to veto a tax bill that includes significant tax breaks for businesses that invest in 25 impoverished inner-city neighborhoods.
The legislation passed Thursday would establish far fewer zones than Mr.
Bush had hoped for but would enact several tax provisions the Administration never liked.


CHRONICLE
Observant concertgoers at a recital to be given by LEON FLEISHER at the New England Conservatory's Jordan Hall on Monday will notice that the pianist will be wearing red high-top sneakers with his tuxedo.
What's more, a good portion of the audience will have on red sneakers.
That's because those in red sneakers will get a 30 percent discount on admission.
The concert is a benefit for Composers in Red Sneakers, established 11 years ago by eight graduates of the New England Conservatory who decided to produce their own concerts rather than wait for commissions.


China Will Lower Barriers to Trade In Accord With U.S.
Ending a long-running dispute that threatened to erupt into a full-blown trade war, the United States and China reached an agreement in principle today under which Beijing would bring down barriers to American imports, Administration officials said.
Trade experts said the accord, among other things, gave American-made computers, chemicals and telecommunications equipment greater access to China's huge market.


Larry Pond, AIDS Fund-Raiser, 42
Larry Pond, a founder and the first chairman of the Design Industry Foundation for AIDS in New York City, died yesterday in St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Pond died of AIDS, said Muriel Chess, a friend.


Britain Shapes Up in Hong Kong
Bravo for Christopher Patten, Hong Kong's new Governor.
He proposes an imaginative reinterpretation of the colony's electoral ground rules to expand democracy during the run-up to Beijing's resumption of sovereign control in 1997.
And it's clear he acts with the support of Britain's Prime Minister, John Major.
At last, London addresses its responsibilities to Hong Kong.
Mr.
Patten, a former Member of Parliament and Conservative Party chairman in Britain, is a creature of democratic politics.
His open style and outgoing personality mark a refreshing change from the remote Foreign Office functionaries who preceded him.


Divided Loyalties in Canarsie; D'Amato Pits Italian Pride Against Democratic Party Ties
There is some troubling news for Robert Abrams in the streets of Canarsie, a Democratic stronghold that includes some of the largest Italian neighborhoods in New York City.
It is that Alfonse M. D'Amato's relentless portrayal of him as a roguish candidate who ran a "nasty," "vicious" Democratic primary race against Geraldine A. Ferraro has clearly gained a footing.
"They're both no angels," said Michael DeVito, a retired bus mechanic for the Transit Authority, describing Mr.
Abrams and Senator D'Amato, who will oppose each other in next month's Senate election.
"Abrams has a lot of skeletons in his closet, too -- they're advertising it on TV," added Mr.
DeVito, who, like a lot of people in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn who were interviewed over recent days, did not seem particularly aware that the "they" doing the advertising was Mr.
D'Amato.


Fairy D. McIntire, Religious Leader, 85
Fairy D. McIntire, a religious leader and the wife of Dr.
Carl McIntire, president of the International Council of Churches, died on Sept. 13 at Thomas Jefferson Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 85 years old and lived in Collingswood, N.J.
She died of cancer, said a daughter, Celeste M. Bashaw of Princeton, N.J.


Shake-Up Continues
"The New Ice Age" is the promotional slogan chosen by the new management of the Islanders.
So far, the era is sending a chill through the front office.
The latest shiver came yesterday when GREG BOURIS, the public relations director for eight seasons, was dismissed.
PAT CALABRIA, a vice president and former reporter for Newsday, said, "Greg Bouris is no longer with the organization," but he refused to give details.


Keep On Trying
To the Editor:
This is a word of appreciation for "The Words I Lost" (Op-Ed, Sept. 19), A. H. Raskin's article on aphasia.
My wife's stroke three years ago, her rapid recovery from paralysis and her nonstop struggle since then to re-establish words as a means of communication are recapitulated almost exactly by Mr.
Raskin's experience.


Life, Death and the Need to Explain
THEY held a memorial service at St.
John the Divine yesterday for H. L. Humes, who died as a street person in Massachusetts last month some 30 years after his prodigiously promising literary career was diverted by mental illness.
Among his contemporaries at the service were people like George Plimpton, with whom he founded The Paris Review, and Joe Fox, the Random House editor who worked with him on "Underground City," a 750-page novel of war and collaboration that appeared to enthusiastic reviews when it was published in 1958 when the author was 32.
There were also many younger people among the 200 who filled St.
James Chapel, one a man with a parrot on his shoulder.
They could not have met him as a writer but as the wandering commentator who would hold forth with brilliance on any of many subjects.


COMPANY BRIEFS
E.
I.
DU PONT DE NEMOURS &amp; CO., Wilmington, Del., said it was developing technology to recycle used nylon efficiently.
GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP., Atlanta, agreed to sell its Washington lignosulfonate and alcohol processing operations to Borregaard IndustriesLtd. of Norway for $41 million.
LABORATORIES MERCK-CLEVENOT, a French subsidiary of Merck &amp; Co., Rahway, N.J., bought Societe Financiere Biotrol for an undisclosed amount.
LORAL AERONUTRONIC, a division of LoralCorp., New York, said it had received a $21 million contract for spare parts from the Navy.


Rangers Begin Inexorable March to the Stanley Cup!
Despite all the self-imposed secrecy, Rangers' coach Roger Neilson didn't tinker much with the system, at least not tonight.
The Rangers opened their season with Mark Messier happily centering the same line he had last season -- Adam Graves to his left, Tony Amonte to his right.
The usual Brian Leetch-Jeff Beukeboom defensive duo started behind him.
For the first time, Mike Richter opened the season in goal, but that didn't come as too much of a surprise.


Two Officers Are Indicted In Assault
Two police officers were indicted yesterday in an assault on a Brooklyn youth.
The charges stem from a fight on a subway car during the rowdy aftermath of the police demonstration outside City Hall last month.
The officers, who were off duty, fought with the youth, 18-year-old Ywunas Mohamed, aboard the train after he slashed another off-duty officer with a box cutter, the authorities said.
The indictment says that the officers broke Mr.
Mohamed's jaw after they had handcuffed him.


Pitchers Leave Tough Act To Follow
Over the first two games, the starting pitchers for both the Oakland Athletics and the Toronto Blue Jays have sparkled in the American League Championship Series while some of the teams' top hitters have not.
As the clubs head into Game 3 Saturday afternoon even at 1-1, the question is which came first, the slew of unhittable pitches or the crippling slumps?
No matter; the bottom line is that either the hottest of pitchers or the coldest of hitters has assured that the series has been tautly played, with runs a lot scarcer than either team is used to having.
That has made for exciting baseball, not to mention some mighty tough acts to follow for Toronto's Juan Guzman and Oakland's Ron Darling, the scheduled starters for Game 3.


Federal Agents Investigating Loss of Iran-Contra Papers
Federal agents are investigating a missing suitcase of classified documents that Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, lost after he met secretly last summer with President Ronald Reagan in Los Angeles, an Administration official said today.
The inquiry was first disclosed in a letter, dated Aug. 14, from a Justice Department official to Mr.
Walsh.
The letter was made public today by Knight-Ridder Newspapers, which said that it had been obtained from a someone in the Bush Administration who hoped to embarrass Mr.
Walsh.


Pornography Jury Convicts Teacher
The former Phillips Exeter Academy drama teacher charged with possession and distribution of child pornography was found guilty tonight of all charges.
The 12-person Federal District Court jury of eight women and four men reached its verdict after four and a half hours of deliberation in the case of the former teacher, Larry Lane Bateman.


The Bush-Clinton Health Reform
The debate over health care reform is over. Managed competition has won.
That outcome is as wondrous as it is surprising.
Wondrous because managed competition, a structured competition among health maintenance organizations, is the best way to provide high-quality care to every American at affordable rates.
Surprising because 18 months ago hardly anyone outside university seminar rooms had ever heard the term.


Life Term for Boss Of Lucchese Family
Vittorio Amuso, who was portrayed by prosecutors as the brutal boss of the Lucchese crime family, was sentenced yesterday to life in prison without parole after being convicted in June of all 54 charges in his racketeering trial, including nine murders.
Mr.
Amuso, who was sentenced in Federal District Court in Brooklyn by Judge Eugene H. Nickerson, was also fined $250,000.


CHRONICLE
Over the years, OSSIE DAVIS and RUBY DEE have considered themselves on perpetual call to perform for worthy causes.
"From the civil-rights days, there was always a group who could be called on by the N.A.A.C.P., the Urban League, by Martin Luther King Jr., to show up for a benefit or rally, a sort of floating support group," Mr.
Davis said yesterday.
So when the call came to narrate a free performance this evening of Duke Ellington's Sacred Concerts at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan, the couple could not refuse.


F.B.I. Closes Inquiry on Clinton's Passport
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it was closing its inquiry of Gov.
Bill Clinton's passport file, a case that in the end proved little more than how easily, in the midst of a Presidential election, questions about a candidate can get blown wildly out of proportion.
It began on Monday, when Newsweek reported that the F.B.I. had begun an investigation into whether someone had tampered with the Democratic candidate's passport files dating back to the 1960's.


The White Elephants of Mental Health
Thousands of castoffs from state mental health systems wander urban streets uncared for, in New York State and elsewhere.
Yet New York continues to lead the nation in per-capita spending on mental health.
To understand the anomaly, go to Gowanda.
In this Western New York town 40 miles south of Buffalo, a huge, outmoded mental hospital that once warehoused 3,710 patients remains open -- for only 14 of them.


Classical Music in Review
Gotham Ensemble Greenwich House Music School


At Yale, Wedding Band Takes On a New Meaning
If Yale is the Mercedes of American universities, the Yale Precision Marching Band is the Edsel of marching bands, a little bizarre and, always, a little out of step.
Musical talent is not a prerequisite for membership, and the 100 or more students who march every weekend are as likely to carry couches and stuffed bananas onto the field as they are to play the trumpet or the trombone.


Corrections
A front-page picture of Derek Walcott, winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, bore an incorrect credit yesterday.
The photograph was by Agence France-Presse.


Patents; Helping Old Dogs Deal With Senility
Maybe you can teach an old dog new tricks.
Deprenyl Animal Health Inc., a small company in Overland, Kan., has patented what it said could be a treatment for senile dogs.
Many old dogs suffer from a dementia that is similar to that in humans: they no longer recognize familiar people, wander aimlessly and often lose bladder control without any apparent physical cause.


Two Officers Are Indicted In Assault
Two police officers were indicted yesterday in an assault on a Brooklyn youth.
The charges stem from a fight on a subway car during the rowdy aftermath of the police demonstration outside City Hall last month.
The officers, who were off duty, fought with the youth, 18-year-old Ywunas Mohamed, aboard the train after he slashed another off-duty officer with a box cutter, the authorities said.
The indictment says that the officers broke Mr.
Mohamed's jaw after they had handcuffed him.


D'Amato to Keep Using Disputed TV Ad
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's campaign said yesterday that it had no intention of pulling a television commercial that uses a news clip of Geraldine A. Ferraro criticizing his rival, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, and First Amendment lawyers said Ms.
Ferraro appeared to have no legal standing to block it, as she has threatened.
Mr.
D'Amato's camp also released another in a series of hard-hitting television ads, his 10th since the general election campaign began.
Once again, the ad paints his Democratic opponent as a liberal who would raise taxes and cost jobs, ending with a narrator saying: "If Bob Abrams loses this election, he'll still have a job. But if he wins, will you and your neighbors still have yours?"


Judge Orders New York Not to Block a Contractor
A New York judge has castigated city officials for taking a $1.2 million city contract away from a builder, saying that City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman had no evidence other than "innuendo, speculation and guilt by association" to suggest that the contractor had ties to organized crime.
The contractor, Frederick DeMatteis, lost the prison-construction contract last December when the Dinkins administration upheld the objections of Ms.
Holtzman.
Mr.
DeMatteis sued the city, and in a sharply worded 26-page decision issued late Thursday, Acting Justice Alice Schlesinger of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said: "Frederick DeMatteis has not only lost a contract here, he has also, because of the recommendation to debar his company from future work with the city, largely lost the opportunity to do business in New York."


Eric the Flyer Makes the Devils See Red
Just when it appeared the Devils would escape unscathed in their first meaningful confrontation with Eric Lindros, the sensational rookie found a way to put his mark on the Flyers' home opener.
The Devils neutralized the towering Lindros for 54 minutes 14 seconds tonight without having anyone shadow him.
But with 5:46 left in the third period, Lindros powered himself through to score the winning goal in Philadelphia's 6-4 victory at the Spectrum.


Scandal, From Tip to Trial
Late 1985 -- Iraq asks the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro to handle its applications for Department of Agriculture loans.
Aug. 4, 1989 -- Acting on a tip about irregularities in loans to Iraq, the F.B.I. raids the bank's Atlanta office, seizing thousands of records and shutting down the operation.


Secession Plan for Manhattan Schools
A plan that would effectively let Manhattan secede from the New York City school system is being circulated by Borough President Ruth W. Messinger.
The proposal is intended to free the borough's schools from the Board of Education bureaucracy while taking advantage of some extra pools of state money.
It would make Manhattan's elementary, middle and high schools independent of the board except in two areas: contract negotiation and pension administration.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Beijing is to lower barriers to American imports under an agreement in principle reached by the United States and China, ending a long-running dispute that threatened to erupt into a full-blown trade war.
Trade experts said the accord would give American-made computers, chemicals and telecommunications equipment greater access to China's huge market.  [ Page 1. ]
A new trade dispute erupted with Japan because a Japanese Government research institute, the National Institute for Fusion Sciences, decided to buy a supercomputer made by NEC of Japan instead of one made by Cray Research.
The American company filed an unsuccessful complaint with a Japanese review board.  [ 35. ]
American and European trade negotiators are to meet in Brussels Sunday in yet another attempt to settle the longstanding disputes that have blocked progress in broader world trade talks.
But officials on both sides seemed unprepared to compromise.  [ 35. ] Markets
The Dow industrials fell to the lowest level of the year, 3,136.58, down 39.45 points, or 1.24 percent, as stock prices retreated broadly.
Rising interest rates, Ford Motor's disclosure late Thursday that it expected a loss and uncertainties surrounding this weekend's Presidential debates led investors to issue sell orders.  [ 35. ]
Treasury bond prices fell sharply as prospects dimmed that interest rates would ease, sending the yield on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year bond up 8 basis points to 7.52 percent.  [ 38. ]
The dollar gained against other currencies, giving it an impressive advance for the week.  [ 44. ]
Orange juice futures prices fell to a six-year low after the Government predicted the largest Florida harvest in 13 years.  [ 44. ] The Economy
Federal Reserve officials saw few glimmers of hope for a pickup in the economy when they met Aug. 18.
They were markedly more downbeat about the economy then than they are now, interviews, public statements and the minutes of the meeting by the Fed's main policy-making committee show.  [ 35. ]
Despite misgivings about fiscal stimulus for the economy -- given Washington's failure to check the growth of the budget deficit in the last decade, not to mention the reluctance of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton to focus on the issue -- the idea of Federal spending or a tax jolt is suddently back in fashion.  [ 35. ] Companies
Ford's shares tumbled $2.75, to $34.875, after the auto maker surprised Wall Street with a $1 billion preferred stock offering and said it expected to report losses because of poor European sales.
L.
Lindsey Halstead, chairman of Ford of Europe, will retire on Jan. 1 and be succeeded by Jacques Nasser.  [ 36. ]
Digital Equipment filled two key executive posts, naming William D. Strecker vice president of engineering and chief technology officer and Richard Poulsen president of the $7 billion European operation.  [ 36. ]
Philip M. Hawley announced his retirement as chairman and chief executive of Carter Hawley Hale Stores, a day after the company emerged from bankruptcy protection.
The move clears the way for Sam Zell, the investor who bailed out the big retailer, to install his own top managers.  [ 36. ] Today's Columns
For parents who want to transfer a home or business to adult children while minimizing tax consequences, today's combination of depressed real estate values and low interest rates offers an opportunity.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 37. ]
A fluorescent light box to cheer people up when days become short and cold has been patented by two scientists hoping to profit by treating seasonal affective disorder, the clinical depression brought on by winter.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 37. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Out of Bush's Mouth, Old Rumors Draw Big-League Attention
When the President's surrogates raise accusations against Gov.
Bill Clinton, they no longer make news.
When the President raises the same accusations, they do.
Big time.
This, at least, is the conclusion one is forced to draw from watching rumors about a 1969 trip Mr.
Clinton made to Moscow migrate from the relative obscurity of C-Span to a dominant position on all three networks and in most major newspapers.


No Headline
We act modern, cool and sophisticated.
But underneath, we want a daddy, a king, a god, a hero.
We'll take the heel if we can get Achilles, a champion who will carry that lance and that sword into the field and fight for us.
We're not as rational as we think.
It's sort of scary. -- ROBIN LAKEOFF of the University of California, on Presidential politics.  [ 1:2. ]


Japan and U.S. Disagree On Cray Supercomputer
A decision by a Japanese Government research institute to buy a Japanese supercomputer instead of an American one has led to a new trade dispute between the countries.
In June, the National Institute for Fusion Sciences chose a supercomputer made by the NEC Corporation of Japan over one made by Cray Research Inc. of St.
Paul.
Cray filed a complaint with a special Japanese Government review board, but the board said this week that it saw no reason to overturn the award.


Johnny Carisi, 70, A Jazz Trumpeter And a Composer
Johnny Carisi, a jazz trumpeter and composer, died on Oct. 3 at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 70 years old.
He died of complications from heart surgery, said a friend, Don Leight.


Costs of L.I. Incinerators Rise With a Landfill Glut
Officials of Babylon and Huntington are plagued with a garbage problem that has other townships rejoicing: there is a glut of low-cost places to dispose of trash.
Both Suffolk County towns built multimillion-dollar incinerators in recent years, banking on a high demand for their services from other townships.
But this year, with landfills outside Long Island offering bargain-basement prices, officials in both towns said they did not have people knocking at their doors.


Review/Film Festival; For De Niro, the Game Turns Serious
In "Night and the City," which will be shown at 9 P.M. tomorrow as the closing feature of the New York Film Festival, the glad-handing New York lawyer Harry Fabian (Robert De Niro) is seen making enemies all over town.
Harry's career as an ambulance-chaser has understandably left a string of irate clients in its wake, as has his habit of borrowing money he has only the faintest intention of repaying.
The film's intermittent glimpses of Harry's methods leave no doubt as to why he has a raft of problems hanging over him.
On one occasion, trying to sound honest, he swears upon his goldfish's eyes.
For others this modus operandi may be irritating, but for Harry it is mostly a game.
"You wanna take a walk in the park?" he cheerfully advises one guilty-looking client.
"Leave the baseball bat at home." To another, a potential plaintiff who has physical injuries but says he feels all right, Harry counsels: "You wanna make some money? You feel terrible."


Digital Equipment Appoints Executives to 2 Key Posts
Robert B. Palmer, new president and chief executive of the Digital Equipment Corporation, filled two key executive positions today, as he promised to do when he officially took over last week.
He named William D. Strecker vice president of engineering and chief technology officer and Richard Poulsen president of Digital's $7 billion European operation.


U.S. Munitions Expert Is Seized by Iraq in U.N. Zone
An American munitions expert has been seized at gunpoint by Iraqi security forces operating in the demilitarized zone established along the Kuwaiti-Iraqi border, United States and Kuwaiti officials said today.
They said the American, Clinton Adam Hall, was seized on Thursday, 1.2 miles from the United Nations observer post at Camp Khor, a former Iraqi naval base in the Iraqi city of Umm Qasr.


Bertina Manning, 70, Art Scholar And a Collector of Italian Works
Bertina Suida Manning, a scholar of Italian art and a collector of French and Italian paintings and drawings, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 70 years old and lived in Forest Hills Gardens, Queens.
She died of heart failure, said a friend, Mary Jane Harris.


Van Slyke Makes a Point With His Bat
His distinction entering the National League Championship Series was his .324 average for 1992.
His distinction since then had been that he was a good quote.
The job at hand for Andy Van Slyke in the seventh inning tonight was to at last do and not merely say something significant.


Observer; Once More Unto The Grave
The Vietnam War is like Marilyn Monroe, who is the American equivalent of Count Dracula.
The Count, remember, was doomed to eternal exhumation.
Though dead, he was never allowed to die, and still isn't.
Hollywood, which has not been famous lately for new ideas, is about to trot him out of the coffin one more time under orders to bring back another big payday.
Threadbare with overuse he is, and this probably guarantees box-office success.


At Playtime, Learning to Save the Earth
The values and habits of society are always represented in the toys that children use, whether it be a Barbie doll in a feather boa or a miniature fast-food restaurant with its plastic burgers and fries.
Not surprisingly, environmental themes are increasingly showing up in products marketed to children.
In many cases, the toys are made of recycled materials.


Judge Asked to Void Contract at The Daily News
The Daily News asked a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday to void a contract with a printers' union that guarantees the jobs of the union's 167 members for life.
The outcome of the contract dispute could affect the sale of the newspaper to the publisher Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
"We are not willing to assume the lifetime job guarantees, and it is our position that we don't have to assume them," Mr.
Zuckerman's partner, Fred Drasner, said yesterday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Clinton, Citing Privacy Issues, Tells Little About His Health
Gov.
Bill Clinton's doctors say he is in good health, but Mr.
Clinton has been less forthcoming about his health than any Presidential nominee in the last 20 years.
Although three doctors have written brief letters about Mr.
Clinton's health, he has not provided fuller details, has not allowed his principal doctor to speak to reporters about his medical history and has declined to agree to an interview on the subject.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a flurry of legislative action as Congress approached the end of its session referred incorrectly to Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey in some editions.
He is a Democrat.


2 Israeli Politicians Are Under Religious Fire
These are days of religious awe for observant Jews, a period of holidays devoted to reflection and atonement.
Here, it is also a time for politics, testified to by a squall that blew today over the nonreligious behavior of two leading Israeli politicians.
While the dispute had elements that were more comic than cosmic, it underlined the serious divisions that exist between secular and religious elements in Israel's new Government.
The tensions have persisted almost nonstop for weeks, prompting some political commentators to wonder how long it will take before the Government runs into real trouble.


Why It's Important to Know a Truck From a Car; To Protect U.S. Jobs
To the Editor:
In "Tax. Blame. Regret. Elect." (Op-Ed, Sept. 29), an attempt to respond in kind to the Bush campaign's statement that Gov.
Bill Clinton raised taxes in Arkansas 128 times, Mickey Kantor, chairman of the Clinton-Gore campaign, displays a dismaying confusion between what constitutes a tax and what represents actions that save American jobs.


Chinese Party Leaves Ex-Leader in Limbo
The Communist Party Central Committee said today that it had ended a three-year investigation into the conduct of the former party leader, Zhao Ziyang, without either rehabilitating him or punishing him further.
Mr.
Zhao, who was once regarded as the likely successor to Deng Xiaoping as China's paramount leader, was dismissed after the Tiananmen Square military crackdown in 1989.
Hard-liners were furious with Mr.
Zhao for showing sympathy to the student pro-democracy protesters.


Health Record Of the President
President Bush has been more forthcoming about his health than Gov.
Bill Clinton, although like his opponent, Mr.
Bush has not agreed to an interview about the issue.
Mr.
Bush's doctor, Dr.
Burton J. Lee 3d, has spoken with reporters or issued statements after each of Mr.
Bush's annual checkups.
Dr.
Lee has also spoken about Mr.
Bush's health in interviews.


Your Money; Good Time for Parents to Give Assets to Children
For some parents who want to transfer a home or business to adult children, the present combination of depressed real estate values and low interest rates brings opportunity.
The goals of such transfers are to keep property in the family while giving the younger generation immediate use of it, to provide parents with steady incomes, and to avoid what would probably be an onerous estate tax if property were simply left in a will to children.


Getting Into Character as Columbus Day Approaches


D'Amato: Using Ferraro to Attack Abrams
The Script Geraldine A. Ferraro, addressing Mr.
Abrams in news clip: "The Feerick Commission has said to you that you should not take campaign contributions from people who are doing business with your agency. You are currently in contempt of that decision by the Feerick Commission, which criticized you."
Announcer: "Bob Abrams once swore he wouldn't take money from people who do business with his office. People who profit from his decisions. But Bob Abrams needed the money to run his dirty little campaign against Geraldine Ferraro. So he broke his oath. He took the money. Bob Abrams. Hopelessly political."


Outdoor Clothing With Vents
Duofold, the company that introduced the first double-sided thermal underwear 85 years ago, has developed a new layering system with vents for outdoor clothing.
Although Duofold still makes its original thermal underwear -- cotton inside and a blend of wool and cotton outside -- it uses synthetic fibers and fabrics in the new vented clothing.


Beliefs
The most important vote in the United States this November may not be for the President, and it may take place in only one of the 50 states.
Of course, calling California only one of the 50 states is like calling Michael Jordan only one of the Chicago Bulls.
If California were a separate nation, it would have the world's ninth largest economy.
So when Californians vote on whether to become the only place in the world where it is unequivocally legal for doctors to kill terminally ill patients who request to die, the event will be of national if not international importance.
If Californians pass the initiative, Proposition 161 -- and right now the polls suggest that they will -- no state that is linked to California by a simple airplane flight, no family that has friends or relatives there, will escape the impact.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about the jazz drummer Ed Blackwell misstated his age.
He was 62.


Elinor K. Bernheim, a Volunteer For Many Causes, Is Dead at 85
Elinor Kridel Bernheim, a social-welfare volunteer whose widely cast interests ranged from the Federation of Jewish Philanthropies and Columbia University's School of Social Work to a community center she founded in the Bronx, died yesterday at her Upper East Side home.
She was 85 years old.
She died after a long illness, her family said.


Classical Music in Review
Anne LeBaron Quintet Alternative Museum


Stephen Temmer, 64, An Audio Innovator And a Manufacturer
Stephen F. Temmer, an audio innovator and retired executive, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Patents; Standard Platform In Space Launchings
Frederick W. Perkins, a satellite engineer in McLean, Va., won a patent this week for a one-size-fits-all platform to launch scientific instruments into space.
The platform is essentially the chassis of a satellite, which holds the equipment being launched on a rocket.
Mr.
Perkins said all satellite platforms thus far had been custom-ordered at great expense.
With a standardized platform, customers would have to tailor their equipment to make sure the bolts and plugs line up with the chassis, but costs could be lowered by millions of dollars.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: ISSUES -- Economic Philosophy; Candidates Sharply Divided On Prescription for Economy
President Bush believes that the American economy is fundamentally sound and that the Government generally should keep its hands off and let the free market thrive.
Gov.
Bill Clinton, by contrast, holds that the economy has run aground and that the Government should step in, get it sailing again and plot its course in detail.


James Galway to Open Great Performers Series
The flutist James Galway is to give a recital of works by Dvorak, Copland, Martinu, Debussy and Prokofiev to open the Great Performers series at Lincoln Center, at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.
Christopher O'Riley will be the piano accompanist.
Tickets are $17 to $35.


Patents; For Chasing Winter Blahs, A Box of Fluorescent Light
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9 -- Hoping to corner the market in treating the winter doldrums, two scientists have patented a fluorescent light box to cheer up people when days become short and cold.
Over the last decade, studies at the National Institute of Mental Health and elsewhere have produced evidence that the shortage of sunlight during winter produces clinical depression in millions of people.


Pioneer 12 Is Sinking Into the Venusian Clouds and Burning Up
The Pioneer 12 spacecraft, seared and pummeled as it flashed through the upper atmosphere of Venus, has expired after 14 years of uncovering the mysteries of the cloud-shrouded planet, NASA officials said today.
The robot spacecraft, launched on May 20, 1978, for a year's work around the second planet from the Sun, greatly extended its visit to send back more than 400 billion bits of data that provided a new understanding of the neighboring world.


Mexican Politics: Steps to Pluralism
After months of protests, a battle over the fairness of an election in the leftist stronghold of Michoacan state has refocused the debate over political reform in Mexico even as the conflict itself has fizzled to an end.
Earlier this week, a newly elected Governor from the ruling party was forced from office in the state by a leftist campaign of civil disobedience, only to be replaced by another ruling party member.
And today, leftist leaders, who had asserted that the election was stolen from them by fraud, acknowledged privately that they would set aside their demands for a new vote.


Why It's Important to Know a Truck From a Car
To the Editor:
Your arguments in "Sophistry in Detroit" (editorial, Sept. 22) against a Senate bill to reclassify all multipurpose vehicles as trucks reflects unfounded cynicism, not thoughtful analysis.
Here are the facts:


Taste for Fiscal Stimulus Returns
President John F. Kennedy's tax cut of 1962 was widely celebrated as the dawn of the millennium of can-do economics.
But by the early 1980's, the use of fiscal stimulus to revive a flagging economy was seen as an act of hubris, a temptation to the slumbering gods of inflation.
And by 1990, the notion of adding to the budget deficit for any reason seemed folly.
Now the pendulum is swinging back.
How could anyone believe that policies so long discredited would do more good than harm?


Georgians Prepare for Tomorrow's Elections


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about mass transit projects in Hudson County, N.J., misstated the proposed timetable for building a light rail line.
Design work is expected to begin early next year.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about the Hubble Space Telescope's observation of a gravitational lens -- an object in space with a gravitational force that bends light from even more distant objects -- was omitted from some editions, and replaced by a duplicated article about H.I.V. infection.
The space telescope article is reprinted today on page 46.


Review/Fashion; These Opposites Are Attractive
Coming from opposite ends of the fashion spectrum, Giorgio Armani and Gianni Versace brought the Italian fashion showing for spring and summer to a brilliant conclusion on Thursday night.
Mr.
Armani, the master tailor who is responsible for making the jacket an essential part of women's wardrobes for the last 15 years, extended the suit look in previously unexplored directions.
He also made evening clothes of unbelievable splendor that had his audience gasping at the richness of the embroideries and the subtlety of the prints.


Review/Pop; Sinatra and MacLaine: Stoic and Feisty Nostalgia
Shirley MacLaine isn't as big a legend as Frank Sinatra, but she sure can kick higher.
At Radio City Music Hall on Thursday night, opening their eight-night engagement, Ms.
MacLaine strove to dazzle by abundance.
She had lots of great costumes, lots of songs, lots of jokes and lots of gusto.
With her red hair short and her mouth fresh, she came onstage wearing a black-and-silver dress that showed off a generous percentage of her long legs; when she stepped just right she gave a glimpse of a fiery red petticoat underneath.
Later, she wore a cosmic-blue ball gown.
Ms.
MacLaine doesn't have a voice that exactly dazzles, but she went easily from hot-mama bravura to lovelorn tenderness.
Most of her numbers were medleys.
She sang so many songs, or portions of them, that it was hard to keep count: everything from "On a Clear Day You Can See Forever," "Irma la Douce," and selections from the musical "Gypsy" to "Heart and Soul," "I'll Never Fall in Love Again" and Hank Williams's "Hey Good Lookin'."


To Pick an Architect, Talk to Some Clients
The slump in building caused by the recession offers at least one benefit for homeowners: architects who during the boom years were too busy to touch small jobs are eager for projects of any size.
For that reason it is easier to find talented architects willing to take on projects like renovating a kitchen, remodeling a bathroom, adding a playroom over the garage or simply enclosing a porch.
Before approaching an architect, it is important for homeowners to know what they want.
Making a list of what the job will entail helps.
Consider whether any walls or plumbing would have to be moved, whether rewiring would be required or whether the work would be simply cosmetic.
Outline necessities, like a child's room.
Then make a list of things that you may like to include but that are not a priority or that could be undertaken if budget permitted, like a library.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: Promising a Changed Party
The Clinton campaign on Wednesday began broadcasting a 30-second commercial that officials said would run in 20 states.
ON THE SCREEN As the camera moves jerkily, Gov.
Bill Clinton is shown at a rally.
Scene cuts to him and Senator Al Gore at a rally during their bus tour, then Mr.
Clinton at a speech surrounded by police officers in Houston.
The ad ends with a familiar shot of the running mates at the Democratic National Convention, arms raised.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.04
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.81
2.77
4.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.87
5.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
5.97
7.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.44
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.55
9.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.40
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush Tones Down Criticism Of Clinton Visit to Moscow
President Bush rushed today to mute an accusation that Gov.
Bill Clinton was hiding details of a trip he took to Moscow at the height of the Vietnam War.
In a morning television interview, Mr.
Bush softened somewhat a tactic that an aide said had backfired.
The President said he now accepted Mr.
Clinton's statement that the visit was a tourist excursion unrelated to his activities in the anti-Vietnam war effort while he was studying at Oxford University in England.


Critic's Notebook; Perot Leaves a Field of Broken Rules
The Perot Show is something new in political campaigning and something old in television.
A screen occupied by an unprepossessing figure displaying graphs and charts is the sort of dozer that gave educational television a bad name in the 1950's.
But the concentration on facts without the distraction of what producers like to call production values is just what critics of television campaigns have been hollering for.
Ross Perot's opener, broadcast on Tuesday on CBS and repeated last night on ABC, defied all the rules of both television and politics.
Not only was the scene static - a man behind a desk using a slide-out metal pointer to explain what the wiggles and curves on his charts meant -- but the news was all bad as well.
Yes, there was the occasional wan attempt at a joke ("This is like having Willy Sutton run the banks," he said, then had to explain that Mr. Sutton had been a bank robber) and an obligatory line about working together to clean up the mess ("It'll be tough, but it'll be fun"), but this may have been the most downbeat half hour ever to occupy a major network during prime time.
Talk about negative commercials.


At Columbia, the Classics' Olympian Reign Is Challenged
The subject of the Columbia University class was the "Republic," a dialogue on justice and the ideal state written by a dead white European male named Plato.
But hanging over the discussion was an equally serious and longstanding debate over the value of studying DWEM's, as students and scholars call them, and the role of the two courses that form the bedrock of Columbia's core curriculum.
It has been more than four years since many of the nation's campuses became embroiled in a divisive argument over whether core courses like those at Columbia are too "Eurocentric," too "patriarchal" and perpetuate racial and ethnic stereotypes.


INSIDE
U.N. Bans Flights in Bosnia
The United Nations Security Council voted to ban all military flights over Bosnia, but stopped short of approving enforcement of the ban.
Page 3.
Sarajevo's Absent Ministers
Besieged for six months by Serbian forces, the people of Sarajevo are turning their anger on Government officials who have fled.
Page 3.
American Seized by Iraqis
Iraqi security forces have seized an American munitions expert at gunpoint in a volatile zone along the Kuwaiti-Iraqi border.
Page 2.
Stocks Hit Low for the Year
The Dow Jones average fell to its lowest level of 1992, as investors were said to be worried about rising interest rates and losses at Ford.
Page 35.
Pirate Rookie Beats Braves
Rookie Tim Wakefield pitched the Pittburgh Pirates to a 3-2 vicory over the Atlanta Braves to tighten the National League playoff.
Page 29.


Ready to Debate
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams have agreed to at least three debates in their campaign for the United States Senate from New York.
Here is their schedule: OCT. 15. 7 A.M. to 8 A.M.
"Imus in the Morning," WFAN-AM, New York City, with single moderator, Don Imus.
OCT. 17. 7 P.M. to 8 P.M., WRGB-TV and the Northeast Public Radio Network, Schenectady, with single moderator, public radio commentator, Alan Chartock.
NOV. 1. 11:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., WNBC-TV, New York City, with single moderator, Gabe Pressman.


Savimbi Meets U.N. Official On Angola Election Impasse
Emerging from nearly a week of seclusion, Jonas Savimbi met today with a senior United Nations official in an attempt to end the political impasse that has gripped Angola since elections last week.
Mr.
Savimbi, the former rebel leader who apparently lost to Jose Eduardo dos Santos of the governing party in his bid for the presidency, met for two hours with Margaret Anstee, the head of the United Nations election monitoring team, at his headquarters in the central Angolan town of Huambo.


Making a Difference; Marriott Corp. Divided in Two
Every executive has to put out a small fire now and then, but Stephen F. Bollenbach, chief financial officer of the Marriott Corporation, is battling a firestorm largely of his own making.
On Monday, in a move that delighted shareholders but incensed bond holders, Marriott said it was going to divide the company into two parts.
One will be Marriott International Inc., a healthy hotel management services company with almost no debt and good growth prospects.
The other, to be called Host Marriott, will be a sickly real estate company, hobbled by huge debts and a portfolio of hotels that are hard to sell in this dismal real estate market.


Saving the Children Isn't Half Enough; No Unesco Default
To the Editor:
In "U.S. vs. U.N." (Op-Ed, Sept. 28), Siddarth Dube voices the resentment in much of the third world toward the Bush Administration's selective embrace of the United Nations, stoking widespread suspicions that it cynically uses the organization when convenient and marginalizes it when not.


Marjorie L. Fox, Jeffrey T. Naiman
Marjorie Laura Fox, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Fox of Little Silver, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Todd Naiman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Naiman of Woodbridge, Conn.
Rabbi Sally J. Priesand performed the ceremony at the Yale Club of New York City.
Ms.
Fox, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an assistant corporation counsel in the environmental law division of the New York City Law Department.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia University, where her husband is a fourth-year medical student.


After 'Confusion,' Iraq Frees U.S. Munitions Expert
In a swift about-face, the Iraqi authorities released an American munitions expert into the custody of United Nations officials in Baghdad today after abducting him at gunpoint inside Kuwait on Thursday.
"He is in Baghdad's Unikom office," said Abdel Latif Kabbaj, a spokesman for the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission.
The mission, known as Unikom, was created to demarcate the border between the two countries under the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war.


Commercial Property: Carnegie Hall; What's Playing? Maybe a Rousing Business Meeting
LOOK who's playing Carnegie Hall.
Primerica Inc., the financial services company, held its annual meeting in the main hall in April.
Last month TAFA International Inc., an executive search firm, held a dinner for 110 people in the East Room, plus a private concert in the Weill Recital Hall.
Next month -- on Nov. 14 -- the American arm of Credit Suisse, the big Swiss bank, will hold a black-tie dinner for 150 banking clients on the premises, when it sponsors the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra's concert in the hall.
It will also offer drinks and coffee during intermission, probably in the venerable Carnegie Cafe.


West Thinks Quebec Pact Goes Too Far
Julia Mohs and her neighbor Grace Kelly ("everyone calls me Princess Grace") are two of the reasons polls suggest that the "yes" campaign for the Oct. 26 Canadian-unity referendum is in trouble in British Columbia.
"Quebec is asking for too much," said Ms.
Mohs, an unemployed computer saleswoman shopping with Ms.
Kelly at a supermarket here.


Serbs' Patriarch Pleads for Peace
As Serbian forces step up their attacks in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the head of the Serbian Orthodox Church is seeking help for the people of Serbia and an end to "the tragic war" in the former Yugoslavia.
The church leader, Patriarch Pavle, called for the lifting of United Nations sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, which he said were hurting Serbian civilians and Muslim refugees.
Serbia and Montenegro are the only republics left in the Yugoslav federation.


Struck By Lighting, A Pretty Space Becomes Something Spectacular
LIGHTING in home design is like Cinderella pre-Prince Charming: pretty much a background figure.
It's odd that lighting is so often overlooked, since it has the power to radically transform architecture and interiors.
Lighting can make a small space seem spacious and a large one intimate.
It can make walls appear solid or transparent, can make or break a piece of art and can even make or break a mood.
To show how the magic works, three different spaces were given makeovers with light.
Before the remodeling, this New York City living room was illuminated by a chandelier, a table lamp and a floor lamp.
Simple and straightforward.
Then, Larry Lustberg, whose company, Stortz Lighting, has created installations for the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, the World Financial Center and the philanthropist Brooke Astor's 90th birthday party, put in temporary equipment to demonstrate what creative lighting can do.


IN MEXICO, CRISIS SHAKES OPPOSITION
Ever since President Carlos Salinas de Gortari began freeing markets, balancing budgets and patching up relations with the Catholic Church, Mexico's conservative opposition has suffered something of an identity crisis.
If the Government was applying many of the policies for which the Mexican right had so long clamored, some members of the conservative National Action Party wondered, what was the point of working against it?


Drum and Bugle Corps Stage Comeback
FOR three hours on a scorching Saturday afternoon, the 60 young members of the Southern Knights Drum and Bugle Corps of Franklinville marched across a grassy field at Bayonne High School's Veteran's Memorial Stadium.
At 7:30 P.M. they were to compete in the Garden State Circuit Championships.
In their routine called "Foreplay," percussionists formed a front line; buglers and color guards gathered in a circle.
The high-pitched bells reverberated, and the snare, quad and bass drums joined in.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Larry Stanford and Mike Witt, pitchers, and John Ramos, catcher, from the 60-day disabled list and designated Stanford and Ramos for assignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Tony Bennett, guard, to a multiyear contract.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Lee Mayberry, guard, to a four-year contract, and Jim Farmer, Stephen Thompson and Kevin Williams, guards, and Mike Smith and Joe Rhett, forwards, to one-year contracts.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Vincent Askew, forward, and Marty Conlon, forward-center.
Continental Basketball Association  FORT WAYNE FURY -- Signed Melvin Love, center.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Signed Demetrius Calip, guard.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Alex Coles, forward; Darryl McDonald and Willie Brand, guards.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Signed Terrence Lewis, guard.
Football National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Activated Kevin Mack, running back, and Frank Stams, linebacker, from injured reserve, and Keenan McCardell, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Placed Pete Holohan, tight end, on injured reserve.
Waived Tom Myslinski, guard.
DETROIT LIONS -- Waived Scott Lockwood, running back, and Ben Mitchell, offensive tackle.
Activated Herman Moore, wide receiver, from injured reserve and placed him on the practice squad.
Released John Derby, linebacker, from the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Re-signed Joe King, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Signed Robert Petrovicky, center.
Traded Michel Picard, left wing, to the San Jose Sharks for future considerations.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Signed Phil Crowe, right wing, and assigned him to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.


Re-covery Program
IN HIS BOOK "BILLY BALDWIN REmembers," the celebrated decorator tells of a client who made the following request.
"I would like to have the sofa covered in a material I've never seen," she told him.
"Ideally, one that has never been made." When asked if she could give him a little hint as to what that material might be, she replied, "Perhaps one that looks like a lovely little sweater crocheted by old ladies." Maybe, Baldwin thought to himself, he could have it done by the Woman's Exchange.
Today, such a request would probably be taken in stride.
Anything and everything -- short of Saran Wrap -- is finding its way into the upholstery workroom.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
121.85
119.35
129.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4958
1.4090
1.6880
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2493
1.2500
1.1287
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6840
1.7290
1.7230
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$349.75
$348.25
$359.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; While Not Squarely Pro-Clinton, One Town Is Definitely Anti-Bush
This St.
Louis suburb tends to be up for grabs in Presidential elections.
It split 50-50 in the vote four years ago.
But ask about George Bush this time around, and the response among even his dwindling supporters tends to be a merger of disappointment and disbelief, all the more so since the President started attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton's activities in the 1960's.
Here at least, that maneuver has backfired in a big way.
"This is just a lot of garbage," 73-year-old Audrey Mueller said of the Bush attacks on Mr.
Clinton for traveling to Russia in 1969 and attending antiwar demonstrations in England.
"I wish he'd get away from this stuff. The President of the United States shouldn't be doing this." 'No Way for Bush'
Her husband, Leslie Mueller, 75, put it this way: "I was in World War II. Who cares? That was 45 years ago. Who cares what Clinton did 20 years ago as a young man? Let's talk about the homeless and unemployment, Mr. President. What are you going to do about those?"


BEST SELLERS: October 11, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
2
2
31
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
20
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
5
4
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
5
4
13
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
6
7
7
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
7
6
9
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
9
5
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Visiting her native Napa Valley, a television star encounters shades of her unhappy childhood and romance with the heir to a winery.
9
10
3
THE LEGACY, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $15.95.) A fantasy tale about a spider queen's war to stop a band of elves in their quest for peace and security.
10
8
7
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The story of Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton and her spouse.
11
12
3
BEFORE AND AFTER, by Rosellen Brown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A tragic event in a New England town pits members of a family against one another.
12
14
2
LIVE FROM GOLGOTHA, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.) The Gospel according to St.
Timothy, recorded in A.D. 96 amid intrusions by 20th-century religious and media personalities.
13 *
11
3
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran has to contend with a series of crimes in Scotland.
14
1
THE SILKEN WEB, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $16.95.) Kathleen Haley faces a difficult choice: marriage to a secure well-to-do man or to a passionate old flame.
15
13
7
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the radio talk show host.
2
2
6
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) The veterinarian's new memoir.
3
3
20
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) A discussion of menopause.
4
4
17
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5 *
1
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
6 *
6
3
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
5
18
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses the environment.
8
8
9
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
9
10
6
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10
7
15
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A life of the Princess.
11
9
10
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life and death of Nicholas II.
12
12
4
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) Spirituality in everyday life.
13
11
3
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL, by Joseph Mitchell. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Three dozen pieces about Manhattan life, first published in The New Yorker.
14
13
22
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
15 *
14
20
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
16 *
1
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
17 *
1
SHADOWS OF FORGOTTEN ANCESTORS, by Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan. (Random House, $23.) The origins of human life on earth; an excursion through more than a billion years of evolution.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
2
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
2
1
13
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
2
2
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
4
3
44
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
5
4
45
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE, by Edward O. Wilson. (Belknap/ Harvard University, $29.95.) The distinguished scientist who made sociobiology famous warns humanity that it has become far too powerful for its own good and will soon regret, morally and economically, its devastation of nonhuman forms of life.
MARLENE DIETRICH: Life and Legend, by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $25.) A celebration of the one and onliest, with plenty of what appear to be the facts about her private and public careers.
POLITICS BY OTHER MEANS: Higher Education and Group Thinking, by David Bromwich. (Yale University, $30.) Mr.
Bromwich argues that cultural politics has swollen to supply the absence of real politics, resulting in a dangerous polarization.
FORGOTTEN FATHERLAND: The Search for Elisabeth Nietzsche, by Ben Macintyre. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A journalist's account of the philosopher's nutty sister, who founded an unsuccessful Aryan colony in Paraguay and twisted Nietzsche's thoughts and dictums to fit Hitler's purposes.
BAILEY'S CAFE, by Gloria Naylor. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A novelist's virtuoso orchestration of survival, suffering, courage and humor among black people in Brooklyn, circa 1948.
MEETING AT THE CROSSROADS: Women's Psychology and Girls' Development, by Lyn Mikel Brown and Carol Gilligan. (Harvard University, $19.95.) Two psychologists study the transition from childhood to adolescence, and find adult women guilty of teaching girls to suppress their native truthfulness.
SHARED LIVES, by Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $24.95.) An evocative memoir of private lives and public events, distorted by both racism and sexism, in South Africa in the 1950's and since.


Corrections
A table on Sept. 6 with the Networking column, about laser printers, misstated the resolution of the Compaq Pagemarq 20 printer using the Postscript language.
A letter from a reader late in September points out that it is 800 horizontal by 400 vertical dots per square inch, not 800 by 800.


Choice Is Magic's
To the Sports Editor:
Leave it to Dave Anderson to put a negative spin on Magic Johnson's return from his premature retirement ("The Lakers Don't Play Angola," The Times, Oct. 1).
Anderson appears to have assumed the role of resident doomsayer of the sports section.


Robin Pogrebin, Edward J. Klaris
Mr. and Mrs.
Bertrand Pogrebin of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin J. Pogrebin to Edward J. Klaris, a son of Harvey Klaris and Alice Klaris, both of New York.
A January 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pogrebin, 27 years old, is a reporter for The New York Observer.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is the senior partner of Rains &amp; Pogrebin, a law firm in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother, Letty C. Pogrebin, is an author and a founding editor of Ms. magazine in New York.


Robin Miller, Steven Travis
Roberta Lynn Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene Miller of Miami, was married there yesterday to Steven Lloyd Travis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lazarus Travis of Great Neck, L.I.
Justice Gerald Kogan of the Florida Supreme Court officiated at Villa Woodbine, a mansion.
Mrs.
Travis, who is 31 years old and uses the name Robin, is a payroll supervisor at GTE Mobile Communications in Atlanta.
She graduated from Indiana University and received an M.B.A. from Georgia State University.
Her father is an associate editor of The Miami Herald.
Her mother, Electra Yphantis Miller, is a quality assurance specialist at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Miami Beach.


Making a Difference; Teaching Customers How To Tithe
Not all small-business owners would see much financial sense in giving away 10 percent of their annual sales revenue to charity.
Even fewer would have their customers bother writing two separate checks to fulfill that goal.
But one, Buddy Noro, an AIDS activist and owner of the Buddy Gallery in Manhattan, does just that.
Profit and philanthropy can go hand in hand, he said.


Scaled Down, Television Returns
An axiom among dormant pop bands is that absence makes the crowd grow larger.
That is, if a once-innovative but now-defunct group waits long enough to stage a reunion, the band can become more celebrated than it originally was.
This is certainly a possibility for the early punk outfit Television, whose members had not played together for 13 years before recording the just-released comeback album "Television" (Capitol 98396; CD and cassette).
Underground-rock fans had mixed reactions when Television became headliners at the Manhattan punk club CBGB in the mid-1970's, particularly about the lead guitarist, singer and songwriter Tom Verlaine.
According to punk ideology at that time, catchy tunes were to be played mostly for camp value and other songs should be nasty, brutish and short.
Verlaine, who openly admired French Symbolist poets and avant-garde jazz saxophonists, would swirl through long, involuted solos that reminded his detractors of the despised psychedelic rock of hippie San Francisco.
Even worse, the other Television guitarist, Richard Lloyd, enjoyed pretty pop tunes for themselves.


Elizabeth Keenan, C. C. Thompson
Elizabeth Forsyth Keenan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Keenan 3d of New Orleans, was married there yesterday to Christopher Campbell Thompson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter C. Thompson of Westwood, Mass.
The Rev.
Hill C. Riddle performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.


World Markets; In Europe, the Bears Prevail
For most of the first half of this year, European brokers and bankers were busy explaining that the second half would be better for the Continent's stock markets.
The general prediction was that a quickening United States recovery, lower German interest rates and improved corporate results based on tough cost-cutting in recent recessionary years would all contribute to an upswing.
In fact, none of the above has materialized.
Rather, the sudden, extreme turbulence on European currency markets and the resulting uncertainty in corporate boardrooms have given rise to a mood of pessimism that is taking a toll on stocks and seems likely to dampen markets for some time.


Neglected for Years, TB IS Back With Strains That Are Deadlier
The United States has stumbled into its first preventable epidemic, a wave of tuberculosis with strains so virulent they threaten to return pockets of American society to a time when antibiotics were unknown.
The resurgence has been swift, forceful and for many of America's largest cities, it has come after two decades of searing budget cuts in public-health programs.
Without those cuts, experts say, the disease could have been all but eradicated, and new, deadly strains would never have been able to flourish.


The Transit of Woman
THE CHANGE
Women, Aging and the Menopause.
By Germaine Greer. 422 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Consulting the Stars
To the Editor:
STAR-tling to say the least.
A recapitulative look back through the 1980's (Berlin wall fall) and a series of predictions for the 1990's (Bush victory, natural disasters, etc.).
Both through astrology!
What vistas this could open.
Do we now look forward to personnel evaluation by palmistry, management analysis per phrenology or just general prognostications through reading chicken entrails?
HARRISON ROTH New York, N.Y., Sept. 8


YOU ARE BALKANS
Slavenka Drakulic's article subtly reinforces the predilection of the Western news media to lay all blame on the Serbs for instigating bloodshed.
Drakulic's friend Drazena, a refugee from Sarajevo, is one "who escaped from under the Serbian knife." And it's "the Serbians who are engaged in even the worst atrocities, like concentration camps." It should be clear by now that the slaughter is mutual.
Hostility has been escalating since last January, when the European Community recognized the legitimacy of Slovenian and Croatian secession.
Behavior is equally atrocious on all sides.


Bringing Out the Beast in Bob Newhart
From time to time, says the actor and comedian Bob Newhart, he has consulted a psychotherapist to work out his personal problems.
Most of these encounters have been productive, he adds, but several years ago, eager to overcome a fear of flying, he visited a Beverly Hills psychiatrist with what can only be described as mixed results.
"He was on Roxbury Drive," says Mr.
Newhart.
"I parked inside his building, and at the end of the first session I pulled out my parking ticket. I said, 'Do you validate?' And he said, 'Well, what do you mean by that?'


Choices
Outfitting a home today has its trade-offs; one person's luxury is another's necessity.
Here's a multiple-choice game featuring household-related items that create close to the same effect at close to the same price.
To play, just pick one from column A or column B.


A Backstage Is On Stage
Audience members at the Theatre du Soleil's production of "Les Atrides" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music seem to be as fascinated with watching the French troupe dress and undress backstage as with seeing the performance.
"Backstage" is an open structure filled with Oriental rugs, elaborate costumes and Poland Spring water bottles.
And actors.


'The Voyage' at the Met; The Drama Behind the Opera
TOMORROW night, a new opera called "The Voyage" will have its world premiere at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The work, by Philip Glass and David Henry Hwang, commemorates the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the New World, but also salutes all voyagers.
The sets for "The Voyage", designed by Robert Israel, are among the most complicated ever undertaken at the Met.
Characters soar and drift over the stage, sets twist and shift and fly apart.


Cleaning Outdoor Items Prolongs Their Lives
TAKING sufficient time to clean, repair and store outdoor items carefully will prolong their lives and make them immediately available for use in the spring.
Wash aluminum or chromed lawn furniture before storing it.
First, rinse items with hard spray from a garden hose to loosen dirt, and then scrub them with a stiff bristle brush dipped in household or car-washing detergent and water.
Rinse again with clear water, and then allow the items to dry.


POSTINGS: 42d St. Exhibit; Buildings In Politics
Photographs of buildings that are part of New York's political history will be exhibited starting Tuesday in the main lobby of the Chrysler Building, 42d Street and Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
The exhibit, "Politics and Real Estate in New York," is sponsored by Cushman &amp; Wakefield, a New York real estate services company.
It runs to Nov. 6.


Peruvian Rebel Leader Sentenced to Life


Cleaning Outdoor Items Prolongs Their Lives
TAKING sufficient time to clean, repair and store outdoor items carefully will prolong their lives and make them immediately available for use in the spring.
Wash aluminum or chromed lawn furniture before storing it.
First, rinse items with hard spray from a garden hose to loosen dirt, and then scrub them with a stiff bristle brush dipped in household or car-washing detergent and water.
Rinse again with clear water, and then allow the items to dry.


Starting the Mint Wasn't Easy
TWO hundred years ago, the United States Mint was just getting started.
Built on the site of a defunct distillery on North Seventh Street in Philadelphia, the mint almost didn't materialize.
The idea for a national mint was proposed by the first Superintendent of Finance, Robert Morris, in 1781, but was not approved by Congress until 1791.
Various ideas on coinage came and went, most involving contract coinage.
In contract coinage, a private mint makes the coins and the Government buys them.
But most mints were in England, and Congress didn't want to buy items made by its recent enemy.


THE RIDICULOUS VISION OF MARK LEYNER
What a dead ringer Mark Leyner (in your cover photo) is for Picasso's portrait of Gertrude Stein ("The Ridiculous Vision of Mark Leyner," by William Grimes, Sept. 13).
For some time now I've insisted that Leyner's is the best-built writing to come out of New Jersey since William Carlos Williams's, and, suddenly, my favorite obscure writer has burst into the mainstream.


Reduced to Luxury
SIMPLIFY, ELIMINATE, PARE DOWN: These are impulses of taste, but they are also dictates of democracy, marking the renewal of a tradition that has animated architects and designers for more than two centuries.
Neo-classicism, Arts and Crafts, Art Nouveau and the modern movement each added a distinguished chapter to the history of this tradition.
Its overarching aims: to align the aristocratic art of architecture with modern democratic ideals; to replace the opulence of the past with a display of sheer visual intelligence, and to establish simplicity of effect as the esthetic equivalent of individual merit.
Two centuries ago, these ideals attained sufficient power to penetrate to the heart of the old aristocratic order.
Though we may laugh at historical accounts of Marie Antoinette dressing up to play dairy maid with the ladies of her court, the queen's diversion, in fact, was a sympathetic response to the Enlightenment ideas that would ultimately bring down the
ancien regime
.
The Queen's dairy at the Chateau de Rambouillet, a neo-classical work of 1785 distinguished by a primitive stone grotto, was a royal rehearsal of the simple life.
In America, Thomas Jefferson adopted classicism as the architectural vocabulary of democracy, not only because of its association with ancient Greece, but also because its simple geometric forms proclaimed an order ruled by laws, not men.


Everyone's Favorite Food From Italy
DE ROSA'S, a popular local restaurant, now has De Rosa's Brick Oven Pizza at the Firehouse.
The new place, with a name that telegraphs its essence, is indeed situated in a handsomely restored firehouse, the Vigilant Hose Company No. 3 (Westport's first firehouse), just off U.S. 1.
To accentuate the building's origins, there are axes, a rolled-up hose and firemen's coats and helmets hanging on the brick walls of the compact dining area, which seats 38.
A black ceiling, with pin lights and hanging lanterns, sets off the red brick simply and attractively.
To the right of the entrance a fire burns in the large brick oven, while pizza chefs use huge wood piels to place and remove the pies over the fire.
The decor is spare and so is the menu.
There are 18 types of toppings for the pizza, 4 fillings for calzones, 2 salads and 2 breads, focaccia and bruschetta.
Occasionally desserts are also on the menu.
Actually the pizzas are so generous, there's not much need for anything else.
A shared spinach salad, too generous for two, was a welcome mixture of large spinach leaves, warm bacon squares, fresh mushroom slices, hard-boiled egg halves, strips of Swiss cheese and canned black olives, with a creamy peppercorn dressing (which was on the bland side).
We intended to order different small pizzas and share them, but our waiter said, "One is really enough for two." He was right.
Even at that, the 14-inch pizza, which was listed as small on the menu, meant bagging three slices to take home. (The large pizza is 18 inches.)
We were encouraged to order half one kind, half another, so we tried the Whitey Valiante and the pizza alla cioppino, both with seafood toppings that seemed compatible.
The undistinguished crust had the thinness of a cracker with a cracker-like crunchiness, but was piled high on one half (the Whitey) with clams (tasty but chewy) that rang with the flavor of garlic, oregano and olive oil, with a layer of melted mozzarella.
The cioppino half combined calamari and clams over a thin layer of mildly seasoned fra diavolo sauce, then topped with Romano and Parmesan cheeses.
Mussels were supposed to be included as well, but were missing.
Even so, the notable factor in both pizza halves was the sheer abundance of ingredients.
Unlike some pizza parlors, where skimpy ingredients are concealed under an avalanche of molten cheese, the De Rosa pizzas were piled generously with the menu-listed ingredients and minimal tomato sauce and cheese.
A nice change.
The same lavishness prevailed on other days in a split pizza: half firefighter Dominic Zeoli (pomodori, mozzarella and a plethora of bacon and sauteed onion slices) and pizza alla Palma (profusions of sliced fresh mushrooms, Italian sausage chunks, green and red pepper strips and the expected pomodori and mozzarella).
In this instance, the crust was thicker and more bread-like.
In every instance, whichever pizza we ordered, the key ingredients dominated the pie, sprinkled throughout with great magnanimity.
For 50 cents extra each, 11 different ingredients are available as additions, but we wonder how the thin crust could bear any additional weight.
Pizzerias abound these days, in Westport and elsewhere, and some feature unusually imaginative topping combinations.
At De Rosa's Brick Oven Pizza at the Firehouse, the pies are more traditional, but what gives this small place its signature is its generosity, both in the size of pizzas and the abundance of ingredients used.
There is no liquor license but there are a few wines by the glass and a small beer selection that includes the New Haven-produced Elm City beer.
A La Carte
Anyone who thinks Japanese cuisine consists mostly of sushi, sashimi, tempura, sukiyaki and teriyaki, should drop by Kotobuki (457 Summer Street, Stamford; 359-4747).
The growing number of Japanese people living in and around Fairfield County area has led Kotobuki to expand its menu.
Most of the new items are appetizers like dobin mushi (a broth with mushrooms that is served in a tiny teapot), haze (small white fish and vegetable tempura), yanagawa nobe (an eel dish with burdick root), tiny cooked octopus, marinated bream in boiled sake, nabe yaki udon (noodles with shrimp tempura), mozuku (a kind of seaweed) and age nasu (Japanese eggplant).
The day's specials are posted on a blackboard.
De Rosa's Brick Oven Pizza At the Firehouse
Good
6 Wilton Road (between U.S. 1 and Kings Highway), Westport; 221-1769.
Atmosphere: Situated in a small renovated firehouse, the compact dining area seats 38, and the brick walls are hung with firefighter equipment; a brick pizza oven and take-out counter are on the other side of the room.
Service: Quick and friendly.
Recommended dishes: Spinach salad, firefighter Dominic Zeoli pizza, pizza alla Palma, the Whitey Valiante, pizza alla cioppino.
Price range: Entrees $6.95 to $14.
Credit cards: American Express, Mastercard, Visa, Diners Club.
Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Sunday through Thursday, 11:30 A.M. to 11 P.M.
Friday and Saturday.
Reservations: Not accepted.
Wheelchair accessibility: Ground-level access.
Ratings: Poor Satisfactory Good Very Good Excellent Extraordinary
Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to comparable establishments.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


Eleri J. Reiner, Glenn S. Dixon
Eleri Jocelyn Reiner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Reiner of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married in New York last evening to Glenn Sterling Dixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Dixon of Longboat Key, Fla.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Dixon, 29 years old, is a vice president in technology services at Lehman Brothers, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a lawyer in New Rochelle.
Her mother, Marian Reiner, is a literary agent.


Jackson Files Knicks Under Distant Memory
Mark Jackson has never played a "home game" away from home.
The commutes from his stucco house in St.
Albans, Queens, were 90 minutes to high school, 15 minutes to St.
John's and 30 minutes to Madison Square Garden -- local enough for his mother, Maria, to park her megaphone voice behind the bench for every tip-off.
Most National Basketball Association referees knew Maria Jackson by sight and sound.
After one particularly taut Knick game at the Garden, a referee's ear was aching and he told another referee, "This one lady was distinctly on my back and one of these days I'll turn around and give her a piece of my mind."


A Mother Teaches School Board a Lesson
As Juanita Rodriguez headed for two big Manhattan television studios on Friday, her thoughts began to wander: What would the questions be like?
How would she answer?
Finally, she muttered, "I won't get myself into anything like this again."
Such apprehension was surprising; it was coming from a woman who just last week had led a loud and defiant boycott of Eastern District High School in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.


POSTINGS: Museum and Memorial; A Holocaust Center for L.I.
Work is to begin next spring in Manhasset, L.I., on a Holocaust resource center that will serve as a combination memorial, museum and education center.
The center will go up on a portion of the property owned and occupied by Temple Judea, a synagogue at 333 Searingtown Road, where that road meets the westbound service road of the Long Island Expressway.
Temple Judea has donated the land for the center and members of its congregation are raising funds for its construction.


23 Questions; Mr. President:
This summer, Americans thrilled to the performance of the Dream Team in Barcelona.
But if Spain had our immigration policy, which prevents anyone infected with H.I.V. from entering the U.S., Magic Johnson would never have been allowed to play.
Last month, Mr.
Johnson quit the National Commission on AIDS.
How can you justify this country's continued discrimination against the world's Magic Johnsons?
And how do you explain that someone so clearly committed to fighting the epidemic would charge that your Administration has "utterly ignored" this crisis?
*
Since you took office, 483 banks have failed, depleting the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to the point where it has a $5.5 billion deficit.
Your Administration says that as many as 100 more are likely to go under after the election.
One study estimates these failures will cost taxpayers $100 billion during the next decade -- on top of the billions we're already paying in the savings and loan bailout.
Why haven't you alerted the public to this imminent disaster, and why didn't your Administration fight to increase the F.D.I.C. fund this spring?


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review of Li Yu's "Tower for the Summer Heat" on Sept. 27 rendered a phrase incorrectly in the final sentence, reversing the reviewer's meaning.
The sentence should have read, "It is, like Li Yu's other tales, a study in monstrous theft, a battle in the inconclusive war of wits that admits few victims and little enlightenment."


OCT. 4-10: Overridden at Last; Congress Defies Bush Over Cable Rates
It took four years, but as Congress left town last week it finally overrode one of President Bush's vetoes, his 36th.
But that was hardly an epochal moment over an issue like abortion, one that defines political fault lines in the capital.
Instead, the override enacted legislation that would reregulate the cable television industry.
For Mr.
Bush, the issue may have been philosophical -- the idea that regulation is intrinsically bad for the economy was his basic argument against the bill.
But for the two-thirds majorities -- 74 to 25 in the Senate and 308 to 114 in the House -- who overrode the veto, that was beside the political point.


Jack Rabbits and Soldier Boys
To the Editor:
Reading Tom Ferrell's review of "Bat Bomb: World War II's Other Secret Weapon," by Jack Couffer (Sept. 20), I recalled my days in the Joint Chiefs of Staff organization at the Pentagon in the late 1950's.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Sam Llewellyn's suspense novels are about the sea, yacht racing and the forces of good versus the forces of evil.
Mr.
Llewellyn is a graceful writer with a sharp feeling for his subjects and characters, and his books have proved to be winners, as demonstrated once more in BLOOD KNOT (Pocket Books, $20).
Mr.
Llewellyn's central character, Bill Tyrrell, is a giant of a man who was a top investigative reporter for a major London daily.
But now he is retired, and he enjoys taking underprivileged young people on his sailboat, Vixen, for short cruises.
His idea is to get some discipline into the kids, teach them to work as a team; eventually, they might join a flotilla of tall ships that is making the rounds of the Continent.


The Gridlock Congress; The 102d Will Be Remembered as Much For Its Embarrassments as Its Legislation
Exit snarling.
The 102d Congress left town this week without good humor or credibility, remembered as much for its embarrassments as for its legislation, and notable for battles with President Bush when one side or the other claimed victory but national problems like the recession endured.
This Congress will make the history books, but primarily for foreign policy, for moments when it followed Mr.
Bush's lead and voted for war in the Persian Gulf and for peace with Russia, along with foreign aid, after a cold war that had lasted longer than the tenure of almost every Senator or Representative.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ALL MEN A DANCIN'
An array of male dancers that includes Honi Coles, one of the country's most accomplished tap dancers, and Fernando Bujones, principal dancer with the American Ballet Theater and numerous other companies, will participate in the Connecticut Ballet Theater's "Celebration of Men in Dance," to be held on Saturday at the new Rich Forum Theater in Stamford.


In the Lineup: A Selection of New and Vintage Lamps
AMONG these old and new lamps are several hybrids: contemporary reworkings of earlier models.
The tole palm tree, for example, is a remake of a turn-of-the-century French original, while the motel light pairs a 1950's base and a new shade printed with a photograph by the artist.
As for bulbs, think of them as accessories to be changed from time to time, like shoes or a handbag: Switching the color is a quick way to alter the look of a room.
The wardrobe of bulbs shown here includes reflectors with silvered bases that direct the beam and Chromalux bulbs, which give off a slightly pinkish light that is more flattering than that of a standard pink bulb.
For product information, see page 54.
Product Information: 1.
Handmade wax-treated paper crown lamp with string stitching and copper wire trim by Roberto Gerosa, $450.
At Claiborne, 452 West Broadway. 2.
"Etz" lamp with fossilized coral base, painted metal stem and square linen shade (not shown) from Homage a Giacometti Collection, Fine Art Lamps, $339.
At Light Inc., 1162 Second Avenue. 3.
Lamp with wooden base, brass tube and glass bowl (shade not shown) from the 1940's, signed by Heifetz, $1,500.
At Alan Moss, 88 Wooster Street. 4.
Lamp with alabaster base and woven palm shade from the 1940's, $1,500.
At Alan Moss. 5.
Glazed terra-cotta bust lamp with gilded wood base and velvet trim, late 1930's or early 40's, $1,500.
At Alan Moss. 6.
Vintage table lamp with cream-colored leather base and airbrushed fiberglass shade with leather lacing by Harvey Probber, $2,800 a pair.
At Alan Moss. 7.
Custom-painted tole palm tree lamp, reproduction of an antique, $630.
At Lexington Gardens, 1008 Lexington Avenue. 8.
Venetian glass lamp, circa 1910-1920, with clear glass base, pink and blue florets and pink shade (not shown), $990 for a pair.
At Suttonbridge, 328 East 59th Street. 9.
Fruit lamp with 1920's bronze base and new shade of multicolored velvet grapes on copper-and-brass wire mesh frame, $2,400.
At Judyth van Amringe, 107 Greene Street. 10.
"Madonie" lamp, 16 inches high, with enameled steel base and nylon Lycra cone in red, blue, orange, green, brown or cream and brown by Martha Davis for Able Design, $99.
At Modern Age, 795 Broadway. 11.
Motel lamp with 1950's base and new shade of photosensitive material printed with a photograph.
One of a kind by Dean Brown, $225.
Shade alone, $200.
Available with custom photograph to order.
At 280 Modern, 280 Lafayette Street. 12.
"Miss Sissi" plastic lamp with base and shade in purple, red, green or white by Philippe Starck for Flos, $95.
At Modern Age. 13.
Brass globe hanging lantern, made in Egypt, with star cutouts and glass "jewels." In three sizes: small, $195; medium, $240; large, $270.
At Katie Ridder, 944 Lexington Avenue. 14.
"Cefalu" lamp, 16 inches high, with enameled steel base and nylon Lycra cone in red, blue, orange, green, brown or cream and brown by Martha Davis for Able Design, $110.
At Modern Age. 15.
Slanted lamp with metal stem and base and a plastic-treated cloth shade in blue, red, white, yellow or green by Christian Ghion and Patrick Nadeau, $185.
At Ad Hoc Softwares, 410 West Broadway. 16.
See caption 10. 17.
See caption 12. 18.
Brass and painted metal 1950's tripod lamp with wooden ball; new shade (not shown) is printed with a photograph of a hamburger joint.
One of a kind by Dean Brown, $225; shade alone, $200.
At 280 Modern. 19.
Selection of bulbs, 25 watts to 150 watts, including standard ("A"), tubular, flamescent (chandelier) and reflector models, $1.90 to $19.
Chromalux bulbs in standard and reflector styles, $7 to $17.95.
At Just Bulbs, 938 Broadway.


Broadway Cares
The winner was Equity's AIDS program as a hotel floor became a casino, Oct. 4.


Janine Frentress, Steven Pickhardt
Janine E. Frentress, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Frentress of Manchester, Iowa, was married yesterday to Steven C. Pickhardt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Pickhardt of Pittsford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Henry Albeke performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich, Conn.


In France, the Baths on a Budget
THE road begins to lift and dip over gentle hills as you approach Eugenie-les-Bains from the flat wooded area of Les Landes to the north.
All around are the fields that grow the corn that feeds the geese that produce the foie gras for which this section of the Aquitaine is famous.
Every other farm sports a hand-painted sign inviting you to stop and shop for therich, cholesterol-packed delicacy and the other great regional specialty, Bas-Armagnac firewater.
But when you reach Eugenie itself billboards proclaim that you have just arrived at "The No. 1 Slimming Village in France," the fiefdom of Michel Guerard, whose luxurious 40-acre complex has attracted so many of France's beautiful but slightly overweight people.
Working from a small restaurant in Asnieres, a distinctly nonchic suburb of Paris, Mr.
Guerard almost single-handedly invented novelle cuisine 20-odd years ago.
In 1974 he and his wife, Christine, moved to Eugenie, opened a restaurant, renovated the thermal baths and refurbished the old hotel.
Eugenie-les-Bains -- in the southwest corner of France about 450 miles from Paris -- quickly became a mecca for film stars, politicians, TV personalities, captains of industry


C.I.A. AND JUSTICE FEUD OVER INQUIRY IN IRAQ LOAN CASE
A fractious and public dispute between two usually secretive agencies worsened today as officials of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Justice Department accused each other of concealing information about a multi-billion dollar bank fraud involving Iraq.
The unusual finger-pointing over the case came after reports that C.I.A. officials had disclosed to Congress on Thursday that, at the urging of the Justice Department, they had deliberately withheld information about the bank fraud from Federal prosecutors in Atlanta.


On the Road? Vote Anyway
About 10 million Americans are away from home each Election Day, according to the Vote America Foundation.
The foundation, dedicated to increasing voter participation, reminds those travelers who are registered voters that they can cast their ballots anyway.
Details of absentee voting vary by state so absentee voters should call their local board of elections (usually listed in the blue pages in the back of telephone books) for details.
But these are the basics, according to the foundation: To get an absentee ballot by mail, send a letter requesting one at least week before you will be leaving.
The letter should include your full name, address at which you are registered, Social Security number, birth date and a signature of your full name.
Absentee ballots sent by mail must be postmarked the day before Election Day and be received within seven days of the election.


Sports of The Times; Knuckleball Captures Prime Time
YOU could envision it all over America yes terday little children, grown men, women who think their time has come.
All of them out in backyards and playgrounds, digging their fingertips into the stitches of a baseball.
In one glorious prime-time display, the knuckleball has become fashionable, the ticket to the major leagues, to fame and fortune.
Boxers are throwing away their gloves.
Musicians are hocking their guitars.
Savings and loan officials and investment brokers and other scam artists left over from the 80's are putting their clients on hold while filing their fingernails.
The knuckleball will be the get-rich scheme of the 90's.


Cleaning Outdoor Items Prolongs Their Lives
TAKING sufficient time to clean, repair and store outdoor items carefully will prolong their lives and make them immediately available for use in the spring.
Wash aluminum or chromed lawn furniture before storing it.
First, rinse items with hard spray from a garden hose to loosen dirt, and then scrub them with a stiff bristle brush dipped in household or car-washing detergent and water.
Rinse again with clear water, and then allow the items to dry.


Nothing New Under the Sun
To the Editor:
In "Ratso Rizzo Redux? Not if He Can Help It"  [ Sept. 27 ] , Bernard Weinraub writes that Laura Ziskin, the producer, and Alvin Sargent, the screenwriter, initially conceived the idea for the plot of the movie "Hero." He quotes Ms.
Ziskin as asking "What would happen if a hero turned out to be a crumb?"


Return of the Gala
Whitney revived its black-tie events: drinks, dinner and dancing in the galleries, Oct. 5.


Hampton Court Renting Flats
The Landmark Trust, a British charity that preserves historic and often eccentric buildings by restoring them and renting them to vacationers, has added two apartments at Hampton Court Palace, once home to Henry VIII, to its portfolio.
If repair and restoration work at the palace -- on the southwestern edge of London -- runs on schedule the apartments will be ready to rent early next year.
It will be the first time that any part of any royal palace in Britain has been used in this way, and the first time the Landmark Trust has acted as an agent for a historic building it doesn't own.
The apartments, named Fish Court and the Georgian House, will be rented as housekeeping units.
Fish Court, in the Tudor part of the palace, sleeps six guests in two single bedrooms, one twin-bedded room and one double-bedded room.
Prices will range from about $425 for four nights in the winter to $1,200 for four nights in midsummer, although dates have yet to be set. (Prices calculated at $1.78 to the pound.)


S.B.A. Coming Here to Help Businesses
THE circuit riders are here -- ministering to small-business owners.
Once a month, representatives from the Small Business Administration district office in Manhattan will set up shop in different Westchester locations to show owners of small-businesses and would-be entrepreneurs how the administration's programs and services can help them.
And since owners of small businesses find it difficult to leave their offices during normal working hours, the center will accommodate them by opening at 4 P.M. and remaining open until 8 P.M., which is a radical departure from the Government's normal 8 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. workday.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about state taxes misstated some figures for Ohio.
The state's spending per $100 of personal income in fiscal 1979 was $15.87.
It increased by 12 percent from fiscal year 1979 to 1990.


Sports of The Times; One School System Stands on Principle
THE coach's voice boomed out across a crowded auditorium, followed by a dramatic drum roll after each name was called.
One by one, the football players ran down a long, sloping aisle and joined teammates on the auditorium stage.
The underclassmen were introduced first, then the seniors.
After that, the undefeated freshman team, then the cheerleaders.
With each new introduction the students seemed to cheer a little louder, chanting win-win-win slogans and singing fight-fight-fight songs.


Anne Ellett, Richard Sammons
Anne Fairfax Ellett, a daughter of Phoebe F. Ellett of Williamsburg, Va., and the late Col.
Charles C. Ellett of the Army, was married yesterday to Richard Franklin Sammons, a son of Mack R. Sammons of Phoenix and Meredith Baker of Delaware, Ohio.
The Rev.
Cotesworth Lewis, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Jamestown Memorial Church in Jamestown, Va.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 13 about a truck museum near Mason City, Iowa, misidentified the maker of the Reo truck.
It was Ransom E. Olds.


Talking: Tax Law; Reaping Benefits of A Change
UNTIL two months ago, owning a co-op or condominium brownstone or loft-style apartment in New York City meant paying property taxes higher than for a similar unit in a high-rise building.
An informal study made this year of 300 apartments in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn by Roger Melzer, president of an eight-unit co-op at 156 Prospect Park West, found that apartments in buildings of 11 units or less were being assessed as much as 25 percent higher, on average, than those in larger buildings.


Coy 'Philadelphia Story'
PHILIP BARRY has been one of the few writers in American theater to tackle the comedy-of-manners form in which the goings-on of the upper classes take on a satiric and even moralistic view.
Of his Broadway hits, "The Philadelphia Story" is still the best known, owing mainly to the George Cukor movie starring Katharine Hepburn, Cary Grant and James Stewart that pops up frequently on late-night television.


Lisa B. Seiden, Gerald McGowan
Lisa Brooke Seiden, a daughter of Steven and Katherine Seiden of New York, was married last evening to Gerald Gunter McGowan, a son of Gerald and Mary McGowan of Floral Park, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles Nosser officiated at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Davidson took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
McGowan, 25 years old, is a portfolio analyst in the investment advisory subsidiary of the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 27 about Kauai, Hawaii, misidentified the hotel in which the actor Don Johnson was staying during Hurricane Iniki.
It was the Hyatt Regency Kauai.


Holik's Hat Trick Adds Zest to Rivalry
It was only the first game of the season between the cross-river rivals, but the atmosphere the Devils and the Rangers created here tonight was an electrifying one that was reminiscent of their playoff confrontation last season.
The Devils prevailed, 4-2, on the strength of three goals by Bobby Holik and marvelous goaltending by Craig Billington, who turned back 29 shots while yielding goals to Joey Kocur and Paul Broten.


Lessons From a Man Who Froze the Moment
INTERESTED in honing your powers of visual observation?
Consider the new book on the photographer Cornell Capa and, after slowly contemplating his pictures, read his notes at the back of the book explaining his techniques.
This black-and-white picture book, "Cornell Capa Photographs" (Little, Brown, $60), is a textbook in disguise, loaded with lessons in seeing, photographic thinking, camera technique, darkroom printing, lighting and capturing the moment.


Mutual Funds; Readers' Questions Answered
Who gets the sales commission when mutual fund investors buy shares directly from the company and not from a broker?
Following are answers to this and other recent questions from readers about fund jargon, safety and more.
Question: When I buy shares in a load fund, the sales charge is used to compensate the broker who sold the shares.
What happens if I buy directly from the company?


Morning-After Use for Abortion Pill
The abortion-inducing drug RU486, the French pill that has become an issue in the abortion debate in the United States, now appears to work as a morning-after birth control pill.
Some advocates of the pill argue that the finding should shift the balance in the American debate over legalizing the drug.
A group of Scottish scientists reported last week that RU486 is very effective in preventing pregnancies in women who have had unprotected sexual intercourse in the preceding 72 hours.
It is as good as a regimen already used by many emergency rooms for sexual assault victims as well as by college health clinics, and Planned Parenthood clinics: take two birth control pills, wait 12 hours and take two more pills -- a process that causes much more nausea and vomiting than RU486.


Broadway on the Road, Classics and More
REGIONAL theaters are setting their stages with repertories of classics in new adaptations and novel guises as well as with original works that just might make a difference.
And in a new season, heads are being turned by a certain glitter more redolent of Broadway than its alternative.
"Guys and Dolls," for example, is reported to be a just-so replica of last season's Broadway knockout (which may be the most rapturously endorsed musical revival ever), and the national company was rounded up in a flash.
The touring version that had its beginning at the Bushnell in Hartford on Sept. 15, just five months after Broadway's still-sold-out production opened, is to be seen for three weeks, not just the customary one or two, at the Shubert in New Haven come December.


Love for Art and Things Most People Don't Want
NAME: Joanne Leonhardt Cassullo.
IDENTITY: Texas philanthropist and trustee of the Whitney Museum of American Art.
HOME: Upper East Side.


League's Playing Field Has Become a Court
Marie Jensen-Thomas wants everyone to know that she is not one of those wives who battles with her husband each weekend over how frequently the television is tuned to football.
"Myself and another member of the jury, we both love and watch a lot of football and are big football fans," said Jensen-Thomas, one of the eight women who made up the jury in McNeil v. the National Football League, the recent antitrust trial in Minneapolis.
"Especially when the trial first started, as a group we were quite put off by all the attorneys.  They talked way down to us like they thought we didn't even know what a football looked like."


Update; Judge Says Jean Harris Should Be Released
A prominent judge who helped uphold Jean Harris's murder conviction in the killing of the Scarsdale diet doctor Herman Tarnower says Ms.
Harris should go free.
Vito Titone, now a judge on the state's highest court, also said he wished he had done more to convince his fellow judges that Ms.
Harris should have been convicted of manslaughter, not murder.


Majors Have a Youth Movement Going That's Worth Keeping an Eye On
This is not a post-season major league all-star team.
None of the players on this team will earn bonuses for being on the team.
Nor will they receive plaques, rings, engraved trays, gold gloves or silver bats.
This is an all-star team of young emerging stars, players whose continued development established them as legitimately outstanding or whose performance proved that a previous outstanding season was no fluke.
The players who have made this team were beyond the rookie stage this year, but for the most part they have spent no more than three years in the majors.
There are a few exceptions, most notably Gary Sheffield of San Diego, who at the age of 23 showed that he wasted his first three years in the majors.


Choosing Berries for Eating or for Show
IT'S berry time not only for the delicious ones that are eaten but also for the ornamental ones that are decorating many shrubs, vines and trees.
The most obvious cultivated shrub that is a big showoff now is Pyracantha or firethorn.
Its gorgeous orange berries can be seen for blocks.
The plant is stiff and lends itself nicely to training along chimneys or fences.
The summer flowers are not too significant and most gardeners grow the plant for the gorgeous orange berries, which are favorites with birds.


2 Parades In Rivalry To Honor Columbus
It's a tale of two parades up Fifth Avenue -- one today, the other tomorrow -- each with thundering bands and colorful floats, seas of flags and galaxies of stars, politicians and other celebrities, all mingling with tens of thousands of marchers bursting with ethnic pride.
But these two parades, in a friendly but staunch Hispanic-American vs.
Italian-American rivalry that goes back many years, lay claim to the same hero: Christopher Columbus on the 500th anniversary of his voyage of discovery to the New World.


Writers' Center Behind Workshops at Project
As the chairwoman of the Hudson Valley Writers' Center, an organization which is totally administered by volunteers but committed to innovative programs in the arts, I was gratified to see that three of our projects are mentioned in three different articles in the Sept. 27 issue of the Westchester Weekly.
Although this section of The New York Times appears only once a week, our board has found that your writers have covered our programs in a more responsive and thorough manner than the local papers, which are published on a daily basis.


Becoming More Aware of Chanterelles
IN recent years, chanterelles, which for most of us were a rare treat, have become extremely popular in the United States.
Now, they not only show up on the menus of restaurants across the nation but they are also a familiar sight in the fruit and vegetable departments of specialty shops.
From now through the winter they will be available -- with varying degrees of quality.
Recently, the ones on the market have been excellent.
American chanterelles grow in the wild in the Pacific Northwest and some places on the East Coast.
They are larger than their European counterparts (some as big as demitasse saucers in the last couple of weeks), but they have as much flavor.
They should be plump, their frilled edges firm, not sunken or broken.
They will keep for about a week, covered with a lightly dampened kitchen towel.


Now It's Fashionable To Pay Less for Clothes
A FORMAL event next month has Katie Goldberg pursuing the perfect sequined or velvet bolero jacket.
But instead of searching at Bloomingdale's or Saks Fifth Avenue, the Mount Kisco graphics designer and mother of two haunts stores like Consigner's Closet in her community, where used garments sell for a fraction of their original price.
"Rather than spend $200 or $300 at a department store, I'll shop around," Ms.
Goldberg said.
"I shopped consignment stores when I was pregnant and needed a dress for a black-tie affair. Some of my friends have an attitude about used clothes, but I take everything to the dry cleaner's first."


Clinton Promises He'll Say More About His Health
Gov.
Bill Clinton, responding to questions from news organizations, said today that he would soon make public more detailed information about his medical history, but a top aide said the candidate would continue to deny reporters access to his doctors.
"I believe the American people must be assured that candidates for the Presidency are physically sound," Mr.
Clinton said, in a statement by his campaign staff in Kansas City, Mo., where he was preparing yesterday for the first Presidential debate.
"Several months ago, I released statements from my doctors confirming that I am in excellent health, but as Election Day draws near, I believe it necessary to provide more details."


Britt I. Lacher Marcus C. Tauber
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Lacher of Somerset, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Britt Ilene Lacher to Marcus Coudert Tauber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yale D. Tauber of New Canaan, Conn.
A December 1993 wedding is planned.


Vidisha Dehejia And Ashvin Patel
Vidisha Makarand Dehejia, the daughter of Makarand V. Dehejia of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Dr.
Nina M. Dehejia, was married yesterday to Dr.
Ashvin Ishvar Patel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ishvarbhai S. Patel of Great Neck, L.I.
Pandit Niranjan Vaidya, a Hindu priest, performed the ceremony at the Woodlawn Plantation in Mount Vernon, Va.
Mrs.
Patel, 29 years old, is an assistant commercial manager in marketing at the Lever Brothers Company, the consumer products manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the vice president of corporate business development at the International Finance Corporation, a branch of the World Bank in Washington.
Her mother was an obstetrician and gynecologist at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.


Stricklin Gets New Ride
JUNIOR JOHNSON announced yesterday that 31-year-old HUT STRICKLIN of Calera, Ala., will drive one of Johnson's cars on the Nascar Winston Cup tour next season, as teammate to BILL ELLIOTT, Johnson's other driver.
The change had been rumored for several weeks.
Stricklin, whose car will be sponsored by McDonald's restaurants, will replace STERLING MARLIN, 35 years old, who started driving for Johnson in 1991.
Marlin's performance with the Johnson's team, one of the most successful outfits in the sport, has been a disappointment.
Marlin has not won a race in 244 career Winston Cup starts.


Christine Norling, Andrew S. Jones
Christine McDiarmid Norling, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Parry M. Norling of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to Andrew Scott Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald L. Jones of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Allan Hohlt, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral Church of St.
John.
Mrs.
Jones, 25 years old, is the collections management assistant for photography at the Textile Museum in Washington.
She graduated from Duke University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in museum studies from George Washington University.
Her father is a planning director for research and development at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington.


Missouri Governor's Race Focuses on Inquiry
The Missouri Attorney General, William L. Webster, is best known nationally for the landmark United States Supreme Court case in 1989 in which he defended Missouri's law restricting abortions.
But in this fall's campaign for Governor, pitting Mr.
Webster, a Republican, against Lieut.
Gov.
Mel E. Carnahan, the state's hottest issue is a grand jury investigation into a supplementary workers' compensation program, the Second Injury Fund, which pays extra benefits to workers with previous medical problems that complicate on-the-job injuries.


Tories Back Major on Europe Treaty. Sort Of.
After a week of sharp divisions and bitter wrangling, Prime Minister John Major rallied his fractious Conservative Party to his side Friday, holding out a vision of European union in which Britain's identity would remain undiminished.
As the party's annual conference ended in the coastal resort of Brighton, Mr.
Major had the last word on his critics, blending appeals to British nationalism with a grim warning that Britain could not afford "to be left "scowling in the wings while other people make the policy for our continent."


Streetscapes: Building Atop Railroad Yards; A 1902 Precedent for Trump's Plan
IN the long wrestle over Donald Trump's Riverside South project, almost everyone says it's an unprecedented plan for New York City -- 13 city blocks to be created out of thin air over a rail yard.
But 90 years ago the New York Central Railroad began an almost identical project, differing principally in one aspect: It excited almost no controversy.
The contrast between the respective eras casts light on what change meant to the city then and what it means now.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
First Avenue between 34th and 41st Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the First Avenue street fair.
Madison Avenue between 23d and 42d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the We Care About New York street fair.


Robbed
To the Editor: I read with great interest Betsy Wade's Practical Traveler column "How to Get Cash after a Robbery" (Aug. 16) because I was a victim of a purse snatching in February in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Unfortunately, all of my personal documents were in my purse -- passport, plane ticket, credit cards, traveler's checks, driver's license -- as well as prescription eyeglasses, and more.
Luckily, in a separate bag I had a photocopy of my passport and driver's license, a record of my travelers' checks, and the numbers to call for credit card replacement.
Within 48 hours I was able to replace these documents without difficulty.


You Look Familiar . . . A Supermodel, Perhaps?
Last Monday night at Russell Simmons's birthday party at the Coffee Shop on Union Square, the guests were captivated by a young model in the crowd who looked strikingly like the supermodel Iman.
"They say it even back home," said Luna Mohamed, who, like Iman, is a native of Somalia.
"When I saw her pictures growing up, I used to think I should come to America and do it, too."


A 'D' in B-29's?
To the Sports Editor:
Peter Levine ("A Symbol of Possibility and Pride," The Times, Sept. 27) clearly knows a great deal about Jewish athletes.
He might do some research on World War II Army Air Force bombers, however.
Hank Greenberg did not fly a B-29 over Germany.
The B-29 was used in the bombardment of Japan.
MARSHALL R. EFFRON Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Pontiac's Grand Prix: 30 Years of Flash
IT'S hard to believe, but 1992 marks the 30th anniversary of the Grand Prix, the popular Pontiac that had a lot to do with improving automotive architecture in the latter part of the 1960's and beyond.
That first GP, vintage 1962, has been pretty much forgotten, but the re-do a year later is the one that a lot of people remember, given its tasteful looks and crisp shape.


D'Amato's Barrage: Smart Bombs or Smoke?
Like a squadron of angry bumblebees, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's campaign commercials have buzzed for days around the head of his rival in the New York Senate race, circling and stinging Robert Abrams in a shifting mix of attacks so sudden that he can barely breathe before the next sound bite.
Some of the ads are nasty, brutish and short -- just 10 seconds -- yet funny, too.
Others are longer -- 30 seconds -- and meaner.
No fewer than 10 ads have run on television in the last 25 days, and together with others on radio, they cost about $1 million a week to broadcast in the 10 media markets statewide.


Ripe for Dessert
Fall is an impetuous season for desserts.
The dance between summer and the nippy north winds makes the sweet tooth long for a cooling fruit sorbet one minute, a warming slab of tart pear pie the next.
Ingredients sway to their own bittersweet sonata.
Summer peaches and pints of raspberries jam the markets, only to be replaced by pears, plums and figs.
Underlying both appetite and availability is the knowledge that these weeks are the outer limits, the final gamut before everything turns to apples, oranges, lemons and green-picked tropical fruits.


AIDS Memorial Quilt Unfolded in Washington


OCT. 4-10: Kennedy Autopsy; Pathologists Break Silence On a President's Disease
John F. Kennedy described himself in 1960 as "the healthiest candidate for President in the country." Yet before Kennedy became President, and throughout his 1,000 days in the White House, rumors circulated about his health, particularly about the status of his adrenal glands.
Last week two pathologists who took part in the Kennedy autopsy broke a vow to keep silent about their findings and offered in the Journal of the American Medical Association what appears to be conclusive evidence that the President had adrenal insufficiency, or Addison's disease.
During his Presidency, Kennedy's cheeks periodically became puffy, suggesting he was being treated with cortisone and other hormones that compensate for the role the adrenal glands play in regulating circulation, inflammatory responses and minerals in the body.
But Kennedy and his aides, including the White House physician, Dr.
Janet Travell, either flatly denied the rumors or used cleverly worded cover stories to mislead the public.
Some journalists who covered Kennedy say such a disclosure probably would have cost Kennedy the election.


'Screening History'
To the Editor:
Michael Kammen's review of "Screening History," by Gore Vidal (Aug. 30), reports that Mr.
Vidal wanted to grow up to be (somewhat confusingly) Puck or Mickey Rooney.
It's comforting to know that he achieved both ambitions.
JOHN CAFFREY Scottsdale, Ariz.


Looking Beyond Deng, Leaders Find Chinese Looking Beyond Them
WHEN China's Communist elite shuffle into the Great Hall of the People tomorrow to open a rare party congress, analysts around the world will study every nuance for insights into which factions are winning and losing.
The larger question is how much any of this matters.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Baker Re-emerges as Bush's Campaign Chief, Only to Be Hit With Criticism
Once the Bush Administration was proud of its collegiality.
Now Bush aides and friends paint a picture of a White House awash with scalding leaks and ruthless back-stabbing, with even the President as a target.
The intrigue resembles a campaign version of the classic murder-mystery board game Clue.
The White House game board based on accounts of Administration players might look like this: Richard Darman in the West Wing with a noose.
James Baker hiding in the conference room with a candlestick.
Nicholas Brady in the Treasury with a revolver. (Aimed at Mr. Darman.) The conservatives in the Cabinet room with wrenches. (Looking for Mr. Darman and Mr. Baker.) Mrs.
Bush in the library with a lead pipe. (Also looking for Mr. Darman.) President Bush in the Oval Office with a knife. (Gripped in self-defense.)


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 26  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 275,000
30 West 15th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, 10-ft.-windows, south exposure; maintenance $917; 6% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Delson/Ginsberg)  Murray Hill 325,000  155 East 38th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, entry foyer, terrace, 2 exposures; common charge $395, taxes $4,200 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  East Village 155,000
170 Second Avenue (11th St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,032-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, dining area, 9 1/2-ft. ceilings; washer/ dryer in unit, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,016, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kleigerman)  Upper East Side 2.725 million
980 Fifth Avenue (79th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, library, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $4,200, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 800,000
261 West 90th Street  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, one-family, 4 1/2-story town house; entry foyer, dining room, library, remodeled kitchen, bay windows, 17-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $9,990 (Broker: Gail Zogney Real Estate)  BRONX  Fieldston 640,000
4701 Iselin Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached stucco-framed Tudor; center-hall, dining room, 24-by-14-ft. living room, fireplace, powder room, c/a, 1-car garage, 100-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $4,700 (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  Van Courtlandt Village 300,000
3977 Saxon Avenue  3-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms in two units; 1 bedroom in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 50-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $2,650 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN Ditmas Park West 227,000
475 Stratford Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached Dutch Colonial; dining room, breakfast nook, oak cabinets, private driveway, 40-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  Park Slope 497,500
180 St.
John's Place  2-family, 3-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, powder room, jacuzzi in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 19.6-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty)  Prospect Park South 235,000
98 Argyle Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family detached brick and wood-frame house; dining room, fireplace, original oak details, 2-car garage, 50-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  Corona 135,000
34-14 106th Street  2-family semi-attached frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 21-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  Jackson Heights 250,000
25-34 71st Street  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 22-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Rose Marie Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 177,000
26 Piedmont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached wood-frame Ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 56-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,394 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Huguenot 183,000
476 Stafford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached Hi-Ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)


Mutual Funds; The Added Overseas Risk
The recent European currency crisis helped to provide a good lesson for yield-hungry American investors who have been shifting their cash out of money market funds into higher-yielding investments.
Many moved their money into short-term global income funds.
But the global funds lost about 2 percent of their value in mid-September because of the foreign-exchange turmoil.
The lesson is fundamental, but it is worth repeating.
Bond-fund yields reflect the risk of the underlying investment: the greater the risk, the higher the yields, as the accompanying chart shows.


Painting a Set Four Different Ways Shows How Color Alters The Perception of Space
THERE'S not much left to the imagination here: The bare walls and ceiling of a set, designed by the architect Frederick Biehle and painted four different ways, demonstrate dramatically how color sculpts a room.
The creator of the palettes, Ken Charbonneau, the color and merchandising manager of Benjamin Moore &amp; Company, used the rule of thumb that cool colors recede and warm colors advance.
On this page, the gray-violet of the walls and the blush of the ceiling are equally pale, minimizing boundaries and creating the illusion of spaciousness.
"The chair looks almost suspended," says Charbonneau.
On the opposite page, the high contrast between the rich terra-cotta walls and the robin's egg-blue ceiling shrinks the room visually by emphasizing its borders.
"This intensity would work better in a hallway than in a space you have to live or work in," notes Charbonneau.
When the walls are painted yellow, as on page tk, they reflect and amplify the light; the cooler tone of an off-white ceiling keeps the brilliance from being overwhelming.
Green, shown on page tk, creates a more soothing atmosphere.
In fact, Charbonneau sees new interest in green, a color he classifies as a neutral.
Claiming it can be a background for any other hue, he invokes a higher authority: "Does nature make a mistake?"


Kathleen O'Neill Mark W. Lynch
Mrs.
James E. O'Neill of Monroe, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Kathleen Mary O'Neill to Mark William Lynch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Lynch of Fair Haven, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss O'Neil, 29 years old, is the marketing coordinator in New York for Meredith Custom Marketing, the marketing division of the Meredith Corporation, a publishing conglomerate based in Des Moines.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her late father was the president of Printing Sales Associates, a former printing brokerage company in Monroe.
Her mother, Margaret P. O'Neill, teaches English at Chalk Hill Middle School in Monroe.


OCT. 4-10: Shipping Plutonium; Not in Our Backyard, A Tiny Nation Tells Japan
For years, the Japanese Government has refused to say much about its most daring nuclear energy plan: to turn Japanese nuclear waste into plutonium at European reprocessing centers, then ship it to Tokyo to be burned as fuel.
The secrecy, the Government says, is needed to keep plutonium from terrorists.
But now, weeks before the first lightly guarded convoy is to leave France, countries along its possible routes -- South Africa, Malaysia, Singapore, Chile -- are telling Japan to steer clear of their waters.
While the risk of a disaster may be minuscule, the countries say, the results would be devastating: a speck of plutonium can cause cancer and it stays radioactive for thousands of years.
Most aggrieved are the Pacific island nations that have long been sites of nuclear testing and dumping grounds for radioactive waste.
"Japan has not even had the courtesy to tell us where the shipments are going, or what the emergency plans are," said Bernard Dowiyogo, the President of Nauru (pop. 9,000), last weekend in Tokyo.


'Screening History'
To the Editor:
In Michael Anderson's interview with Gore Vidal, Mr.
Vidal is quoted as saying, "In 1776 a higher percentage of the three million Americans could read history competently, even passionately  [ than today ] ." As one who has been studying the idea of an informed citizenry in America for several years, I offer the informed opinion that unless Mr.
Vidal is talking about biblical history, he is probably wrong, although there is no way to establish such a subjective opinion with certainty.


A Life as Prisoner of Europe's Hatreds
EUROPE echoes with anguish about the revival of old demons: of xenophobia and internment camps; of national chauvinism and religious warfare; of "ethnic cleansing" and the passivity of neighboring countries and ordinary neighbors, who manage to shut some inner eye to the atrocities in front of their faces.
Darya K. Detsik has been here before, and so has her homeland, Western Ukraine.
In her life is the whole recent history of this land, fought over many times in this atrocious century.
She has absorbed horror and tragedy like a Ukrainian Lear.


Mr. Smith Goes to Camp, but There's No Picnic
When the Knicks opened training camp on Friday, Charles Smith was introduced to life under Coach Pat Riley.
After the first three-hour practice session, Smith's 6-foot-10-inch body was in serious need of a nap.
He was sweaty.
He was sore.
He knew this was only the beginning.


New Age for Western Water Policy: Less for the Farm, More for the City
A new age is dawning in the American West.
Under inexorable urban, political and environmental pressures, water -- the lifeblood of this arid region -- has slowly begun to flow away from farms and ranches and toward the big cities.
Congress pushed along the trend on Thursday by passing the Omnibus Water Act, a turning point in Federal water policy.
The act would explicitly encourage farmers to sell their water to the cities and would reserve large amounts of water to repair environmental damage in California.
It would also pay for the final stage of a new dam project in Utah drawn up with the blessings of environmentalists.


Ms. Reynolds, Kenneth Abbott
Katherine M. Reynolds, an economist, was married yesterday to Kenneth C. Abbott, a banking executive.
The Rev.
Raymond Daley, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Chapel in New York.
Mrs.
Abbott, 30 years old, works at the Journal of Commerce, a newspaper for the shipping industry in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University, from which she received a master's degree in English.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Reynolds of Edison, N.J.
Her father is an assistant treasurer in the marketing department of the Provident Savings Bank in Jersey City, N.J.
Her mother, Catherine Reynolds, is an accountant at Fibrenetics Inc., a fiberglass composites maker in Woodbridge, N.J.


The Queen Of Clean
THERE'S SOMETHING WONDERFUL IN A philosophy that can be condensed to three words, and both Diana Vreeland and Eugenia Errazuriz shared this breezy succinctness.
According to Vreeland: "Elegance is refusal." And Errazuriz?
"Elegance means elimination." The elegantly obscure Errazuriz practiced what she preached.
Though she designed no furniture, had no clients, and little of her work was photographed, she is credited as one of the first to create a modern, minimalist esthetic.
Her achievement seems unlikely, given her background.
Born about 1860 in a small Chilean village, Errazuriz added to her family's silver-mine fortune by marrying a wealthy landscape painter, Jose Thomas Errazuriz.
The couple settled in Paris, where Madame Errazuriz attracted a high-profile following.
She sought out artists, supporting both Stravinsky and Diaghilev.
Described as an extraordinary beauty, with a beaked nose and raven hair, she was painted by John Singer Sargent.
Picasso adored her, and the designer Jean Michel Frank was a disciple.


Mistakes? The A's Make More Than a Few
If they looked like imposters today, like anything but themselves, it was only because the Oakland Athletics lacked the thing that has been as important as their pitching and their power.
When they needed it most, the A's lost their fundamental soundness.
They botched ground balls.
They threw wild pitches.
They left runners on base.
They showed poor coaching judgment.
They let their mistakes pile one on top of the other, and it left them with a 7-5 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays in the American League playoff.


Rev. James D. Watson, a Leader In Civil Rights Causes, Dies at 67
The Rev.
James D. Watson, an leader in housing, civil rights and peace causes as a pastor and New York regional head of the United Presbyterian Church, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Los Angeles Complex Calls In Muslim Guards
A short walk from the palms and broad sands of Venice Beach is Oakwood, a square-mile pocket of aging bungalows and condominiums where unemployment, drugs and violent crime are part of daily life.
The Shoreline Crips street gang claims this neighborhood as home turf.
So does a gang called V-13.
Gunfire is common.
Prostitutes and crack are available around the clock.


Q and A
Co-op Mortgage Paid Off  Question: I live in a Section 213 co-op.
The co-op's 40-year mortgage will be paid off in January 1993.
The board is being very secretive and has avoided inquiries as to what will happen next.
Now we hear rumors that it wants to take out another mortgage.
It was my understanding that once the mortgage was paid off, we would be free to sell our apartments for a profit, or at least have lower maintenances.
Can the board take out another mortgage without a vote by the shareholders? . . .
Linda Kay, Brooklyn.
Answer: Yes.
It may make for poor public relations, but it is not illegal for the board to be so secretive about its decisions.
That your co-op is a so-called Section 213 co-op does not diminish its right to conduct corporation business without consulting shareholders.


Honey, I Shrunk The Stereo
STIFF RENTS AND CRAMPED QUARters have compelled designers of home electronics to come to terms with residential realities.
The trend is to produce more sound with less equipment, for less money.
That's quite a switch from the days when listeners in quest of musical truth had to give house room -- and lots of it -- to stacks of scraggly-wired gadgetry and speakers as big as doghouses.
"You might call it a minimalist approach," explains a design executive for Denon, one of the companies spearheading this trend.
"We keep to essentials. That makes the equipment space-efficient. And we also try to make the equipment easier to use -- to 'unconfuse' the controls."


Side by Side by Side


A Baby on the Roof
SORROW FLOATS
By Tim Sandlin. 352 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company.


POSTINGS: 26 Stories on West 66th; Italians Buy Troubled Tower
After nine years in construction and dormancy, 22 West 66th Street, a vacant 26-story building, has been sold for $6.35 million to Stirling Equities, a New York subsidiary of a conglomerate based in Rome.
The 60,000-square-foot building was planned by its developer, the late Herbert Handman, as a luxury condominium.
And as it neared 80 percent completion, more than 25 percent of its 47 units were presold at prices up to $600,000.
The duplex penthouse with views of Central Park and the Hudson River was listed in 1984 at $4 million.


Drabek's Exit Line Reads 2 Playoff Losses
Doug Drabek, gone because again was not good enough, made his way to the dugout in the sixth inning, sprinting through the steady rain and the darkness of the personal moment.
There was too much respect at Three Rivers Stadium for there to be boos, but there was also too much hurt for there to be even polite applause.
Drabek then disappeared from sight, and the night's fatalism made it impossible not to wonder if he would be seen again in the uniform he was about to take off.


Data Bank/October 11, 1992


It's a Revival. It's a Re-Creation. It's a Premiere.
Martha Graham took on nothing less than the creation of "landscapes of the soul," as she put it, in work that was to change dance in America and throughout the world.
It was a radical departure from the fantastic fairy tales and exoticism that were the province of ballet and modern dance as Graham knew it.
Today, a year after her death, the Martha Graham Dance Company faces as daunting a challenge.
There will be no new dances from Graham.
Her company must not only preserve its heritage but grow.
And so the question becomes how to keep the institution as green as the little gardens that ring the Martha Graham Center for Contemporary Dance on East 63d Street.
The answer lies in large part in revivals of long-lost Graham works like "Panorama" and "Salem Shore," which will be performed by the Graham company during a weeklong season that opens on Tuesday at City Center.


Perla J. Delson and Maitland Jones 3d
Perla Jeanne Delson, a daughter of Anna P. Delson of New York and the late Morton H. Delson, was married yesterday to Maitland Jones 3d, the son of Susan Hockaday and Mr.
Jones Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Philip A. C. Clarke performed the ceremony at Christ Church United Methodist in New York.
Ms.
Delson, who is 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a designer for the architect Michael McDonough in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College.
She received a master's degree in architecture from Yale University, as did her husband.


Software -- Japan's Little Nightmare-in-the-Making
As Japan's economy has slumped in the last few months, various industries have successfully appealed for Government subsidies to help them retrain or at least keep paying unneeded workers.
The supplicants include smokestack industries like blast furnaces, plywood manufacturers and brick makers.
And software developers.
Japan's software industry is in dire straits.
Dozens of companies have gone bankrupt this year as corporations have cut computer spending.
More than just economic problems are at work, however.
There is a growing acknowledgment in the industry and in Government that the industry is badly organized and fundamentally uncompetitive.
Japanese companies sell almost no software outside the country.
And even in Japan, software is developed by what many consider an outmoded process.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; CANDIDATES CRAM FOR FIRST DEBATE
The Presidential candidates stayed mostly out of the public eye today, cramming for the first of three nationally televised debates that could be pivotal in efforts by President Bush to reverse his electoral fortunes, Gov.
Bill Clinton to cement his lead and Ross Perot to reclaim his reputation.
The first debate, on Sunday at 7 P.M.
Eastern daylight time on all major commercial networks and many cable stations, is expected to be the most watched single event so far in the campaign.
In preparation, Mr.
Bush took part in a mock debate at the White House theater room.
Mr.
Clinton, after running in a charity race in the morning, stayed at a hotel in Kansas City, Mo., rehearsing and resting his hoarse voice.
Mr.
Perot made no public appearances as he prepared in Dallas.


You Too Can Write Like a Political Pro!
EVERY four years, as surely as the swallows return to Capistrano -- or as predictably as the candidates return to Berlin, N.H. -- the country falls under the sway of campaign-speak, an election argot that is as American as apple pie, as comfortable as a pair of old shoes and just about as elegant.
What is to be done?
Hundreds of years ago, when type was set by hand, letter by letter, French printers realized that certain phrases occurred more frequently than others.
These they set in advance and put on a shelf, like sandwiches in a deli, handy to get to and ready to go.
Some scholars say this is the origin of the word "cliche."


Consulting the Stars
To the Editor:
Surely you have created a new low for a would-be responsible and intelligent journal by publishing an astrological business forecast in "A New World Order in the Stars" (Sept. 6).


New District Lines, New Challenges
SUZI OPPENHEIMER, the four-term Democratic State Senator from the Sound Shore area, has long taken pride in what she felt was a high level of name recognition in her district.
"We took a poll once and found that 56 percent of my constituents said they had actually met me," she said.
This year, redistricting came to Mrs.
Oppenheimer, as it must to all incumbents, and like other officeholders, she found that she has to seek out many new voters to solicit their support.
An aide to the Senator said that perhaps one-third of the voters in the redesigned 36th Senate District are new to Mrs.
Oppenheimer.


Northern Town's Fall Is Blow to Bosnia


Critical Moments; How Bush Lost Five Chances to Seize the Day
THE final act of a Presidential campaign brings its own brutal simplicity.
The handlers, the strategists, the subplots recede.
The polls acquire a sudden clarity.
The televised debates, which begin tonight, are the candidates' last best chance to affirm the voters' judgment, or to shake it.
Republicans have difficulty believing that it has come to this: A Republican President, under siege even in Texas and the Deep South, regions that once seemed congenitally Republican; a President struggling to push his approval rating above 40 percent just 18 months after he seemed so unassailable that most of the best and brightest Democrats never ventured into the field.


By the Way, Giants Face Cardinals
In a week dominated by Coach Ray Handley's confrontations with the news media, Lawrence Taylor's retirement announcement and Phil Simms's career-threatening injury, there is one afterthought.
The Giants have to play a game today.
Their opponent at Giants Stadium is the Phoenix Cardinals, like the Giants a 1-3 team with more bad days likely to come.
But at least the Cardinals are on an upswing after last Sunday's stunning 27-24 upset of the Washington Redskins.


Most Alumni Were Positive
To the Sports Editor:
Several pieces in The Times have indicated some Brown alumni would be opposed to a black football coach.
Whatever our departing athletic director, John Parry, may or may not have said, had Nebraska's Ron Brown accepted the offer by the president, Vartan Gregorian, in 1989 to become head coach, he would have been welcomed with open arms by the university community, including the overwhelming majority of our alumni.


White's Running Leads Way for Undefeated William Paterson
William Paterson 35, Upsala 13
Al White scored two touchdowns and rushed for 147 yards to lead William Paterson over Upsala, 35-13, yesterday at Wightman Field in Wayne, N.J.


Michele Lang And Scott Blair
Michele Susan Lang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Lang of New York, was married last evening to Scott David Blair, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Blair of Rochester.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Georgian Suite, a catering hall, in New York.
Mrs.
Blair, 29 years old, is the office manager at the New York law firm of Kane, Dalsimer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisele &amp; Richard.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the presiding partner at the New York law firm of Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; Specter's Challenger Gaining With Help of Ads and Debate
After flagging for months, Lynn H. Yeakel's Democratic campaign for the United States Senate has come to life, with assistance from more than $1 million in advertising and a strong performance in a recent debate with her Republican opponent, Senator Arlen Specter.
Ms.
Yeakel, a fund-raiser for women's charities who is making her first run for elected office, has rebounded from a nose-dive in popularity in public opinion polls in September, when she was as far as 16 percentage points behind Mr.
Specter.


BENEFITS
Evening for Cystic Fibrosis
TUESDAY -- A black-tie evening at the Pierre will benefit research projects of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and an auction of special vacation trips.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 986-8783.


Noblesse Largess
THE
LARGESSE
," Keith Bradsher of The New York Times wrote about new payments to farmers, "will be far less than the impression created by the President."
On the same day in the same paper, Michael Wines wrote, "While President Bush politicked across the Great Plains early last week, handing farmers some $1.8 billion in Federal
largess
. . . ."


2 Solo Shows That Go Their Own Ways
THE solo exhibitions at William Paterson College here are by William Hogan and Mark Gibian, artists who could scarcely have less in common.
Mr.
Hogan is a painter with a style that lies somewhere between Surrealism and folk art, owing a little something to Giorgio de Chirico, Marc Chagall and the Italian primitives in particular.
Most of his canvases are house-shaped, although the outlines seldom have much to do with what is on the surface.


Anyone Can See Our Devastated Forests
To the Editor:
Re "Bush Plan Protects Both Owls and Logging" (letters, Sept. 28): My great-great-grandparents homesteaded in the Pacific Northwest.
I grew up there, and it just tears my heart now every time I go home and see the devastation wrought by the timber interests.
My sister, who lives in Gig Harbor, says with sarcasm, "They call it forest management."


Golden Age of Printing Revisited
VISITORS to Davison Art Center, at Wesleyan University in Middletown, can see the pair of well-cut black riding boots -- or rather their silhouettes -- at 100 paces, hanging on the wall that faces the entrance of the gallery.
The image is Jim Dine's and he produced it in 1965 at Universal Limited Art Editions, the print shop in West Islip, L.I., that was founded by Tanya Grosman in 1956 and first visited by Peter and Susan Ralston in 1962.
Eventually the Ralstons acquired 78 prints, half of which now hang at the Davison under the title "30 Years at Universal Limited Art Editions," on view through Oct. 25.


The Awakening Chinese Consumer
Two weeks ago, the Yaohan Department Store Company of Japan broke ground for what will be the largest department store in Asia.
With almost 20 percent more selling space than even the Macy's at Herald Square, which claims to be the world's largest department store, the 1.3 million-square-foot palace of consumption will be filled with popular brands, from Sony televisions to Chanel perfume and Ritz crackers.
Its location? Not the affluent sprawl of Tokyo, Hong Kong or Singapore, but Shanghai.


Saving the Children Isn't Half Enough
To the Editor:
"Shortchanging the World's Children" (editorial, Sept. 17) reminds us that in September 1990 more than 70 heads of state met at the United Nations about the world's children.
They set goals and pledged support to reduce the infant mortality rate by one-third and the child malnutrition rate by 50 percent, and to insure basic education for 80 percent.
What is regrettable is not just that the United States contribution is falling $100 million short of the stipulated support.


Warmup Pitches
THE cliche is about the sizzle and the steak, but Jacqueline B. Reynolds is working a variation.
"We're not selling victories here," she said. "We're selling excitement."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: 10,000 Questions; In Quizzing Candidates, No Query Is Too Stupid
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton have been in seclusion with their coaches, trying to prepare for whatever awkward questions come up in tonight's debate.
But is there really anything left for them to learn?
With the possible exception of Socrates's students, it is doubtful that anyone has ever had more practice answering strange questions than this year's Presidential candidates.
From talk shows to news conferences to town meetings, running for President has become a commitment to answer anything anyone in America wants to ask -- scores of questions a day, probably at least 10,000 throughout the campaign, with no time off for stupidity or irrelevance.
Already this year, for instance, the candidates have actually tried to give intelligent answers to journalists and voters who asked:


Allison B. Trani, Robert A. Kellan
Allison Beth Trani, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore J. Trani of Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Andre Kellan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Kellan of North Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
Mario Costa officiated at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Kellan, 23 years old, is an actress who does commercials in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the chairman of the Mabon Securities brokerage in New York.


Nonpartisan Figures Appointed to Cabinet in Seoul
President Roh Tae Woo has dismissed three South Korean Cabinet members and appointed replacements whom he called "politically neutral" in an effort to contain a vote-buying scandal that threatens the governing party's prospects in presidential elections expected in December.
Mr.
Roh promised to take the steps after evidence came to light that leaders of the Democratic Liberal Party had bought votes in a legislative election in March.


Babette Allina, E. S. Roberts Jr.
Babette Allina, the daughter of Curt J. Allina of Olalla, Wash., and Hanna Allina of New York, was married yesterday to Elwood Scott Roberts Jr., a son of Frances F. Roberts of Burke, Va., and Mr.
Roberts of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Rabbi Joseph H. Gelberman took part in the service.
Ms.
Allina, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is the assistant curator at the Equitable Life Assurance Society's art gallery in New York.
She graduated from Bennington College.
Her father is the president of the Norpac Marketing Group, a food distribution company in Tacoma, Wash.
He developed the marketing for the Pez candy dispenser in the United States.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Hannelore Allina of Olalla.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Restaurant Wants To Focus on Food
As much as I appreciate the support, "About Long Island: The Thursday Night Phenomenon: 'They Just Seem to Show Up"  [ Aug. 30 ]  seems to have caused some confusion for many of our loyal patrons.
They have expressed concern that perhaps we have decided to change our course of direction from a successful restaurant to a "singles club." I would like to reassure people that this is not true, and in fact our commitment to food and service is stronger than ever.
From the initial concept through design and finally opening, the formula here was very simple -- great food, service and reasonable prices = longevity.
As a restaurant operator I am very sensitive to any night being hyped as the "in place." It is not because I don't love seeing a room full of people.
It is simply that overdemand leads to potential service problems, and hype nights generally are temporal.
My objective is that people should leave this restaurant and know that the focus of this place and ultimately its long term success is being cooked in the kitchen.
JOHN A. VITALE North St.
Grill, Great Neck


A Change In the Atmosphere
EMPTY a house completely, and three elements remain: light, color and a sense of cleanliness.
Any rethinking of the space starts with these basics.
So step back and focus on what is already in the home before adding more objects to it.
Reevaluate the lighting: Change the placement of a lamp -- or the color of a bulb -- to make a difference.
Use color to transform a room, so it appears larger, smaller, subtler or more dramatic.
Consider a clean and polished interior an absolute luxury for the senses.
There are precedents for this new scrutiny.
In the 1920's, Eugenia Errazuriz, a wealthy patron of Picasso's, pioneered a minimalist approach to the home that glorified cleanliness.
"If the kitchen is not as well kept as the salon . . . you cannot have a beautiful house," she declared.
To Errazuriz, elbow grease was a decorating ingredient as important as good taste.
It's all about taking another look at what is taken for granted.


Elayna C. Levine, David J. Kaplan
Elayna Cindy Levine and David Joshua Kaplan, lawyers in New York, were married last evening at Fresh Meadow Country Club in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein officiated.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 28 years old, is an associate at Smith Mazure Director &amp; Wilkins.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Levine of Oceanside, L.I.
A graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton, she received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a sales executive at Donnkenny Inc., a women's-clothing maker in New York.


U.S. Weighs Sending Arms to Muslims in Bosnia
Pentagon and State Department officials are exploring the idea of sending arms to the outgunned Muslims in Bosnia, but such intervention is opposed by senior officials and complicated by the Administration's hesitation to make a major reversal in policy so close to the Presidential elections.
The Administration is caught between Washington's reluctance to involve American military forces in the Balkan conflict and its goal of ending what President Bush last week called "a flagrant disregard for human life" in the Bosnian fighting.


Gay Politics Goes Mainstream
When David B. Mixner decided to come out of the closet, among the first people he called were his old friends Bill and Hillary Clinton.
So it seemed fitting that 15 years later, when Bill Clinton reached a turning point in his own life -- deciding he would run for President -- one of the first people he called was Mixner.
But instead of the unqualified support the Arkansas Governor had expected, there was a hitch.
"I said, 'Bill, I've lost over 180 friends to AIDS,' " recalls Mixner, an influential political organizer and fund-raiser in California.
" 'Before I can get behind this campaign, I have to know where you stand on this, where you stand on AIDS and our struggle for our freedom.' "


Massachusetts
To the Editor: I enjoyed the Massachusetts-related articles in the Aug. 30 issue but was surprised that the comments on the Marblehead Historical Society's Jeremiah Lee Mansion ("Marblehead's Passion for Preservation") did not mention the building's most notable interior feature: the hand-painted, custom-made English wallpapers from the late 1760's that incredibly survive in the hall, the parlor and the drawing room.
These nonrepeating scenic papers depict imaginary landscapes, many with classical ruins, and are bordered by elaborate trompe l'oeil frames and trophies.
Such design was a less expensive way for wealthy colonists to imitate the art-filled homes of the British nobility.
Documentation exists for four American installations from the 18th century, but the Lee mansion is the sole case of their survival on the original site.


Fraud Widespread in Hurricane Claims, U.S. Says
Accelerating the process of getting Federal assistance checks to people whose houses were destroyed by Hurricane Andrew has led to numerous attempts to defraud the Government, officials of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said on Friday.
A Fort Lauderdale woman has been arrested on charges that she lied in a claim for housing assistance by saying she owned a house damaged by the hurricane.


Columbus Runs Into Storm in Boston
Buddy Marino Cuozzo is the grand marshal of the Columbus Day parade on Monday in East Boston, a working-class, predominantly Italian-American section, and he is bitter.
"We're Italian-Americans, and they've taken all our heroes away from us," Mr.
Cuozzo said, sitting in his office in a battered old row house.
First, he said, Frank Sinatra was vilified by the press; then Geraldine A. Ferraro was defeated after a spate of rumors that her husband was linked to the Mafia.


Susan Barrett, Richard Malone
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Barrett of Manhasset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Veronica Barrett to Richard J. Luckyn Malone, the son of Mrs.
E.
Mabel Malone of Kingstone, Herefordshire, England, and the late John S. Malone.
A December wedding in planned.
Miss Barrett, 32 years old, is a vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Marist College.
Her father is a partner with the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.


Griffey Sr. Is Interested In Reds' Managerial Job
KEN GRIFFEY SR., a minor league hitting instructor for the Seattle Mariners, wants to talk to Cincinnati about the Reds' managerial vacancy.
BRIAN GOLDBERG, Griffey's agent, said Friday night that WOODY WOODWARD, the Mariners' vice president of baseball operations, had given permission for Griffey to discuss the job.


Fiber Artists' Creations Emphasize Rich Colors
IGNORING the current high-fashion passion for black, several fiber artists from around the country have forecast color -- rich, vibrant color -- for this season's "wearable art." Their jackets, dresses and accessories at the America House Gallery are painted, dyed or printed in a broad range of luscious hues.
Textures are equally appealing.
Coats woven with rayon chenille yarns have the soft feel and sheen of velvet.
Fine strands of nubby yarns give a gentle nap to hand-woven or knitted sweaters and jackets.
And printed or painted silk outfits are sensuous to the touch and to the eye.


Corrections
The Q &amp; A column on Sept. 27 referred incorrectly to the New York City Senior Citizens Rent Increase Exemption program.
The Department of Housing Preservation and Development no longer supervises the program; it is under the jurisdiction of the city's Department for the Aging.
Information is available at the S.C.R.I.E. office, 150 Williams Street, Room 4200, New York, N.Y. 10038, or by telephone at (212) 240-7000.


Becoming More Aware of Chanterelles
IN recent years, chanterelles, which for most of us were a rare treat, have become extremely popular in the United States.
Now, they not only show up on the menus of restaurants across the nation but they are also a familiar sight in the fruit and vegetable departments of specialty shops.
From now through the winter they will be available -- with varying degrees of quality.
Recently, the ones on the market have been excellent.
American chanterelles grow in the wild in the Pacific Northwest and some places on the East Coast.
They are larger than their European counterparts (some as big as demitasse saucers in the last couple of weeks), but they have as much flavor.
They should be plump, their frilled edges firm, not sunken or broken.
They will keep for about a week, covered with a lightly dampened kitchen towel.


Choosing Berries for Eating or for Show
IT'S berry time not only for the delicious ones that are eaten but also for the ornamental ones that are decorating many shrubs, vines and trees.
The most obvious cultivated shrub that is a big showoff now is Pyracantha or firethorn.
Its gorgeous orange berries can be seen for blocks.
The plant is stiff and lends itself nicely to training along chimneys or fences.
The summer flowers are not too significant and most gardeners grow the plant for the gorgeous orange berries, which are favorites with birds.


Prison Commissioner to Drop Electronic Monitor Program
Under mounting pressure from the Legislature and after a series of well-publicized incidents that shook public confidence, the Commissioner of the State Department of Corrections has ended a program that monitored some prisoners from their homes with electronic bracelets.
"It's an economic decision, a management decision and a political decision," said Commissioner William H. Fauver.
"I'm disappointed, but I want to stress that this was my decision. It was not forced on me."


Lee Grabs a Little (of Alomar's) Spotlight
Roberto Alomar is everywhere on the field.
He plays second base, but it often seems as if he is playing short right field, short center field or even shortstop.
Alomar is also everywhere off the field in Toronto.
His picture appears on the sides of buses and on billboards promoting the Blue Jays.
A day rarely passes when his picture is not found in the newspapers.
Dave Winfield claimed Alomar could run for Prime Minister in the Canadian election.


More Matisse


Jordan Must Testify
MICHAEL JORDAN must testify in a money-laundering and drug trial, a Federal judge has ruled in rejecting a request by the National Basketball Association star that he be allowed to submit a sworn statement.
Jordan was subpoenaed this summer to testify in the trial of JAMES (SLIM) BOULER, a convicted cocaine dealer.
The trial starts Oct. 20 in United States District Court in Charlotte, N.C.


Caroline H. Aiken, James R. Koster
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Aiken of Anchorage, Ky., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Howard Aiken, to James Robert Koster, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William P. Koster of Cincinnati.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Aiken, 26 years old, is an associate in the New York office of Fulbright &amp; Jaworski, the Houston-based law firm.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father, now retired, was the director of vocational education for the Jefferson County public schools in Louisville, Ky.
Her mother, Dorothy Aiken, retired as a sixth-grade teacher at the Anchorage School.


Abrams Hits Trail Upstate, Trying to Heal Wounds
In the weeks since the Democratic primary, Robert Abrams has pursued the notion that silence is golden with an earnestness that gives new and perhaps literal meaning to the phrase, but that may have hurt his campaign.
But after midweek polls showed him losing ground in upstate New York to his Republican rival, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Attorney General set his campaign alarm for sometime before dawn today and caught a plane to Buffalo to begin a three-day odyssey through a land of uncertain support.


Wall Street; Whither El Al, After the Crash?
As recently as last week, El Al Israel Airlines Ltd. was congratulating itself on a turnaround that had revived speculation that it might soon go public again after years of government ownership.
Even James Baker, the former Secretary of State, raised the possibility of an initial offering with Yitzhak Rabin, the new head of state, on his recent trip to the Middle East.


Where Are Those High-Paying Jobs?
I read with interest "Welfare Mothers Facing Time Limit for College"  [ Sept. 6 ] .
It stated that the first graduates of the Mothers on the Move program "moved on to jobs paying $30,000 or more."
As a college graduate with many graduate school credits and extensive work experience in the public and private sectors, I am quite curious as to the nature of these $30,000 jobs that are available to these, or other, students in the current economic climate.
I would appreciate further comment on this, and also the course curricula completed that qualified the students for these positions.
ELISABETH S. CAFIERO Carmel


When You Can't Raise a Fish, You Can Always Catch the View
Sitting on the second-story deck of the guest house at Don Lyons's salmon lodge, I watched the sun descend into the valley of the Miramichi River, silhouetting three wading anglers nearly a half-mile upstream who had been patiently flogging the water for two hours in their deliberate down-river descent.
Before me in Lyons's home pool, which is about 300 yards long, salmon were jumping and rolling, but it seemed that they were rather dark, not silver-bright as they are when fresh from the sea.
This was not a good sign.
The river was low, and had, because of no rain, been falling an inch or so each day.
When faced with this, salmon halt their upstream thrust to their spawning beds and as one dry day follows another become less and less inclined to hit the flies that anglers proffer them.


At Work; Battling Sex Bias in a Store Chain
For the first 13 years Diane Skillsky worked at a Lucky Stores supermarket in Redwood City, Calif., she says there was never a time she did not think about how she could advance through the chain's intricate jobs flow chart from her position as a checkout clerk.
Nor, after the three weeks or so it took her to settle into the job, was there a time she didn't wonder if advancement had less to do with qualifications and seniority than with friendships, family connections and especially gender.
"I watched people with less seniority who knew less than I did move ahead while I was standing in a checkstand day after day," said Ms.
Skillsky, who will observe her 20th anniversary at Lucky's in a few days.
"I asked to be able to do anything, deli, nonfoods, anything. I learned on my own." Many of the people who passed her on the Lucky's fast track, waving as they went by, were men.
In early 1985, her patience ran out.
She filed a sex discrimination complaint at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.


Chaos on Flight 84: Passengers Head for Exit a Little Too Soon
It should have been just a routine, two-hour hop from Chicago O'Hare International to New York La Guardia.
But United Airlines Flight 84 ran into foul weather Friday night -- and in the next few hours, witnesses said, the whole thing dissolved into a misadventure of curses, cops and chaos worthy of a Mack Sennett comedy.
Before evening's end, Flight 84 was diverted to Hartford and parked on a remote tarmac; a band of rebellious passengers, nearer to home, tried to escape from the plane; the Connecticut State Police had to be called out to herd them back aboard; an ambulance came; a man who may have been feigning illness was whisked off to a hospital, and everybody else wound up back in New York, hours late, exhausted, cursing blue streaks -- but, as United said, safe and sound.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE MIDWIFE'S ADVICE By Gay Courter. Dutton, $23.


East Meets West


Corrections
An article on Sept. 27 about air fares and packages to Europe included outdated fares for midweek flights to various European cities on Delta Air Lines, departing from New York from November through March.
The current fares are $458 to Paris; $458 to Berlin, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart; $448 to Geneva and Zurich, and $508 to Rome.


Working Assets
WHAT: Working Assets Long Distance's monthly statement -- a phone bill for politically active progressives.
It helps customers send letters to politicians, call them free of charge and contribute money to popular liberal causes.
The year-old, San Francisco-based phone company, the only one of its kind, also donates 1 percent of its charges to a group of 36 nonprofit organizations that its customers help select in a poll once a year.
Fifty thousand customers have the service, making it one of the largest resale phone companies.
Resales buy time from A.T.&amp; T., MCI or Sprint and generally charge slightly lower or comparable rates.
This year, Working Assets has had revenues of $15 million.
It expects, however, to post a loss in 1992.
HOW IT WORKS: Customers are encouraged to round their phone bills up to the next $5 mark.
The extra goes to groups like the Rain Forest Action Network, Planned Parenthood and the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Customers can also make a check mark next to one of two issue-oriented statements printed on the bill. (Sample statement: "Urge your senators to vote for the Freedom of Choice Act and
against
any filibuster or veto.") A one-page letter on the selected subject is then sent to the relevant politicians. Charge: $3 for one letter; $4.50 for two. On the first Monday of each month, known as a "free speech day," customers can make four free calls to the politicians mentioned in either statement. During the rest of the month, they get a 10 percent discount on those calls. Politicians' phone numbers are printed on the bill.


The Other Russian Revolution: Avant-Garde Prints, Porcelains
The explosion of avant-garde Soviet posters, books, photography and porcelains, unleashed after the Russian Revolution, was not widely recognized until recently.
Convinced in the 1920's that modernist ideas in painting and sculpture would advance social progress, many artists abandoned their easels to explore abstract forms, typography and photomontage in production art.
By decade's end, however, these works, which far exceeded the abstract imagery of the Cubists, were replaced under Stalin by representational art.
Fortunately, an abundance of these Soviet artifacts survive, acquired in the West at the time they were produced.
Many are now on view at several New York galleries in shows timed to coincide with "The Great Utopia: The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde, 1915-1932" on view through Dec. 15 at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.


Using Music as a Joyful Tool to Help Disabled Children
IT is Saturday morning, when the whirlwind of soccer games, ballet lessons, play dates and special events begins for busy families.
Gayle M. Cratty, the mother of a 5 1/2-year-old daughter with cerebral palsy, decided in February that children with disabilities also needed a place to go on Saturdays, to have fun with other children and at the same time receive help with motor and language skills.
Mrs.
Cratty said she saw how music therapy had helped her daughter, Jennifer, when the child was a patient two years ago at the Rusk Institute for Rehabilitative Medicine of New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.


St. Paul Did It
JESUS
By A. N. Wilson. 269 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Alice Richardson, John F. Fisher
Alice Elinor Richardson, a daughter of Margaret T. Richardson of Greenwich, Conn., and the late William E. Richardson, was married in Greenwich yesterday to John Francis Fisher, a son of Elizabeth B. Fisher of Rochester and the late Charles F. Fisher.
The Rev.
Richard H. Stearns officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.


Conspiracy Against the Poor?
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles's article "The $16.98 CD: How High Is Too High?"  [ Sept. 20 ]  is disheartening: $16.98 is way too much for a CD.
So is $14.98.
Just a few years ago you could buy a perfectly good LP for $6.99.
Then the CD conspiracy came along and the price doubled; $16.98 will buy you a decent meal or two movies or a video.
CD's are going to become like Broadway shows: only for the rich.
STEVEN BRINBERG  New York


The Thin Black Line


Syracuse Tricks Bedazzle Rutgers
The Syracuse coach, Paul Pasqualoni, acknowledged before the game that there were some trick plays included in the Orange inventory for Rutgers.
Pasqualoni wanted to put some dynamite in an offense of enormous potential that had been sluggish against Louisville and Ohio State.
So out came the tricks on Syracuse's second and third plays of the contest.
They resulted in two touchdowns on pass plays of 65 and 69 yards and the Orangemen went on from there to run up a 33-0 lead midway through the second period.
The final score was 50-28, and the explosion sought by Pasqualoni had gone boom.


For Children With AIDS
Fabrizio Ferri, a photographer and the owner of the Industria Superstudios in New York and Milan, Italy, is publishing a new book of photos to help children with AIDS.
Titled "Acqua," it features Patricia Velazquez and Djimon, models whom Mr.
Ferri photographed in the pool at his house on the Italian island of Pantelleria.


Claudia Weithas, Conor Mullett
Claudia Robin Weithas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Weithas Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Conor Timothy Mullett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roderick O. Mullett of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Hughes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church.
Mrs.
Mullett, 26 years old, is a prekindergarten teacher at the Studio Elementary School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in education from New York University.


Perspectives: Row-Housing in Jamaica; A Home-Building Program Gains Steam
IN housing circles, the talk is of affordability when discussion turns to the new houses for moderate-income New Yorkers that are spreading in well-dispersed neighborhoods citywide.
Herbert H. Warman, an architect with offices in Great Neck, L.I., has had to deal with the design aspect of that issue.
Design can get short shrift in low-cost housing.
Mr.
Warman has designed the houses for a development called Arlington Terrace Homes in Jamaica, Queens.
The first phase of Arlington Terrace consisted of semi-detached two-families.
But for the second phase, now going into construction, the builder, the Bluestone Organization, based in Flushing, Queens, was asked by Community Board 12 and Borough President Claire Shulman to produce row housing to provide a somewhat higher density.


Jennifer Bradley, J. Carlo Cannell
Jennifer Treat Bradley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Michael Bradley of New York, was married yesterday to J. Carlo Cannell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Cannell of New York.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Cannell, 28 years old, is a decorative painter in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Brown &amp; Wood.


Victoria Juditz, Mr. Kirschenbaum
Lillian M. Juditz of Camp Hill, Pa., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Victoria R. Juditz, to Alan M. Kirschenbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Kirschenbaum of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Juditz is a television and stage actress in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Bucknell University.
Her father, the late Robert E. Juditz, was a manager in the Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation in Harrisburg.
Her mother teaches drama and English at Cedar Cliff High School in Camp Hill.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
HIDE AND SEEK IN THE YELLOW HOUSE.
By Agatha Rose.
Illustrated by Kate Spohn.
Viking. $14. (Ages 2 to 6) Mother Cat, velvety gray and white, searches the yellow house for her marmalade-colored kitten, Mack.


Scare Tactics


At the Cabaret
Starring Liza Minnelli, Betty Buckley, Leslie Uggams, among others, Oct. 5.


Enough Greed To Go Around
To the Editor:
I was not an accounting major, so I had some trouble following the mathematics in Jon Pareles's article.


Topics of The Times; Dangerous Estate
Turkey's new coalition Government promised to move vigorously against human rights abuses when it took office last November.
A year later, there's little movement -- as shown, for example, by the the Government's appalling indifference to the serial murders of Turkish journalists.
The other day Musa Anter, 74 years old, became the ninth journalist killed since February.
Mr.
Anter worked for pro-Kurdish publications, as did all but one of the victims.
Few dispute that Turkey is seriously tormented by a tiny faction of Kurdish terrorists; it's the hunting license given to police and military that stirs criticism.


Five Pounds That Aren't for Dogs; 'Where's My Car?' Was Heard 104,000 Times Last Year
An empty parking space.
That's what Mario Frederick found last week when he returned to the spot where he had parked his car at 52d Street and Avenue of the Americas in mid-Manhattan.


Heel! Sit! Buy Some Art!
SATURDAY in SoHo.
The art people drift from gallery to gallery, contemplating the new works on the walls, and somewhere below eye level, the art dogs are up to their old tricks.
You may not be able to view the art dogs from the front of the galleries.
But follow the trail of rawhide bones and biscuit bits to the back and you will find one-dog shows, group shows and maybe a pooch-in-progress.


What It's Like to Live Near Auto Race Track
Anyone reading the Sept. 13 article on Raceway Park in Old Bridge, "Battle Rages Over Auto Raceway Noise," could not possibly comprehend the horrendous noise pollution the nearby residents must live with all in the name of big business.
Before moving to our house in the Woodland Green section of Manalapan Township, we were residents of Old Bridge.
We knew of the race track.
At that time, about 20 years ago, the race track was virtually noise free and almost unheard of unless one lived in the area.


Squalid Slums Grow as People Flood Latin America's Cities
In March, 600 families invaded land that had once been a garbage dump on the southern outskirts of Lima, making a settlement by building straw huts overnight.
The police moved in repeatedly, evicting the families and leveling the huts, but the settlers came back each time.
The invasion, like others throughout Latin America, had a predictable result: six months later, the 400-acre tract is a teeming shantytown with 10,000 residents who are lobbying the city to give each family title to its own piece of dusty ground 20 feet wide by 40 feet long.


Penalty for Clipping
By one measure, ERIC SMITH should be getting an award for ingenuity and dedication beyond the call of duty for a Texas high school place-kicker.
After all, it was Smith, a kicker for South Grand Prairie, who mowed an opponent's playing field before a recent game so he would have a better footing on any field-goals attempts.


Sara E. Ross, E. Joseph Knoll 3d
Sara Elisabeth Ross, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce R. Ross of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to E. Joseph Knoll 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Knoll Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
Jack Taggart, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Knoll is the editor of American Healthline, a health-care policy publication in Falls Church, Va.
She graduated from the University of Richmond and is a master's degree candidate in health policy at George Washington University.
Her father is the president of domestic pharmaceutical operations for the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in Princeton.


D-Day


Julie B. Owens, Craig Allen Ream
Julie Bowie Owens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. B. Owens Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Craig Allen Ream, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn C. Ream of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
James Dix performed the ceremony at the Fox Chapel Episcopal Church in Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Ream, 24 years old, is a production assistant at Broudy Printing Inc. in Pittsburgh.
Her father, now retired, was a chairman and a partner of Johnson &amp; Higgins of Pennsylvania, the insurance brokerage, in Pittsburgh.


A Witty Portrait of London Is Served Up in Germany
A CURIOUS FEATURES OF THE past summer in Europe has been the number of English visitors who traveled to Essen, in Germany, and had a very good time.
What tempted them to cross the English Channel was the prospect of an encyclopedic exhibition called "London -- World City" in the Villa Hugel in Essen.
Senior Londoners just couldn't believe it.
Ever since the Nazis came to power in 1933, in particular, it had been axiomatic that Essen was dreary, dirty and dangerous.
A company town, with Krupp as the company's name, it had worked night and day to perfect instruments of destruction that would sooner or later be aimed at London, Paris, Warsaw and points east.
In a word, the name of Essen stank.


Let's Take a Look at This Perot Economic Plan; The Debates Need Him
To the Editor:
I am glad that Ross Perot is running again for President, though I will not vote for him.
He lacks the desire and character to be President.
Nevertheless, I am happy that he will participate in the Presidential debates.
Mr.
Perot is intelligent, articulate and unencumbered by the chance that he might be elected.
Perhaps, just perhaps, he can force the other two candidates to tell us what they think would be good for our country, rather than what they think would be good for themselves.


Wading Through Blood To the Festival's Heart
To survive any film festival, it helps to have strong eyes.
To make it through the 30th New York Film Festival, which closes tonight at Lincoln Center, it helped to have a strong stomach.
I found this out the hard way.
My screening schedule was a fluke, but the message it sent was not.
Here is a brief diary of what I came to think of as the end-of-the-world film festival.


The Romance of Space, Not Reality, Lures Voters
THE once-soaring American space effort, it might be argued, is locked in a dangerous tailspin.
Star Wars, begun in 1983, has so far cost more than $30 billion but produced no antimissile arms.
The space station Freedom, begun in 1984, has cost $8 billion but produced almost no hardware.
A $1.7 billion series of new weather satellites, begun in 1985, is so flawed that its debut has been delayed five years to 1994, risking poor forecasts and damage from violent storms.
Other big initiatives have gone nowhere.
In 1986, President Reagan proposed an exotic space plane, a new "Orient Express" that would take off from a runway, speed into orbit and touch down after two hours in Tokyo.
Six years later it has yet to take off from the drawing board.
In 1989, on the 20th anniversary of the first lunar landing, President Bush grabbed headlines by calling for a return to the Moon and a manned expedition to Mars.
The efforts fizzled.


Corrections
Charts with the Wall Street column last week, about gold and silver prices, misstated the source of London market prices.
The prices are from N. M. Rothschild, as published in The Financial Times and distributed by Datastream, a business information service owned by the Primark Corporation.


There is Something Distinctly Voluptuous About the Scent and Shine of a Perfectly Waxed Wood Surface
FURNITURE polish may be to the 1990's what scented candles were to the 80's.
Not that room fragrance is the big deal: It's what it represents.
The opulent, overdone decor that reeks of rose is finished.
Its replacement is an interior that's clean and polished.
Traditionally, "clean and polished" has had a goody-goody, bed-made-every-morning aura.
But the new clean isn't gratingly hygienic -- it's luxurious.
A luxury because it takes time or money to get a house clean -- and both are hard to come by.
A house that's scrubbed is rich with odors: Murphy Oil Soap, Pine-Sol, Spic and Span. (In Jamaica, clean has a different smell; floors there are scoured with orange halves.) Each scent evokes something tangible: smudgeless tabletops and windows; floors glistening with wax.
Housecleaning history celebrates the Dutch and their extraordinarily spotless interiors.
Visitors to homes in 17th-century Holland often pulled straw slippers over their shoes to avoid scuffing the floors.
Even the country's language reflects this hushed sensibility: Schoon -- Dutch for clean -- also means beauty and purity.


T.W.A. to Drop 11 Destinations
Trans World Airlines, reorganizing under bankruptcy laws, will drop 11 destinations from its routes on Oct. 25.
The international destinations will be Moscow, Istanbul, Copenhagen and Stockholm.
Those in the United States will be Austin, Tex.; Ontario, Calif; Palm Springs, Calif; Sioux City, Iowa; Sioux Falls, S.D.; Syracuse, and Tucson, Ariz.
Syracuse, though losing T.W.A. jet service, will continue to be served by T.W.A.
Express, T.W.A.'s turboprop commuter subsidiary.
Sioux City, too, will continue with commuter service run by Trans World Express and may get more flights, a company spokesman said.
The airline previously said it would also discontinue service to Salt Lake City, then reversed its decision.


Nautical and Nice
A skyline cruise, food and drink, gambling, all to benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels, Oct. 8.


Topics of The Times; The Passionate Statesman
The name of Willy Brandt, who died on Thursday at 78, conjures a single indelible moment.
As West German Chancellor, he traveled to Poland in 1970 to conclude treaties that normalized relations between the two neighbors.
As if acknowledging the weight of a terrible past, Mr.
Brandt fell wordlessly to his knees before a memorial to Jewish victims of Nazi savagery.
The great Social Democrat never stood taller.
There were other moments.
In 1961, as Mayor of West Berlin, Mr.
Brandt raged at the construction of the wall that sealed in the residents of East Berlin.
He also witnessed its demolition in 1989.
Having learned that American power alone could not thwart the wall's Communist builders, Mr.
Brandt tried to reach captive peoples through trade and visitations -- his Ostpolitik.


Company Blamed for Flood Files a Suit Faulting Chicago
The company blamed for the underground flood that halted business in the heart of Chicago for several days this spring has fought back with a suit, contending that the city was the one at fault.
In its suit, filed in Federal District Court on Tuesday, the company, Great Lakes Dredge and Dock Company, argues that the city should have told it about the existence of an underground turn-of-the century tunnel before it began installing protective pilings around a Chicago River bridge.
The work damaged the tunnel, leading to the flood.


Playing Chess as a Tool in Learning
ON an unseasonably brisk morning in early fall, the pale light that filtered through the skylights in Ridgeway Elementary School's newly refurbished media center offered some welcome warmth to the 18 fifth-grade students gathered there for a class.
All eyes were focused intently on a blackboard, where their instructor, Sunil Weeramantry, showed them a complicated problem and challenged them to solve it.


Ms. Shaghalian, L. A. Vranka Jr.
Elizabeth Anne Shaghalian and Lawrence Allen Vranka Jr., associates at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Kegham Zakarian performed the Armenian Apostolic ceremony at the Sage Chapel on the campus of Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
Mrs.
Vranka, 26 years old, and her husband, 28, both graduated from Cornell University.
Mrs.
Vranka received a law degree from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Shaghalian of Manlius, N.Y.
Her father is a confectioners' representative in Manlius.
Her mother, Johanna C. Shaghalian, is a reading specialist at Kinne Street School in East Syracuse, N.Y.


Claudia C. Farans, Douglas A. Morse
Claudia Christine Farans, a daughter of Sahra T. Lese of Rye, N.Y., and Alvin G. Farans of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Douglas Alan Morse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester S. Morse Jr. of New York.
Rabbi Stephen S. Pearce performed the ceremony at the Central Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Morse, 24 years old, was until recently an associate with PMK Public Relations in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the chairman of the Penn Petroleum Corporation, an oil and gas distributor in Norwalk, Conn., and owns Corporate Travel Inc., a travel agency there.
The bride's stepfather, William M. Lese, owns a real-estate brokerage in New York.


Tchaikovsky and 'Mambo Madness'
THERE are so many fine events planned for next weekend that making a decision as to which one to attend might not be easy.
First, on Friday at 8 P.M., Feld Ballets/NY begins the "Dance!" series at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase; the event will be held in Theater A. On Saturday, the center has scheduled two programs for 8 P.M.
One is the American debut of Dance Collective, a much-acclaimed company from Winnipeg, Manitoba; this event will be in Theater C.


Will Conner Jump America's Cup Ship and Set Sail for Italy?
The so-called hired guns of America's Cup yacht racing, the skippers who sail for countries other than their own, may find that their ranks have swelled when the next Cup match comes around in 1995.
Not the least among the new recruits could be Dennis Conner.
Conner has refused to reveal his plans, but there are indications he is being considered as helmsman for an Italian challenge.
The possible Italian effort would be backed by Montedison, a multibillion-dollar chemical products firm based in Milan.


Choosing Berries for Eating or for Show
IT'S berry time not only for the delicious ones that are eaten but also for the ornamental ones that are decorating many shrubs, vines and trees.
The most obvious cultivated shrub that is a big showoff now is Pyracantha or firethorn.
Its gorgeous orange berries can be seen for blocks.
The plant is stiff and lends itself nicely to training along chimneys or fences.
The summer flowers are not too significant and most gardeners grow the plant for the gorgeous orange berries, which are favorites with birds.


On Sunday; On This Beat, Pollution Is the Enemy
Bob Rasmussen parked his Environmental Protection Department jeep on East Ninth Street in Manhattan across from Guerrero's Autobody Shop.
He was investigating a complaint that they were spray-painting cars on the sidewalk.
It looked promising.
Several men out front were prepping a car that was sanded and had taped windows.
They were ready to spray when they spotted the jeep's official "New York City" decal.
They stopped, whispered, pointed.
One smiled and waved.
"They're scoping us out," whispered Mr.
Rasmussen.
A worker walked past the jeep, into the playground to retrieve his pit bull.
It's a high-crime, drug-ridden area.
The guard dog liked to jump, snare the rope on a tire swing, then hang by its clenched teeth, growling, while his master pushed him back and forth.


Gay Political Power
For the first time in a presidential election, gay men and lesbians are becoming major players.
Their voter-registration efforts have been aggressive, their campaign contributions are being actively sought by candidates and the issues that concern them are being discussed on a national level.
Magazine, section 6.


About-Face
We're all prisoners of the past, especially in the voting booth.
I've tried to break free of memory and vote my head instead of my heart, but when I close the curtain behind me, too often I hear the echo of old footfalls, the call of long-forgotten voices.
I served with a Marine rifle company in Vietnam in 1968, the bloodiest year of that war.
I remember my comrades as men of commitment and sacrifice.
I've tracked a few who survived the battlefield.
They've led flawed lives -- some have wandered, some have stumbled, some have failed -- but they are essentially the same, men with a moral core.


Wall Street; When Auditors Change Sides
To some people, William J. Sanders's resume is a mere footnote in an otherwise sorry chapter of business history.
To others, it holds a clue about what can go wrong when the relationship between companies and their accountants becomes too cozy.
As the partner at Deloitte &amp; Touche who headed the audit of the First Executive Corporation for many years, Mr.
Sanders had much responsibility for the reassuring opinions that Deloitte issued each year about the insurance company's financial health.


Let's Take a Look at This Perot Economic Plan
To the Editor:
"No Painless Way Out for the Next President," (Week in Review, Oct. 4), states that Ross Perot has "put forth a detailed, generally plausible plan for balancing the budget." This rosy characterization of Mr.
Perot's deficit reduction program reflects the conventional wisdom.


Nancy Lippman, Doron Israeli
Dr.
Nancy Jo Lippman, a pediatrician, was married in New York last evening to Dr.
Doron Israeli, a surgeon.
Rabbi James H. Perman performed the ceremony at the Westbury.
Dr.
Lippman, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a third-year resident at the New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center in New York.
She is a daughter of Joel N. Lippman and Sheila M. Lippman, both of Buffalo.
A graduate of Smith College, she received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father, now retired, was the president of DL Banite Inc., a maker of industrial soap in Buffalo.


Saving the Sound: Symbols of Progress
As a damp wind ruffled the waves behind him, Chris Lagano dug busily this afternoon in the sand flats that appear at low tide at Greenwich Point Park here.
His back bent, Mr.
Lagano, a recent law school graduate, was engrossed in a search for cherrystone and quahog clams, which he deposited proudly in a bucket beside him.
Only recently did this kind of harvest become legal again in Greenwich.
Since 1960, the shellfish beds have been closed because of pollution, mainly from sewage, in the Long Island Sound.
Because clams, like oysters and mussels, absorb the bacteria in their environments, collecting and eating them was outlawed for health reasons.
Because of improvements in local sewage treatment, a few beds were reopened last year, and this year more will be open for a season that runs from October through April.


Technology; Faster, More Accurate Fingerprint Matching
Los Angeles County homicide detectives, investigating a fatal drive-by shooting in Pico Rivera east of downtown Los Angeles last November, had little to go on.
They had lifted a fingerprint from a stolen truck abandoned after the slaying but found no duplicate in a central fingerprint-matching computer.
The partial print went into an unsolved-crimes data base.
A month later in Lynwood, 10 miles south of downtown, sheriff's officers arrested a man attempting to "hot wire" a truck.
In booking the suspect, the jailer used a pilot electronic fingerprinting system called live-scan instead of the old ink-and-roll method.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Southport
WITH the Victorian and Greek Revival homes of Harbor Road, a legacy of seafaring men, behind them and views of Southport Harbor in front of them, picknickers and artists gather on balmy fall weekends at Perry's Green in Southport.
Like many other activities in this tiny unincorporated village in the southwest corner of the Town of Fairfield, Conn., the gatherings are linked to the water.


Marchons! Marchons!
THE shoes that many New York women want in the 1990's turn out to be the same ones that French mail carriers wore in the 50's.
"Garennes were what the postman wore," said Larry Everston, a co-owner of Freelance, the newest addition to shoe-store row on Prince Street in SoHo.
He was referring to the decidedly unsexy rubber-sole Oxfords ($174) that are among the three-week-old store's best sellers.


SUNY Westbury Helps Older Learners
On reading "Colleges Enrolling More Older Students"  [ Sept. 6 ]  I was disappointed to find no mention of SUNY College at Old Westbury or, indeed, of the program in which I teach.
SUNY College at Old Westbury's mission is to provide the supports necessary to educate many kinds of "nontraditional" students, and we offer a number of innovative programs of interest to older learners, both during the day and at night.
The Community Health Program in which I teach is a case in point.
Unusual among undergraduate programs, it provides a public-health background for both aspiring health-care professionals and those already in the field.
Many of our majors are registered nurses, who, having obtained the associate's degree at some of the Long Island colleges you mention in your article, return to college for a bachelor's degree in community health.
MARTHA LIVINGSTON Asst.
Prof. of Community Health Old Westbury


Fashion Flashback
Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana soared to the top of the Italian fashion world this week with two exciting spring collections and a party for Madonna that have had Milan buzzing for days.
People have been asking themselves, What decade is this?


Q and A
Home Exchange Sources
Q.
I am trying to find organizations that facilitate international home exchanges. -- Ann Jung, Olivebridge, N.Y.


A Little Gore Before Dinner
IT was as if they had been lured into a Venus Fly Trap.
Tatum O'Neal, who's been buzzing around the uptown gala circuit recently, arrived with a friend at the Whitney Museum Gala on Monday night.
Before heading upstairs for cocktails and dinner, they took a quick tour around an exhibit of disturbing, lurid, biomorphic drawings by the surrealist Alfonso Ossorio, which were on display in the gallery adjacent to the lobby.


Jamie Seidner, Jonathan Rubin
Jamie Reed Seidner, a daughter of Judith Seidner of New York and the late Abraham Seidner, was married last evening to Jonathan David Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Rubin of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Jay Rosenbaum performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.


Wine and Sand
THE GIFT
By Kirk Douglas. 288 pp. New York: Warner Books. $21.95.


AIDS Home Overcomes Dispute in Fairfield
ACCORDING to a recent report by the National Commission on AIDS, the need for affordable housing for people with AIDS is more critical than ever.
It is estimated that a third to half of all Americans with AIDS are homeless, or about to become so, either because their illnesses prevent them from keeping up with their rent or mortgage, or they are illegally evicted when their H.I.V. status becomes known.
And as many as 30 percent of H.I.V. patients in acute-care hospitals are there because there are no residential programs to house them -- a stay that can cost more than $1,000 a day.


The Artist As Conjurer, King and Christ
One of the most remarkable legacies in the history of 20th-century art is surely the series of roughly 80 self-portraits that the great German painter Max Beckmann turned out between 1899, when he was a 15-year-old art student, and 1950, the year in which he died.
Over the years, he cast himself in a dizzying range of roles, both earthly and divine -- the artist as mountebank, conjurer and man about town, as king, Jupiter and Jesus Christ.
Beckmann's intensity, encapsulated by the unflinching and intimidating stare with which he returns a viewer's gaze in one after another of the self-portraits, rarely faltered.
A selection of 30 of these self-portraits is at the Gagosian Gallery on Madison Avenue, in Manhattan, through Oct. 31.
Even without the best examples, the exhibition, with works selected by the Beckmann scholar Peter Selz, packs a tremendous wallop.


OCT. 4-10: The El Al Crash; In the Netherlands, The Struggle of Immigrants And Sudden Disaster
The gritty and drug-plagued Amsterdam suburb of Bijlmermeer has long been home to third world immigrants and is a reflection of the willingness of the Netherlands to give them refuge.
In light of the struggles and hopes of its residents, it seemed a striking symbol of tragic happenstance last week when an El Al cargo jet slammed into a high-rise apartment complex in the neighborhood after losing at least one of its engines shortly after takeoff from nearby Schiphol airport.
In addition to the four people aboard the Israeli jet who died, scores of people on the ground were killed, many of them immigrants from Ghana and Surinam.
The charred remains of 51 bodies have been retrieved, and officials say dozens of people still listed as missing may have been incinerated.


Notre Dame Refuels Offense During a Pitt Stop
Notre Dame exorcised its offensive demons and exercised its legs in a 52-21 thrashing of Pitt tonight.
Jerome Bettis rushed for three touchdowns and the Irish (4-1-1) compiled 521 total yards a week after being stymied and stomped by Stanford.
Even the second-team offense scored against a porous Pitt (2-4) that was 95th out of 107 defenses in Division I-A.


Jays Take Advantage Of A's Miscues
The first two games of the American League Championship Series had been graced with good pitching, stellar defense and very few moments in which either the Oakland Athletics or the Toronto Blue Jays could call abysmal failures.
Not so Game 3, a contest that the Blue Jays won, 7-5, in a war of attrition pockmarked with costly errors, wild pitches and otherwise erratic pitching by both starters and relievers.


Clinton and His Health
The Democratic nominee said he would issue detailed information on his medical history but would still bar interviews with his doctors.
Page 17.


The 7 Levels of Plastic in Recycling-by-the-Numbers
Now that Manhattan is pursuing recyling in earnest and the rest of the city is soon to follow, well-meaning New Yorkers are struggling with a new kind of separation anxiety.
It's easy to tell green glass from clear, and steel cans from aluminum ones -- but what are those little numbers inside the three-arrow recycling symbols on every plastic container in the refrigerator?
And will mixing the 3-triangles and the 5-triangles together risk the $200 fines the city is threatening?


Results Plus
TENNIS Edberg Struggles but Will Face Ivanisevic Stefan Edberg looked vulnerable.
Goran Ivanisevic looked mystified.
Both still managed victories yesterday to advance to the final of the Sydney Indoor in Australia.
Edberg, the top-seeded player and the defending champion, went from sharp to ordinary and back to sharp in beating his fellow Swede Henrik Holm, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3.
Holm, 24, has risen from No. 129 to No. 46 in the world in the last 10 months.
Edberg, trying to regain the world's No. 1 ranking after slipping to third, won 29 of the 44 points in which he ventured to the net.
The second-seeded Ivanisevic had seven aces in five service games but was thrown off balance by an obviously injured Richard Krajicek, who retired because of his ailing knee trailing by 6-3, 1-0. (AP) Graf vs.
Navratilova: Steffi Graf struggled past Jana Novotna and Martina Navratilova won when Patty Fendick had to quit because of an injury in the semifinals of the European Indoors tournament in Zurich yesterday.
The final matchup will be the first between the second-ranked German and fifth-ranked American since Navratilova's victory in the semifinals of last year's United States Open.
Navratilova, 35, is 8-7 against Graf in their career matchups.
Graf, the top-seeded player, outlasted Novotna, 6-2, 4-6, 7-6 (7-2). (AP) GOLF Sluman Beats Woosnam in Match Play Jeff Sluman upset three-time champion Ian Woosnam, 3 and 2, yesterday in Virginia Water, England, to become the first American since Ben Crenshaw in 1981 to reach the final of the world match-play championship.
Sluman will play the British Open champion, Nick Faldo, today in the final of the $850,000 event.
Faldo beat the P.G.A. champion, Nick Price of Zimbabwe, 2 and 1, in the other semifinal.
Sluman, who beat five-time champion Seve Ballesteros in the quarterfinals, is seeking to became the first United States champion since Bill Rogers in 1979.(AP) Cook Staggers, Still Leads: Only a late-round rally kept John Cook from being overwhelmed by what he called "a stampede" yesterday during the fourth round of the Las Vegas Invitational.
Cook, who watched in dismay while his once-commanding five-shot lead dwindled and finally disappeared, regained his composure and his lead with birdies on three of the last four holes at the new TPC at Summerlin.
Cook's 2-under 70 left him with a three-stroke lead entering today's final round of the five-day tournament.
At least eight players have a chance to capture the $234,000 first prize.
Cook has a 72-hole total of 266, 22 under.
John Adams is next at 269 after a solid 68.
Robert Gamez, a native of Las Vegas, on-rushing Nolan Henke and Keith Clearwater are next at 270, four behind.
Davis Love 3d, Paul Azinger, Bob Estes and Peter Persons are within sight of the leader at 271.(AP) 2-Shot Edge for Charles: Bob Charles shot a record-tying 65 to take a two-stroke lead after two rounds of the Raley's Senior Gold Rush in Sacramento, Calif.
Charles had a 36-hole total of 136, two shots ahead of Kermit Zarley on the Ranch Murieta Country Club's 6,685-yard North course.
Bruce Crampton had a 68 and was tied for third place with Chi Chi Rodriguez. (AP) Langer Leads in Germany: Bernhard Langer of Germany shot a two-under-par 70 and maintained a three-shot lead after three rounds of the Honda Open in Hamburg, Germany.
Langer, who shot a course-record 65 on Friday to move into the lead of the $1.4 million event, lost a shot to par on the final hole but held onto his comfortable advantage with a three-round total of 12-under 204.
Darren Clarke of Northern Ireland was second with a 207 total after a 67, and Wayne Westner of South Africa was third at 208 after a 66.
Fred Couples shot a 70 to hold down a share of fourth place at 209.
Roger Chapman of England also was at 209 after an even-par 72.(AP)


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
New Castle, N.Y. 452,500
3 Devoe Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, den, 2-car garage; taxes $10,664.
Purchase, N.Y. 725,000
12 Beverly Road  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; fireplace, library, 2 wet bars, 3-car garage, pool; taxes $12,051.
White Plains, N.Y. 295,000
7 Salem Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split-level; 2 dens, living room, fireplace, alarm and sprinkler systems; taxes $4,767.
New Haven, Conn. 129,000
577 Quinipiac Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 122-year-old Victorian; parquet floor in entry, curved staircase, 60-by-154-ft. lot; taxes not available.
North Branford, Conn. 155,000
23 Dogwood Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old ranch; workshop in garage, deck, needs work, 20,000-square-foot lot; taxes $1,819.
Westbrook, Conn. 385,000
123 Second Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, older colonial; waterfront location, enclosed porch, electric heat, 40-by-140-ft. lot; taxes $2,312.
OTHER AREAS Livingston, N.J. 184,000
45 Chestnut Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, dining room; taxes $3,950.
Maplewood, N.J. 235,000
66 Maplewood Avenue
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; family room, 1-car garage, h/w floors, fireplace; taxes $4,733.
Bayport, L.I. 140,000
77 Edgewater Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.


Sound Bytes; Barring the Door to the Ivory Tower
Craig I. Fields is chairman and chief executive of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a research consortium based in Austin, Tex.
A lean, intense man occasionally seen in cowboy boots, he is former head of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
M.C.C. recently announced two ambitious projects to develop global information networks for businesses and consumers.
Question: What is your biggest challenge?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUDDLE Fathers, Sons, and Football. By Andrew H. Malcolm. Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.


Maura Manning, F. X. Comerford
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Manning of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maura Grace Manning to Francis Xavier Comerford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Comerford of Brooklyn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Manning, 31 years old, is a design director for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior partner at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.


The Alcatraz Play: An Insider's Version
IN a column about the Alcatraz Coup that appeared in January, this department stated that there was no evidence that bridge was ever played on California's celebrated Rock.
That provoked a letter of rebuttal from Morton Sobell, who was an inmate there from 1952 to 1958 after his conviction on an espionage charge in the Rosenberg atomic secrets case.
Bridge, he writes, was the only card game played on the island.
"Play was out in the small yard, behind the first- and third-base lines, so that on frequent occasions a softball would land in the middle of the table -- a blanket-covered folding table with legs cut down to about 20 inches in height. We sat on hassocks.


'Danzon' Glides to a Soft Mexican Rhythm
In a big american hotel suite thousands of miles from her home here, the 39-year-old Mexican film director Maria Novaro sits on the edge of a big chair, waiting.
In precise succession, reporters are ushered in to interrogate her about her new film, "Danzon." They all have big glasses, and they all ask: "It must be hard to be a woman director in such a terribly male-dominated society as Mexico's, right?"
"It's really not that bad," she tries to tell them.


Man, 23, Fatally Stabbed On Subway in the Bronx
A 23-year-old man was stabbed to death on a subway in the Bronx early yesterday after telling a group of young men to stop bothering a sleeping passenger, the Transit Authority police said.
The victim, Joseph F. Scott, a former Navy firefighter who had only recently found work as a restaurant busboy was riding on a southbound No. 6 train in the Bronx when he was stabbed at 2:37 A.M., said Al O'Leary, a spokesman for the Transit Authority police.


'End of the Century': A Waiting Game
IT'S 6 A.M.
A couple of old friends are sitting around, doing their laundry.
Richard is a testy novelist with one best seller in his past and a severe case of writer's block in his present.
Howie, who has invited Richard and his fourth wife to a rented beach cottage in Maine, teaches Dante and Blake in college.
He is married -- just once -- and satisfied, seemingly.


CHINA TRADE PACT WITH U.S. IS SIGNED
Facing curbs on billions of dollars of its exports, China signed an accord with the United States today in which it agreed to remove a broad range of trade barriers to American goods, including computers, chemicals and cameras.
Under the agreement, China committed itself to eliminate a vast majority of the quotas, import-licensing restrictions and secret rules it has used to impede the imports.


President Favored in Romanian Runoff Today
Choosing between a candidate with strong links to the country's Communist past and one calling for a clean break, Romanians will vote in a runoff election for President on Sunday.
The runoff will match the men who two weeks ago drew the most votes in a field of six contenders: President Ion Iliescu, and Emil Constantinescu of the opposition coalition, the Democratic Convention.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Cable TV: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill to regulate cable television prices.
Approved 74 to 25, Oct. 5.
2.Tax Bill: Vote on passage of a tax bill that includes $27 billion in tax reductions over five years, and a matching amount of tax increases, to avoid increasing the debt.
The measure also includes enterprise zones to encourage investment in poor urban areas.
Approved 67 to 22, Oct. 8.Connecticut Dodd (D) . . .Y.Y Lieberman (D) . . .Y.Y New Jersey Bradley (D) . . .Y.N Lautenberg (D) . . .Y.Y New York D'Amato (R) . . .Y.Y Moynihan (D) . . .Y.Y House
1. Energy: Vote on passage of a wide-ranging energy bill. Approved 363 to 60, Oct. 5.
2.
Cable TV: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill to regulate cable television prices.
Approved 308 to 114, Oct. 5.
3.
Tax Bill: Vote on passage of a tax bill that includes $27 billion in tax reductions over five years, and a matching amount of tax increases, to avoid increasing the debt.
The measure also includes enterprise zones to encourage investment in poor urban areas.
Approved 208 to 202, Oct. 6.Connecticut 1.
Kennelly (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 3.
DeLauro (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 4.
Shays (R) . . .Y.Y.N 5.
Franks (R) . . .Y.N.N 6.
Johnson (R) . . .Y.N.Y New Jersey1.
Andrews (D) . . .Y.N.N 2.
Hughes (D) . . .Y.N.N 3.
Pallone (D) . . .N.Y.N 4.
Smith (R) . . .Y.N.Y 5.
Roukema (R) . . .Y.N.Y 6.
Dwyer (D) . . .Y.Y.A 7.
Rinaldo (R) . . .Y.Y.N 8.
Roe (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 9.
Torricelli (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 10.
Payne (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 11.
Gallo (R) . . .Y.N.Y 12.
Zimmer (R) . . .Y.N.N 13.
Saxton (R) . . .Y.N.N 14.
Guarini (D) . . .Y.Y.Y New York 1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 2.
Downey (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 3.
Mrazek (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 4.
Lent (R) . . .Y.N.N 5.
McGrath (R) . . .Y.Y.Y 6.
Flake (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 7.
Ackerman (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 8.
Scheuer (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 9.
Manton (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 10.
Schumer (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 11.
Towns (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 12.
Owens (D) . . .Y.Y.N 13.
Solarz (D) . . .Y.Y.A 14.
Molinari (R) . . .Y.Y.N 15.
Green (R) . . .Y.Y.Y 16.
Rangel (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 17.
Vacant . . . 18.
Serrano (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 19.
Engel (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 20.
Lowey (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 21.
Fish (R) . . .Y.Y.Y 22.
Gilman (R) . . .Y.Y.Y 23.
McNulty (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 24.
Solomon (R) . . .N.N.N 25.
Boehlert (R) . . .Y.Y.Y 26.
Martin (R) . . .Y.N.N 27.
Walsh (R) . . .Y.Y.N 28.
McHugh (D) . . .Y.Y.N 29.
Horton (R) . . .Y.N.N 30.
Slaughter (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 31.
Paxon (R) . . .Y.N.N 32.
LaFalce (D) . . .Y.Y.N 33.
Nowak (D) . . .Y.Y.Y 34.
Houghton (R) . . .Y.Y.Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Update; Tension Lessens as Minister Leaves Riverside Church
Last spring, tensions between the two top ministers at Riverside Chruch brought into the open long-simmering discontent over the direction of the interdenominational church in upper Manhattan.
Complaints were raised about everything from the length of the sermon to the choice of the music.
Now some of the tension has been resolved with the departure of the Rev.
David Dyson, a former labor organizer who had served as Riverside's executive minister.
Remaining is the senior minister, the Rev.
James A. Forbes Jr.


Getting the Grime off the Face of the City
IT'S been a cloudburst of cleaning: Trinity Church, the Dakota, the Flatiron Building, the New York Yacht Club, the Century Association and dozens of other buildings in New York have emerged after baths in acids, detergents and in some cases just plain water, as fresh and new, shedding years of grime.
The results range from the sublime to the startling and, occasionally, the tragic.


What Men Want
To the Editor:
Conspicuously absent amid all the anguished speculation over
why
Woody Allen, a man in his mid-50's, would be attracted to a woman in her early 20's is recognition of a simple anthropological fact: youth is probably the only genuinely pan-cultural characteristic of human female attractiveness to males.
Whereas males in some societies prefer scarred rather than smooth flesh, enlarged rather than slim lips, corpulent rather than sparse physiques, sweaty rather than perfumed bodies, all -- and I mean
all
-- societies reflect male preference for young females.


THE RIDICULOUS VISION OF MARK LEYNER
Mark Leyner's work is derivative, the sources being contemporary humorists like Woody Allen and Steven Wright rather than the lofty figures he claims to revere.
Even his quest to be acknowledged as the most muscularly developed of his peers is lifted from the late Joe Orton (to whom Leyner bears a passing resemblance), who jocularly posed for beefcake photos while proclaiming, "I shall be the most perfectly developed of modern playwrights, if nothing else."


OCT. 4-10: Elections in Kuwait; Democracy's Weak Muscles Get an Oiling Up
Parliamentary elections in Kuwait last week, in which the opposition surprisingly won 31 of 50 seats, were less a clear-cut victory for democracy advocates than a precursor to a new struggle between them and the long-ruling Sabah family.
The opposition, which has fought for democratic change for three decades, intends to launch its most vigorous campaign to date to challenge the family's monolithic rule.


Three Generations of a Soccer Family and What They Mean to Amityville
HIS legacy is a soccer ball.
For 44 years Ralph Forman 3d was married to Caroline Forman.
For most of those years soccer was the premiere activity in their Amityville family.
"We weren't allowed to have footballs in the house," recalled Ralph Forman 4th.
"Both my parents would kick the soccer ball around."


Smoltz Delivers, but Not in Usual Way
John Smoltz, who does not know how to lose a post-season game, found a new way to win one tonight.
When his strong right arm failed him, he called on his bat and his legs and sparked the Atlanta Braves to a 6-4 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates.
The outcome sent the Braves to the brink of their second successive National League pennant.
With a three games to one lead, the Braves can end the best-of-seven league championship series by winning Sunday night when Steve Avery pitches against the Pirates' Bob Walk.


Choosing Berries for Eating or for Show
IT'S berry time not only for the delicious ones that are eaten but also for the ornamental ones that are decorating many shrubs, vines and trees.
The most obvious cultivated shrub that is a big showoff now is Pyracantha or firethorn.
Its gorgeous orange berries can be seen for blocks.
The plant is stiff and lends itself nicely to training along chimneys or fences.
The summer flowers are not too significant and most gardeners grow the plant for the gorgeous orange berries, which are favorites with birds.


Cleaning Gadgets Today Have a Colorful, Cartoony Charm
JUST like a pair of blue jeans, a clean and polished house is comfortable and homely, yet chic.
But that's where the comparison stops: A house doesn't thrive on the same casual neglect as jeans.
It needs elbow grease.
These days, the amount of work it takes to keep a house clean isn't as staggering as it was in the 19th century, when standards were more exacting.
Back then, a housewife might lament the drudgery of a cleaning routine that included -- as one woman described it in 1875 -- "the grand Friday sweep, the limited daily sweep and the oft-recurring dust-pan sweep."


Jets Fall Behind From The Start
It is diificult to believe, but the Jets have reached the crossroads of their 1992 season, despite the fact that they haven't played eight games.
That is what happens when you lose the first four games of the season.
Things will get even worse if the Jets lose to the Colts at the Indianapolis Hoosier Dome this afternoon.


Patricia Crowley, David Kostelancik
Patricia Jean Crowley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Crowley of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to David John Kostelancik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kostelancik of Stickney, Ill.
The Rev.
Donald Larsen performed the ceremony at the Lutheran Church of the Messiah in Princeton, N.J.


Becoming More Aware of Chanterelles
IN recent years, chanterelles, which for most of us were a rare treat, have become extremely popular in the United States.
Now, they not only show up on the menus of restaurants across the nation but they are also a familiar sight in the fruit and vegetable departments of specialty shops.
From now through the winter they will be available -- with varying degrees of quality.
Recently, the ones on the market have been excellent.
American chanterelles grow in the wild in the Pacific Northwest and some places on the East Coast.
They are larger than their European counterparts (some as big as demitasse saucers in the last couple of weeks), but they have as much flavor.
They should be plump, their frilled edges firm, not sunken or broken.
They will keep for about a week, covered with a lightly dampened kitchen towel.


The Executive Computer; Besides Storing 1,000 Words, Why Not Store a Picture Too?
Businesses are quite familiar with the processing and storage of computer-generated text, but the use of color photo images in personal computers is still relatively rare.
Now the Eastman Kodak Company is hoping to harness the power of the computer with its Photo CD technology.
Photo CD, just now becoming widely available, is both a consumer product and a tool for business.
"If you look at things such as multimedia and desktop publishing, they are both becoming very image-oriented," said Fred Dunn, a consultant with Jon Peddie Associates of Oakland, Calif.
"Photo CD gives companies the ability to archive and maintain images and make them readily accessible to computer users. A company can take pictures of inventory, of capital goods, employee ID's or large amounts of documentation and have them on a network for others to access."


IN SHORT: FICTION
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? By Jimmy Buffett. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.


Mari-Jo Florio, John Flanagan Jr.
Mari-Jo Florio and Brig.
Gen.
John Francis Flanagan Jr. were married Friday in Colorado Springs.
The Rev.
Richard Headley, a Southern Baptist minister, officiated at the Air Force Academy Cadet Chapel.
Ms.
Florio, who is 44 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in Stamford, Conn., and a lecturer at the Practicing Law Institute in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received a law degree from the University of North Carolina.
She is the daughter of Michael and Josephine Florio of Deerfield Beach, Fla.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


What If They're Out There?
After decades of nagging by scientists convinced that intelligent life must exist
somewhere
in the universe, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is finally conducting a comprehensive search.
Tomorrow the space agency will start an ambitious 10-year program to listen for radio signals broadcast by advanced civilizations on other worlds.
The enthusiasts behind this cosmic eavesdropping make a beguiling case that there just might be someone out there.
After all, there are some 400 billion stars in our own Milky Way galaxy and surely at least 40 billion have planets around them.
And surely some of those planets have just the right conditions and just the right mix of chemicals to produce living organisms, maybe even intelligent organisms, maybe even organisms that send out radio signals.


The Executive Life; The Driving, Diving Boys of Silicon Valley
Upper-Crust executives in the San Francisco Bay area go to Bohemian Grove for their retreat.
The Silicon Valley technology crowd's idea of relaxation is the Consumer Electronics Show.
And the executives of the real estate- and construction-related industries that support high technology in the valley get their kicks courtesy of the Kitchen Pass Club.
Last week, for example, members of the club were diving in the Red Sea, just the latest in a string of adventures that dates back more than a dozen years and has included race-car driving, off-road motorcycling, fishing and a rodeo, as well as diving.


PART SHOWMAN, ALL GENIUS
James Gleick's article on Richard Feynman ("Part Showman, All Genius," Sept. 20) took me back to the 1930's, when I was his friend, classmate and teammate on the Far Rockaway High School math team.
When we competed in the Pi Mu Epsilon contest held at Columbia University, Richard came out first.


Picture This
A preview of work by Skrebneski benefited an AIDS program, Oct. 8.


Tech Notes; Neural Networks for Sorting Prints
In the movie "The Hunt for Red October," a keen-eared submarine technician relied heavily on his own intuition to identify passing ships by their sound.
In truth, sonar operators aboard Navy submarines and destroyers are aided by computers employing artificial intelligence to recognize sonar patterns.
These so-called neural networks filter the cacophony beneath the sea, permitting only sounds of "interest" to be displayed on sonar instruments.


Jennifer Miller, Geoffrey Symonds
Jennifer Elsie Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Miller of New York, was married yesterday evening to Geoffrey Lloyd Symonds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cedric R. Symonds of Sydney, Australia.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Symonds, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York public relations firm Loving &amp; Weintraub Inc.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is the president of Baxter International, a men's clothing company in New York.


Chilis Hot Enough To Singe the Ears
AFTER a recent trip to Hatch, N.M., the self-proclaimed chili capital of the world, I had a fiery vision: a garden of hot peppers in all shapes, sizes, colors and heat, from soothingly mild to the kind of hot that sends guests screaming for more Coronas with lime.
I saw field after field of chilis -- known out here as chiles and pronounced CHEE-lays, in the Spanish way -- stretching across the flat Rio Grande Valley: the long green banana-shaped medium-hot New Mexican favorite known as Big Jim (I brought back seeds!), yellow ones called Sunrise, orange ones called Sunset, purple ones called Eclipse and hundreds, thousands, millions of red ones, of course, which are Big Jim's cousin, NuMex No. 6, or the new improved 6-4, ripening under the sun.


Gallery Represents Audrey Flack Since '82
The enthusiastic article on Audrey Flack  [ "Individualist-Idealist Breaks the Rules," Sept. 27 ]  was poorly researched.
Ms.
Flack has been represented on the East End by Vered Gallery since 1982.
Partners, Ms.
Vered and Janet Lehr encouraged her in her early interest in sculpture far in advance of others in the art community.
We exhibited and sold her sculpture and watercolors and in fact arranged for her first sculptural commission, a major commission called "Islandia." It was commissioned through Vered Gallery for the new Edward Durrell Stone addition to the New York Technical College building on Jay Street in Brooklyn.
The plaster of "Islandia," illustrated in your article, was exhibited at Vered Gallery's "Nude or Naked" exhibition in 1989.
Only two years later did another cast find its way to a place of prominence in front of the Parrish Museum in Southampton.


Old Ironsides Up on Blocks
The U.S.S.
Constitution, the 194-year-old frigate known as Old Ironsides, is in drydock for inspection and repairs in Charlestown, Mass., but that does not mean it is closed for viewing.
In fact, the public can get a closeup look at the work and even come aboard, except for brief periods when the work prevents it.
The ship went into drydock about 100 yards from its usual berth on Sept. 25 and is expected to stay there for about a year.
During that time, free guided tours of the ship's spar deck will be available from 9:30 A.M. to 3:50 P.M., and until sunset, visits are possible with the aid of a self-guiding pamphlet.
The gun and berthing decks, the two levels below the spar deck, will be open less often, as crews are replacing planking and supports there.


Delayed Classic
To the Editor:
Neal Gabler states that Chaplin's abandonment of comedy for melodrama in his 1923 film "A Woman of Paris" "made him an artist." While hailed today as a classic, "A Woman of Paris" was initially greeted with such overwhelming critical and audience scorn that Chaplin never made another non-comedy.
PHIL HALL  Bronx


The Secret Is In The Mix
THIS painter has high standards: "Color has to keep the brain engaged," maintains Bruce Nicol, owner of Woods Paramount Ltd., a commercial paint company.
He favors custom formulas that have been softened with pure spectral colors rather than blacks and browns.
Off-whites mixed this way tease the eye: A white doctored with blue takes on a violet cast in winter's gray light; under incandescent light, it appears more golden.
"You begin to wonder what color the paint really is," says Nicol.
Deeper hues can also be softened with their complements.
A bit of green stirred into red paint, for instance, makes the color less raw.
Product Information: These colors are custom formulas developed by the paint companies listed below, and can be mixed by most retailers that carry their lines.
Benjamin Moore &amp; Company's paints are available at paint and hardware stores nationwide.
Pratt &amp; Lambert paints are sold at Pratt &amp; Lambert stores and by paint and hardware stores.
Sherwin Williams Paint Company's line is available only at its stores across the country. 1.
Lime Sorbet (No. 1515) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 2.
No. 1296 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 3.
Storm (No. 1478) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 4.
Nickel (No. 2232) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 5.
Granitine (No. 2309) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 6.
Violet Echo (No. 2322) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 7.
No. 462 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 8.
Edwardian Green (No. 1203) from Sherwin Williams Paint Company. 9.
No. 1441 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 10.
Blue Heron (No. 1225) from Sherwin Williams Paint Com pany. 11.
Chaste Fern (No. 1601) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 12.
Sylvan Whimsey (No. 1602) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 13.
Ancestral (No. 1426) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 14.
Pagoda Red (No. 1882) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 15.
Whale (No. 2252) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 16.
Iris Mist (No. 1041) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 17.
Balsa (No. 2042) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 18.
Angel Wings (No. 1016) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 19.
No. 1492 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 20.
No. 519 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 21.
Irish Green (No. 1735) from Sherwin Williams Paint Com pany. 22.
Cool White (No. 1514) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 23.
No. 630 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 24.
No. 980 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 25.
No. 969 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company. 26.
Mauve Mist (No. 2035) from Pratt &amp; Lambert. 27.
No. 1301 from Benjamin Moore &amp; Company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- California; Bush's Downhill Political Journey in California
"Four more weeks," the hecklers chanted gleefully as Vice President Dan Quayle tried to make his way down Grant Street in San Francisco's Chinatown the other day.
In that sarcastic message, if in nothing else, the demonstrators seemed to speak for California as a whole.
This immense state, whose 54 electoral votes represent the largest share of the national total cast by any one jurisdiction since the Civil War, has turned with a vengeance on President Bush and his Administration.


Bosnia Loss Hints at Croat-Serb Deal
When Serbian nationalist troops swept into Bosanski Brod earlier this week, it was more than another setback for the Bosnian Muslim Government.
For demoralized officials here, and those who depend on them, the defeat was one of the worst blows yet in a war that seems to bring the Muslims little but disaster.
And it lent credibility to a growing suspicion among Bosnian authorities that their supposed Croatian allies were in fact betraying them.
For seven months, a mixed force of Croats and Muslims defended the northern town of Bosanski Brod against firepower similar to the barrage that reduced much of the capital, Sarajevo, to ruins.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Livingston 184,000
45 Chestnut Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, dining room, full basement; taxes $3,950.
Maplewood 235,000
66 Maplewood Avenue
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; family room, 1-car garage, h/w floors, fireplace; $4,733.
Millburn 263,500
12 South Mountain Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, porch; taxes $3,570.
Short Hills 365,000
401 Hobart Avenue
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; family room, 2 fireplaces, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $6,440.
South Orange 255,000
116 South Wyoming Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 2-half bath, 23-year-old Tudor; slate roof, 2-car garage; taxes $6,188.
West Orange 320,000
46 Warren Road
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 34-year-old colonial; inground pool, patio, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $10,341.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y. 295,000
7 Salem Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split-level; 2 dens, living room, fireplace, alarm and sprinkler systems; taxes $4,767.
New Haven, Conn. 129,000
577 Quinipiac Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 122-year-old Victorian; parquet floor in entry, curved staircase, 60-by-154-ft. lot; taxes not available.
Bayport, L.I. 140,000
77 Edgewater Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.


A Choppy Maiden Voyage
CALAMITY seemed to be scheduled, like bingo.
There was The Morning They Made Coffee With Saltwater, The Day the Swimming Pool Emptied Itself, The Evening the Elevators Became Ovens and The Night the Lights Went Out, to name a few.
Somehow calamities turn into tales, and what one remembers are the ocean and an endearing small cruise ship, the Crown Jewel, on her maiden voyage from Barcelona to New York last summer.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Wednesday
Sept. retail sales, percent change
0.5
0.1
Sept. producer price, percent change
0.1
0.4
Late Sept. car sales, in millions, annual rate
6.8
6.0
Thursday
Sept. consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
Friday
Sept. trade deficit, billions
-$7.8
-$7
Sept. industrial production, percent change
-0.5
0
Sept. capacity utilization, percent
78.5
78.3
Today: Presidential debate Monday: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade releases report on Japanese trade practices  Tuesday: Fed chairman Alan Greenspan visits Japan *
Vice Presidential debate  Thursday Second Presidential debate *
Bundesbank Council meets


Linda Chow and Mark S. Kaplan
Linda Hsui-Ling Chow, a daughter of Kit H. Chow of Washington and the late Dr.
Charles C. T. Chow, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Stuart Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart R. Kaplan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Ralph M. Moore, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Wellesley College Chapel in Wellesley, Mass.
Ms.
Chow, who is keeping her name, is a product manager in Wellesley for JYACC, a computer-software and consulting company based in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father, a pathologist, was an associate at the Oscar B. Hunter Memorial Laboratory, a medical research center in Washington.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PLAYFUL ART FROM JAPAN
Under the title "Asobi: Play in the Arts of Japan," an exhibition of scrolls, paintings, sketches, prints, boxes, games, fans and netsuke carvings, opening today at the Katonah Museum of Art, shows a Japan that is far different from today's workaholic society.


Two G.O.P. Senators Join D'Amato on the Stump
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato took his television attack ads live today, criticizing his Democratic challenger, Attorney General Robert Abrams, as "hopelessly liberal," in appearances here and in Albany and Buffalo.
Mr.
D'Amato, who was accompanied on his campaign swing upstate by fellow Republican Senators Bob Dole of Kansas and Slade Gorton of the State of Washington, also took his Senate-floor filibuster with him.
"While my opponent was sleeping," he told a small airport rally in Buffalo, "Senator Moynihan and I were down on that floor fighting for what is right." He denied Mr.
Abrams's accusation that his dramatic, but unsuccessful, last-ditch effort last week to amend a tax bill to help keep a Smith-Corona typewriter plant from closing in Cortland was a political move.
Talking Politics
On the ride on a small chartered plane from Buffalo to Rochester, Mr.
D'Amato regaled his Senate colleagues with vivid descriptions of his advertisements criticizing Mr.
Abrams for taking contributions from donors who do business with the Attorney General's office.
Mr.
Dole, who is known for an acerbic campaign style, gave him this advice: "Why don't you ask him to step down?"


Stefanie Amadeo, Ian Eric Luyt
Stefanie Amadeo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruno Amadeo of Wayside, N.J., was married Friday to Ian Eric Luyt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Guy Luyt of Johannesburg.
The Rev.
Joseph J. Tyrrell, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel in New York.
Ms.
Amadeo, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an international trade analyst in the Department of Commerce in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University, from which her husband received an M.B.A.


Cuomo Seeks $800 Million For New Jobs
On Nov. 3, New York voters will decide whether to gamble on adding $800 million to the state's already-worrisome level of debt in the hope of reversing the worst loss of jobs to hit the state since the 1930's.
Proposal One on the ballot asks voters to approve a bond act that would authorize the state to issue $800 million worth of bonds to finance investments in roads, sewers and other public infrastructure projects throughout New York.


For the Mets, Safety First
To the Sports Editor:
You under-reported the Mets' defensive skills after they lost, 19-2, to Pirates last week.
The Mets not only blocked two extra points as you reported, but also had a safety.
FU-TIN MAN Holmdel, N.J.


A Refrain: Black Is Back
The trendsetters have packed away their white jeans of summer for their autumnal uniform of black designer jeans worn with black shirt, vest and an occasional gray jacket.
The mix is tied together at the waist with a silver-embossed black leather belt.
Earlier in the century, in Paris, Coco Chanel popularized the little black dress accompanied by a string of pearls as the smart, functional uniform that endured until the fashion revolution of the late 60's.
The all-black concept was revived as a uniform for punks in the late 70's, and it reappeared in the late 80's as the neo-gothic style.


Of Optometrists And Ophthalmologists
Not enough in the Sept. 13 article "Optometrist vs. Ophthalmologist: Trading Barbs and Lawsuits" was devoted to the real issue: the potential toxicity and dangers of ophthalmic preparations.
Medications are absorbed into the bloodstream through the conjunctival blood vessels.
They follow the tears through the tear sac and tear ducts into the back of the nose and the throat, where further absorption can occur.
A beta adrenergic blocker, a medication that is used for glaucoma but that in susceptible patients can cause asthma and cardiac arrhythmia, was the only drug mentioned in the article.
In addition, cortisone in eye drops can cause cataracts and glaucoma.
An anticholinesterase used in glaucoma and certain cases of crossed eyes in children can deplete body stores of a chemical necessary to awaken a patient from general anesthesia.
The reverse is also true. There are ocular side effects of systemic drugs.
People prescribing medication should have the broadest background in biochemistry, physiology, pharmacology and general medicine.
Anything less is "playing doctor." STUART E. WUNSH, M.D.
Clifton The writer is an ophthalmologist.


Bruins' Late Goal Forces Tie
The Islanders are still without a victory, but they took comfort in a hard-earned 3-3 tie tonight with the Bruins at Boston Garden.
Pierre Turgeon got credit for two goals, although he insisted afterward that Derek King scored the second that gave New York a brief 3-2 lead late in regulation time.
Glenn Healy, the Islanders' goalie, had a most impressive night, stopping 42 of 45 shots.
Eight of his saves came in overtime, when the Islanders killed off one of nine Boston power plays.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 140,000
77 Edgewater Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Blue Point 149,000
184 Bluepoint Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces; taxes $5,100.
East Norwich 200,000
71 Timothy Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, sunroom, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,900.
Muttontown 445,000
1929 Midlane Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, fireplace, 1-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $4,700.
Sayville 195,000
359 Astor Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, in-ground pool, 1-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Upper Brookville 1.57 million
27 Wood Hill Road  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 2-year-old contemporary; indoor pool, 4-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $22,000.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y. 295,000
7 Salem Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split-level; 2 dens, living room, fireplace, alarm and sprinkler systems; taxes $4,767.
New Haven, Conn. 129,000
577 Quinipiac Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 122-year-old Victorian; parquet floor in entry, curved staircase, 60-by-154-ft. lot; taxes not available.
Livingston, N.J. 184,000
45 Chestnut Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, dining room; taxes $3,950.


This Director's Wish List Doesn't Include Hollywood
Here are some things Hal Hartley wants: true enlightenment, a golden retriever, love, the chance to keep making the kinds of movies he likes.
Here are some things he doesn't want: a house in the suburbs, more first dates, a fat contract with a Hollywood studio.


Queen Mary Will Remain In California
The Queen Mary is apparently going to stay at her longtime berth in Long Beach, Calif., after a summer in which bidders from around the world tried to give the liner-turned-tourist attraction a new home.
The City of Long Beach, where the 800-foot Art Deco liner had been berthed since 1967, agreed on Sept. 30 to assume ownership.
The ship's owner, the Harbor Commission of the Port of Long Beach, will give the ship to the city at no cost and will contribute toward its renovation.
The ship's hotel closed Sept. 30.
The city hopes to find a new operator and reopen it sometime next year.
Plans are to continue tours of the Queen Mary and keep the three restaurants open during the transition.


A Mexican Icon


Public &amp; Private; Rumor Has It
The rumor moved quickly, from newspaper reporter to magazine writer to television correspondent and back again, in the whisper-down-the-lane world of journalism.
Someone had said that Bill Clinton considered applying for citizenship in another country while trying to avoid the Vietnam draft.
But it had a smell about it, a tinny taste: no one had actually seen a letter that was said to exist, but a friend of a friend knew someone who had.
First one newspaper was said to be preparing a page 1 story, then another.
Some versions said the approach was to the Swedes; others said it was to British officials.


OCT. 4-10: Woe Is Oleo?; The Case Against Solid Vegetable Fat
"I always knew margarine wasn't good for you," chortled all those folks who had never given up butter.
Butter lovers may have felt vindicated last week by new conclusive data showing that partially hydrogenated vegetable oils -- found in margarine and shortening and many baked and fried foods -- may be as bad for the heart as butter and lard.
Until now, the evidence has been equivocal.


YOU ARE BALKANS
Complicity.
A word I understand all too well.
As a gay man, I have had occasion, more often than most, to be an accomplice to the violence against my people by my silence.
Slavenka Drakulic's essay "You Are Balkans, the World Tells Us, Mythological, Wild, Dangerous" (Sept. 13) is a powerful reminder -- in the tradition of the wartime and postwar writings of Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus -- that there is no way to avoid complicity.
Or, rather, that there is only one way, which is to act.
Powerful and tragic words, given that we still need to hear this message all these years later.
MICHAEL GRANT
Madison, Wis.


All About/CD-ROM's; Text! Video! Sound! In a Gizmo Now
Keeping up with the latest consumer electronics gizmos is about to become even more confusing as several companies rush to market with compact disk, read-only memory systems.
These systems, which combine sound and video with computers, are known as CD-ROM, and are already thickening the alphabet soup of acronyms into nearly a stew.
CD-ROM disks look just like the silver audio compact disks that have rendered vinyl records largely obsolete.
But in addition to CD-quality audio, the disks' electronic grooves hold digitized "multimedia" signals that recreate text, video and graphics.
Philips, Kodak and other big names in the business are trying to convince consumers they need CD-ROM to expand their horizons in entertainment, business and education.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
PUZZLING PRESIDENT
GEORGE BUSH has at least one thing that Bill Clinton doesn't have, a jigsaw puzzle made by John Madden of Wantagh.
"He's a puzzler," Mr.
Madden said, of the President.
"Mrs. Bush buys the puzzles for him. I think they help him relax."


RULES REWRITTEN ON NUCLEAR WASTE
Frustrated with delays in establishing a nuclear waste repository in the Nevada desert, Congress has laid out new standards that could be the basis of a radical departure from current thinking about storing the highly radioactive waste from civilian and military reactors.
One provision in the energy bill passed by Congress last week and expected to be signed by President Bush would make the Secretary of Energy the custodian of the waste for the indefinite future; under previous plans, the repository was to be sealed up and eventually abandoned.


Tracey R. Forde and Jeffery J. Weaver
Tracey Robin Forde, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fraser P. Forde Jr. of Central Islip, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffery Jerome Weaver, the son of Lucius Weaver and Mildred Weaver, both of Dorchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Cecily P. Broderick y Guerra performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Hempstead, L.I.
Mrs.
Weaver, 24 years old, is an assistant account executive at the Young &amp; Rubicam New York advertising agency.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University, from which Mr.
Weaver received an M.B.A.


POSTINGS: From Tight to Roomy; Cancer Research Space
For the last two years the Cancer Prevention Research Institute has operated out of tight quarters in rented space at 36 East 22d Street.
But early next year the nonprofit organization will move into an eight-story 1906 Beaux Arts-style building at 11 East 22d Street, across the street from its current space.
The building was bought by a donor for the institute's laboratory and field work in cancer prevention.
The institute, founded in 1989, would name neither the buyer of the new building nor the price paid for it.
Details of the nominal rent it will pay for its new space have not been completed.
The new space will be renovated to provide offices, a library, a conference room and space for the institute's epidemiology department and new biochemistry laboratory.


50 Years Later, Russia Honors U.S. Saviors
For many American seamen who sailed the Arctic aboard allied Liberty ships, running a gantlet of German firepower to supply the Russians in World War II, the treacherous Murmansk run still evokes chilling and painful memories.
"The first time I heard and saw a German scooper, a German dive bomber, it scared the living bejesus out of me," recalled Joseph Zuvicich, a former merchant marine.
In 1942, he made the terrifying 1,600-mile voyage from Scotland to the Soviet port of Murmansk on an oil tanker called the Antietam, which supplied the ships in the convoy.


Samantha Susskind and Noel Mannion
Joyce Susskind of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Samantha Maria Susskind to Noel Thomas Mannion, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Mannion, also of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Susskind is a legal assistant in New York for the United States Department of Justice.
She graduated from New York University, as did her fiance, and received a law degree from New York Law School.
Her father, the late David Susskind, was the talk-show host and television producer.
Her mother is a former talk-show host in Toronto.


Overcoming the Fear of Public Speaking
To the Editor:
Mary Rowland in her article "The Advantage of Taking Risks" (Sept. 13) reports that the No. 1 fear of most business people is having to give a formal presentation.
She then uses the experiences of Christine Seltz, who spent a summer reading her work in front of her fellow students at the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics, as an example of one approach to overcoming the fear of speaking in public.


Serbs' Shell in Sarajevo Kills 3 Children and Wounds 10
A mortar fired from Serbian nationalist positions on the hillsides surrounding Sarajevo exploded among a group of children in a courtyard today, killing 3 of them and seriously wounding 10 others, at least two of whom had limbs amputated.


What Income Figures For Asians Also Show
To the Editor:
"A Census Disparity for Asians in U.S." (news article, Sept. 20) reflects the psychological malaise about money and happiness that is afflicting many people in this society.
You report that Asian-American males earn lower salaries than Caucasians despite their higher education credentials.
You conclude therefore that an advantage in schooling fails to bring a wage advantage.


New Jersey Gun-Ban War Resumes
Ending a late-summer cease-fire during which the fight over the attempt to repeal New Jersey's tough gun law briefly cooled, both sides in the debate returned to their fronts last week with new battle tactics.
Gov.
Jim Florio fired the first salvo on Wednesday when the Democratic State Committee chairman, Raymond J. Lesniak, announced a cable television advertising campaign supporting the Governor's veto of a Republican-sponsored bill that would repeal a state ban against the ownership and the sale of semiautomatic assault-style weapons.


Serbian Planes Said to Kill 19 After U.N. Ban
At least 19 people were killed and 34 wounded in Serbian air attacks on the Bosnian town of Gradacac, less than 24 hours after the United Nations imposed a ban on military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina, radio reports said.
Other civilians were hit in Serbian air strikes in Croatian-populated villages in northern Bosnia near Brcko, Sarajevo and Zagreb radios reported.
They said Bosnian forces had shot down one Serbian MIG fighter.


Saundra Shepherd, 47, Physician Concerned About Needy Children
Saundra D. Shepherd, a pediatrician and educator who campaigned for medical care for needy children in New York City and in Africa, died on Thursday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of chronic pulmonary disease, a family spokesman said.


When a Mother Is Blamed for Her Child's Unusual Illness
On a tape recorded at a far-off foster home, 8-year-old Aaron Storck strums an out-of-tune guitar, and in a sweet high-pitched voice sings of his longing to be home again with a mother who has devoted herself to his continuing medical care.
"God, please help get me home to my mother, my sisters and my brother," he sings sadly, tunelessly.


The Lesson of the Drunkand the Streetlight
THE REDISCOVERY OF THE MIND
By John R. Searle. 270 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: A Bradford Book/ The MIT Press.


Lifted Spirits (and Faces)
Ram Dass, the spiritual guru, brought his message to a highly material place last month: Saks Fifth Avenue in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He spoke at the department store on behalf of La Prairie, a cosmetics company, which was introducing a skin-care product called Age Management Serum.
Other speakers on the eclectic roster included Joan Rivers, Kathy Keaton, and Dr.
Joyce Brothers.
"They asked me if I would speak about the spiritual dimensions of aging," said the author of the best-selling 1971 book "Be Here Now," who was known as Dr.
Richard Alpert when he taught psychology classes with Timothy Leary at Harvard in the 1960's.
"I said I'll talk to any audience but they couldn't use me in any advertising. I did not speak about their product."


Conversations/Pamela S. Brier; With Verve and M &amp; M's, Bellevue's New Chief Readies Her Platform
TEN months ago Pamela S. Brier became executive director of Bellevue Hospital Center -- the 10th person to hold the job in as many years.
Since she took over in January, she has proved to be a rarity in New York City's municipal hospital system: an administrator who earns praise from such historical antagonists as the unions, medical schools and the city administration.
Her management style is evident from a first glance around her office.
A plate of chocolate chip cookies sits on the coffee table, wind-up toys are scattered over the conference table, and bowls of M &amp; M's are everywhere.
She spends about $800 of her own money on the chocolate candies every year.


These Boots Are Not Made For Walkin'
Germaine is the name of these bondage-style boots, for the dominatrix in you.
Sensible they're not.
Their 3 1/2-inch heel is the highest Freelance makes.
The ribbed polyurethane sole does provide good traction in wet weather, though.
They stop halfway between ankle and calf, with a square, silver-colored Bobby Shaftoe buckle on the outside and a zipper on the inside.


INSIDE
Iraq Releases American
In an about-face, Iraq freed an American munitions expert seized near its border with Kuwait.
Page 12.
Toronto Takes 2-1 Lead
The Blue Jays beat Oakland, 7-5, in Game 3 of the American League playoff.
SportsSunday, section 8.
Some copies of the sports section went to press before the game ended.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Red Cross Buys Former Factory
THE American Red Cross has bought a 280,000-square-foot former sweater factory to consolidate and enlarge blood testing and distribution services that supply 94 hospitals in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
By November 1993, the former home of Somerset Knitting Mills at Seventh and Spring Garden streets will become a laboratory and warehouse center with about 1,000 employees.
Instead of a blood testing and typing center in each state, 14 regional centers, of which this will be one, are being created, said Christie Phillips, a spokesperson for the Pennsylvania-New Jersey regional office in Philadelphia.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2


Apartheid's Children: Afrikaner Writers Today
DURING the eight years that South Africa's white minority regime locked him up for treason, Carl Niehaus, then a young theological student, read books written by his fellow Afrikaners to keep abreast of the world beyond his cell in Pretoria's Central Prison.
"When you're in prison, you read very carefully and you search for every implication to understand what is going on outside," said Mr.
Niehaus, who was freed in 1990.
Mr.
Niehaus, who is now a spokesman for the African National Congress, took advantage of his white nation's pride in its language, the 17th-century Dutch imported to southern Africa by the first white settlers and rendered indigenous by the infusion of Portuguese, Malay and African language like Zulu and Xhosa.
Even as a political prisoner, he could order books from the public library in Pretoria.


You Saw It on Film, Now See It on Stage
I'M CONFUSED.
I'd like to come up with a truth of some sort, a dramatic theorem, or at least a generalization that will make sense of my week's play-going.
But the conclusions I reached in one theater -- fairly confidently, I thought -- are directly contradicted by those I formulated -- no less confidently -- upon leaving the second theater.


Suzanne Vega's Version Of the Human Comedy
In a pop climate of big noises and angry outcries, the folk-pop singer Suzanne Vega has always gone defiantly against the grain by writing knotty little songs about people who feel insignificant and victimized.
And in "Rock in This Pocket (Song of David)," the opening cut of her new album, "99.9 F degrees," she slyly addresses the problem of being a quiet folk miniaturist in a heavy-metal world by imagining herself as David to the rock world's Goliath.
"What's so small to you is so large to me/ If it's the last thing I do/ I'll make you see," she declares in a voice that sounds demure but stubborn.
By far Vega's most rewarding record, "99.9 F degrees" (A&amp;M 54005; CD and cassette) is the first album in which she breaks almost completely away from the conventions of the New York folk milieu that nurtured her.
Produced by Mitchell Froom, a studio wizard with an ear for odd noises and instrumental juxtapositions, the record is filled with intriguing Dadaist clangs, clunks and honks that silhouette her ruminations in a stylized carnival atmosphere.
At moments, the record recalls the junk-shop Salvation Army-band style of Tom Waits's much-admired art-rock album "Swordfishtrombones." In other places it echoes the more dissonant moments of the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band."


Early Salvos in the War To Capture People's Minds
After World War I and the Russian Revolution, visual images came to the forefront in the war for people's minds.
George Bernard Shaw said, "Next to torture, art persuades most," but photography had taken art's place.
Lenin called for the new Soviet state to create "a political and social journalism infused with images," and in 1926 the Russian artist El Lissitzky wrote: "The invention of easel-pictures produced great works of art, but their effectiveness has been lost. The cinema and the weekly magazine have triumphed."
They triumphed everywhere.
Though the Soviet Union led the world in the politicization of images, some of its ideas immediately caught on elsewhere.
In Germany in the 1920's, Communists founded the worker-photography movement, a bold attempt to teach workers how to photograph -- and in so doing politicize the proletariat and give it control of its own image.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  C.I.A. AND JUSTICE SQUARE OFF
A fractious dispute between two normally secretive agencies grew as the C.I.A. and Justice Department officials accused each other of concealing information about a bank fraud involving Iraq.  1  IRAQIS FREE U.S.
ARMS EXPERT
In a swift about-face, Iraq released an American munitions expert who had been abducted in Kuwait.  12  LATIN AMERICA'S TIME BOMB
Forty years after Latin Americans started migrating to their cities, an abundance of miserable shantytowns is the bitter fruit of excessive urbanization.  1  OUTCRY AGAINST A SHOGUN
In a country that rarely sees political activism, people are gathering under banners to applaud speakers shouting for the ouster of Japan's most powerful politician.  3  Seoul replaces three ministers to contain a vote-buying scandal.  6  NUMBED GEORGIANS VOTE TODAY
Today Georgia holds a second national election.
But a secessionist conflict has drained any sense of jubilation from the event.  14  CROATIA SOLD OUT, BOSNIANS SAY
Bosnian Government officials are convinced that Croatian forces gave up the town of Bosanski Brod as part of a traitorous deal with Serbia.  10  Ignoring a U.N. air ban, Serbian planes barrage a Bosnian town.  10  Amid dissent, U.S. officials talk of sending guns to Bosnians.  10  U.S.-CHINA TRADE PACT
Under some pressure, Beijing agreed to end almost all official and unofficial curbs on U.S. imports.  7  The Slovak leader is in a running battle with the press.  8  Romanians choose today between an ex-Communist and a reformer.  14  Mexico's conservatives say their party had mortgaged its soul.  15  Israeli forces clash with Palestinians, and an Arab is killed.  12  Bobby Fischer wins another chess game with ingenious endplay.  49  National 18-40  THE CANDIDATES CRAM
The Presidential candidates secluded themselves for the most part, preparing for the big debate in St.
Louis tonight.  1  Is there any question the candidates have not already been asked?  22  'THIS IS JUST A LOT OF GARBAGE'
Conversations with voters in the St.
News analysis: The members of the 102d Congress left Washington last week without good humor or credibility, but for good reason: They will be remembered as much for their embarrassments as for their legislation.  1  'THE LAST HERO WE HAVE'
The debate over how to treat Christopher Columbus has been raging all across America in this quincentenary year.
But it is particularly sharp in Boston, where ethnic passions are always near the surface.  18  THE WEST AND ITS LIFEBLOOD
As ever when the issue is Western water, the politics of the water resources bill that Congress passed last week is complex.
And it is uncertain whether the President will sign the measure.  18  YUCCA MOUNTAIN REVISITED
Frustrated with delays in establishing a nuclear waste repository in the Nevada desert, Congress has laid out new standards that could be the basis of a radical departure from current thinking about the storing of highly radioactive waste from civilian and military reactors.  31  Metro 41-51  TUBERCULOSIS THREAT
The United States has stumbled into its first preventable epidemic, a wave of tuberculosis with strains so virulent they threaten to return pockets of American society to a time when antibiotics were unknown.  1  BETTING ON DEBT FOR JOBS
On Nov. 3, New York voters will decide whether to gamble on adding $800 million to the state's already worrisome level of debt in the hope of reversing the worst loss of jobs to hit the state since the 1930's.  41  MOTHER IN UNUSUAL CUSTODY WAR
A woman accused of either fabricating or causing the illnesses of her youngest son is locked in a custody battle that turns on the suspicions, blame and recriminations sometimes directed at parents of children with unusual medical problems.  41  TRAVAILS OF THE TOWED
In a city where virtually every street is a tow-away zone at some time on some days, a trip to the pound underscores the passionate love-hate affair some New Yorkers have with their cars.  41  City Council debates lead-paint program.  42  Parents' voices heard in school boycott.  43  Busboy stabbed to death on Bronx subway.  43  Risky prisoner-monitoring program ends.  46  Stinging new TV ads in Senate battle.  47  Senator D'Amato calls Bob Abrams "hopelessly liberal." 47  Mr.
Abrams on the offensive in Buffalo.  47  Obituaries 50
Rev. James D. Watson, leader in civil rights causes.  Saundra D. Shepherd, physician.


Paris: Works in Progress
This week, the Spring 1993 ready-to-wear collections kick off in Paris.
And, as always, no one is quite ready.
But the busiest man in town has to be Karl Lagerfeld.
Using his chauffeur-driven car as an adjunct office, the designer shuttles among the design ateliers of his three major collections: the one that bears his name; Chanel, and, after a seven-year hiatus, Chloe.
Lagerfeld's day begins at 7 A.M. and stretches on for 12 hours of last-minute fittings, sketching and meetings, with a minimum of 15 people in each studio waiting to get his attention.
Meanwhile, similar scenes are fermenting elsewhere in Paris.
Out of this brew, longer hemlines, pants and more fluid silhouettes seem to be emerging as the looks of the moment.


Explosion at California Refinery Forces Hundreds to Flee


Challenges and Charms Of a Toll Collector's Life
AN Acura wheeled up to Booth 3 at the Union Toll Plaza of the Garden State Parkway one recent morning.
The driver started to hand Ida Lakeland a dollar bill -- and discovered that his window was still closed.
"I could have made that easier," he said.
As the rush hour heated up, another toll collector, Bradshaw Jefferson, headed out toward Booth 13, a bright orange vest over his green and yellow uniform.
Crossing the lanes, he called out: "This is World War III; it's combat. Every time you walk in front of cars, your life is in someone's hands."


Scandal Stirring Untypical Anger From Japanese
When Japan's latest scandal hit the headlines here, this country's leaders responded the way they traditionally do in a crisis: Explain nothing, make a few token apologies, and ride out any grumbling about corruption and politicians who seem above the law.
After all, the flow of a few million dollars into the hands of politicians does not usually trigger much audible dissent here.
This time, for reasons that are as murky as the machinations of Japanese politics, the formula seems to have failed.
Over the past few days, Japanese television and newspapers have begun a campaign of outrage against the man at the center of the scandal, the country's most powerful politician, Shin Kanemaru.
And as public protests have grown, members of the ruling party, apparently sensing that some invisible line has been crossed that suddenly makes it permissible to attack the country's most fearsome political shogun, are starting to call openly for his resignation.


Not Necessarily Columbus Day
Oct. 12 is not exactly 500 years after Columbus discovered the New World.
Land was indeed sighted on Columbus's first voyage shortly after midnight on Oct. 12, 1492.
But that was the date on the Julian calendar, which Spain and most of Roman Catholic Europe began abandoning in 1582, under a plan sponsored by Pope Gregory XIII.


Inspired by Visits to Maine, a Writer Traces One of Its Smallest Communities
WISE men in Hasidic folk tales started on the way to resolution by pointing to two possibilities.
"On the one hand," they would start.


Will the Breeders' Cup Return Glitter to Arazi?
The United States has been the best of places and worst of places for Arazi, the French-trained colt who was brilliant at 2 and has turned average at 3.
As of now, it appears that Arazi's tale of two continents will include at least one more chapter.
Barring yet another setback in training, his handlers plan to enter him in the Breeders' Cup on Oct. 31 at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, Fla.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
July 92
July 91
Change
Starts
1,120
1,053
+ 6.4%
Completions
1,205
1,065
+13.1%
Sales
607
505
+20.2%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.08
8.17
9.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.25
5.28
6.83
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.96
8.04
8.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.15
5.15
6.65
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.97
8.05
8.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.95
4.95
6.67
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.16
8.25
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.86
5.96
7.37
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.02
3.16
5.40
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.58
7.58
9.10
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Scottie Mirviss and Paul Carvajal
PAUL CARVAJAL, 36 years old, recalled the moment he fell for Adrienne Mirviss, 38, who is known as Scottie.
"Things happened for me when Scottie told me she got all these environmental magazines but could never read them because they made her so sad," he said.
"I felt like I had met my match. The first time she ever got angry with me was when I said whales were not as intelligent as dolphins."


2 Records Are Set In Ironman Event
Mark Allen of Cardiff, Calif., broke away from Cristian Bustos of Chile at the turnaround to win the Gatorade Ironman triathlon yesterday in Kona, Hawaii.
Allen's time of 8 hours 9 minutes 9 seconds broke his previous record of 8:09:15, which he set in 1989.
Bustos placed second, in 8:16:28, and Pauli Kiuru of Finland finished third in 8:17:29.
It was Allen's fourth consecutive ironman victory.


Making a Difference; How to Make Movies: The Short Course
Taking a shortcut doesn't always mean skimping on quality, but is an eight-week filmmaking course a valid alternative to a two- to four-year stint in a film school?
Well, Jerry Sherlock thinks so.
Of course that might have something to do with the fact that Mr.
Sherlock, a veteran producer of stage, television and motion pictures, is the founder of the New York Film Academy.


A Clinton Win: Good for Stocks, Bad for Bonds?
The WORD on the Street is that a victory by Gov.
Bill Clinton would be good for stocks and bad for bonds.
If he wins, as current polls indicate is likely, Mr.
Clinton is expected in his first hundred days as President to take a muscular, Franklin Roosevelt-like approach to the slump.
Many people bet he would push through a fiscal stimulus program to shake some life back into the economy.
By showing he means business about the economy, he might help revive consumer and investor confidence.
Mr.
Clinton would also no doubt use his Presidential pulpit to tell how his huge public investment program will build a more prosperous America.
All this would in theory spur growth, which, says Neal Soss, chief economist at First Boston, could cause a stock market rally because "one would expect that corporate profits would be enhanced." A public investment program would mean more spending on highways, railroads, airports and telecommunications and would probably be a boon for construction, electronics and transportation-equipment companies.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Wednesday
Sept. retail sales, percent change
0.5
0.1
Sept. producer price, percent change
0.1
0.4
Late Sept. car sales, in millions, annual rate
6.8
6.0
Thursday
Sept. consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
Friday
Sept. trade deficit, billions
-$7.8
-$7
Sept. industrial production, percent change
-0.5
0
Sept. capacity utilization, percent
78.5
78.3
Today: Presidential debate Monday: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade releases report on Japanese trade practices  Tuesday: Fed chairman Alan Greenspan visits Japan *
Vice Presidential debate  Thursday Second Presidential debate *
Bundesbank Council meets


Baby's Father Charged With Murder, but Friends Recall Only Love
Neighbors of an Upper West Side man accused of killing his 2-month-old daughter reacted yesterday with disbelief that the father whom they watched playing gently with his infant could also be the one who the police say broke several of her ribs.
The father, David Miranda, 20 years old, of 324 West 96th Street, was arrested Friday, almost 24 hours after his daughter, Apple, was pronounced dead of a brain hemorrhage.


PART SHOWMAN, ALL GENIUS
It was one of Feynman's continual complaints that people look for complicated answers.
In your article, there is a photograph, taken at the hearings on the shuttle disaster, of Feynman's demonstration that rubber stiffens when it's cold.
Feynman's point (as he recounts in his autobiography) was to cut through all the elaborate explanations that were not explanations but rationalizations.
He was proved correct when the chairman of the committee reproached him: "Dr. Feynman, we are talking about these men's jobs." GABRIEL AUSTIN
New York, N.Y.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SUICIDE BLONDE By Darcey Steinke. Atlantic Monthly, $19.


What Happened to Campaign Reform?
"It's the economy, stupid." Recent polls demonstrate the wisdom of that blunt sign in Bill Clinton's headquarters.
When voters are asked what issue they most want the candidates to talk about, almost 60 percent cite economic concerns as Topic A (compared with only 4 percent for Topic B, education).
Understandably, then, President Bush, Governor Clinton and Ross Perot will devote much of their first debate tonight to hot economic argument.
Even so, another issue that provokes voter anger deserves the candidates' attention tonight: reclaiming control of the political system from the grip of money and privilege.


Millard Fillmore Was Right
THE PACIFIC CENTURY
America and Asia in a Changing World.
By Frank Gibney.
Illustrated. 596 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $40.


For a Doctor, Free Fall Is Fun and a Challenge
THE Professionals in Medicine Parachuting Society may be the only nonprofit group in the state that refers to itself as pimps.
The sky divers' headquarters is in Melville, where its founder and chairman, Dr.
Stuart Selkin, an otolaryngologist, lives.
But the Blue Sky Ranch in upstate Gardiner is the principal drop zone.


Becoming More Aware of Chanterelles
IN recent years, chanterelles, which for most of us were a rare treat, have become extremely popular in the United States.
Now, they not only show up on the menus of restaurants across the nation but they are also a familiar sight in the fruit and vegetable departments of specialty shops.
From now through the winter they will be available -- with varying degrees of quality.
Recently, the ones on the market have been excellent.
American chanterelles grow in the wild in the Pacific Northwest and some places on the East Coast.
They are larger than their European counterparts (some as big as demitasse saucers in the last couple of weeks), but they have as much flavor.
They should be plump, their frilled edges firm, not sunken or broken.
They will keep for about a week, covered with a lightly dampened kitchen towel.


Fleeting Reflection


Caroline Coleman, Peter Meriwether
Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Coleman of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Virginia Coleman, to Peter Meriwether O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. O'Neill of Oyster Bay, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Coleman, until recently a law clerk for Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, will join the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell as an associate in January.
She graduated from Princeton University and received law degrees from University of Oxford and Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Plasma Physics Corporation, a research company in Locust Valley.


Walker Seeking Minimum Of Pros
LeRoy Walker, who will be elected president of the United States Olympic Committee on Sunday, is already spending much of his time deflecting the Olympic flirtations of market-conscious professional sports leagues in North America.
Walker said today that he would meet next week in Atlanta with David Stern, commissioner of the National Basketball Association, to try to diffuse their differences and work out a compromise, through the USA Basketball federation, that would halve the league's participation at the 1996 Olympic Games.


The Big Foreign Push to Buy Into U.S. Airlines
After a lifetime of flying to such major gateways as New York and Los Angeles -- and putting up with the delays and confusion of making connections there to go abroad -- passengers from small cities across the country may finally be getting a break.
A small but growing number of alliances between United States and foreign airlines holds out the promise to many of these flyers of much smoother connections from more hubs closer to home, and of lower prices as well.
Not everyone will benefit, though, from the new approach, known as "seamless travel," which melds most of the operations of the foreign and domestic carriers into one.
The alliances could also result in a loss of service in some domestic markets as the biggest carriers carve up territories and freeze out competition.
This could even lead to monopoly pricing on many major routes.


Textbook Case
To the Editor:
In "Chaplin Blazed the Trail. Woody Allen Follows."  [ Sept. 27 ] , Neal Gabler makes a serious blunder when he concludes that geniuses must play by different rules.
The problem with this position is that the actions of everyone, even geniuses, affect other people.
When older men make sexual advances toward younger women, they risk betraying trust and damaging women's self-esteem and future relationships.


City Council Debates Plan on Lead Paint
The City Council has begun wrestling with the difficult question of how to make New York City's program to rid apartments of lead paint less costly while still protecting children from lead hazards.
Arguing that a state judge's strict interpretation of the current law on the removal of lead paint has made the law too difficult and expensive to carry out, the Dinkins administration has submitted legislation to change the criteria housing inspectors use to determine which apartments pose a risk to children.


Wendy Pepper And John Stewart
Anne Eustis Pepper, a daughter of Anne E. McLucas of Washington and Charles W. Pepper of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to John Gardner Stewart, a son of Martha Stewart and David Stewart, both of Washington.
The Rev.
Craig Biddle, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Foxcroft School in Middleburg, Va.
Mrs.
Stewart, who is 28 years old and is known as Wendy, owns Wendy Pepper Designs, a women's clothing design company in Middleburg.
She graduated from the University of Washington.
Her father is a broker at Patricia Watts-Wearn Inc., a real-estate agency in Palm Beach.
The bride's grandfather G. Willing Pepper of Media, Pa., was a president of the Scott Paper Company in Philadelphia.
She is a stepdaughter of Don H. McLucas Jr. of Washington and Anne C. Pepper of Palm Beach.


Business Diary/October 4-9
THE ECONOMY The Nafta Bandwagon Rolls Toward Congress


Elizabeth Frank, David D. McGraw
Elizabeth Lane Frank, a daughter of Walter N. Frank Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., and Brooke B. Frank of Miami, was married yesterday to David Durand McGraw, a son of James H. McGraw 3d of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Virginia S. Parker of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles Newberry, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
John's of Lattingtown church in Locust Valley.
Mrs.
McGraw, 26 years old, was until recently an administrative broker at Johnson &amp; Higgins, the insurance brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the senior partner of Walter N. Frank &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.


Topics of The Times; Autumn Truce
A seasoned gardener finds himself thinking kindly thoughts about nature, which in this confusing year has seemed more an adversary than an ally.
The reason is the autumn truce he seems to have won.
Bugs and funguses are no immediate menace.
The last weeds, which grew tall and bushy during his late-summer letdown, have been yanked out wholesale.
He knows, of course, that this is perhaps a Pyrrhic victory.
Insect eggs and fungus spores are just going dormant for a few months and the ripened weed seeds will sprout next year like dragon's teeth.


Senior Grandmasters Defeat Women, 39 to 33
A SELECTION of senior grandmasters defeated an opposing team of top women, 39 to 33, in Aruba in early September.
The men, all former world championship candidates, were: Lev Polugayevsky, formerly of the Soviet Union but now living in France; Wolfgang Uhlmann of Germany; Oscar Panno of Argentina; Efim Geller of Russia; Borislav Ivkov of Yugoslavia, and Vasily Smyslov of Russia, a former world titleholder.


Ready for The Madonna Family Hour?
While being gagged, bound and spanked for her new photo book, "Sex," Madonna had another project in the works that sounds a little more wholesome.
Sharon Cicero, president of television for Madonna's Time Warner production company, Maverick Pictures, said last week in a phone interview from Paris that the singer is developing a "family entertainment show for the networks to be shown on Sunday night at 8 o'clock."


Better Lucky Than Good? Once Again, Miami Is Both
They might still be unable to win a popularity contest.
But the University of Miami Hurricanes have apparently found a way to win everything else.
Miami's 17-14 victory over Penn State this afternoon, just a week removed from its punishing, emotional three-point triumph over Florida State, completed one of the most remarkable eight-day achievements in the recent history of college football.


With an Imaginative Finish, Fischer Wins Game 17
Bobby Fischer ingeniously dissolved complications into a winning endgame yesterday to defeat Boris Spassky in Game 17 of their exhibition chess match in Belgrade.
With the score 7-3 in Fischer's favor, he needs just three more victories to gain the $3.35 million prize.
Fischer's victory in this game recalls his best achievements in reducing material to reach a pure endgame where he has the entire strategy in his pocket.
So great was his positional superiority with rook and bishop against rook and knight, that Spassky was soon driven to desperation, sacrificing his minor piece in the vain hope of eliminating all pawns and struggling to a draw.
But Fischer, interweaving checkmate tactics, refused to let him off the hook.


Save Those Seeds
As you clean up the garden, save seeds from sunflowers, heirloom pole beans and poppies forgotten in the field.
It's a different kind of pleasure from ordering seeds in the spring -- a kind of coming full circle, a sense of self-sufficiency.
If you have lots, share them with friends.
If you are interested in growing chili peppers next year, these books are excellent: "Peppers: A Story of Hot Pursuits" by Amal Naj (Knopf, 1992), "The Whole Chile Pepper Book" by Dave DeWitt and Nancy Gerlach (Little, Brown, 1990) and "Peppers: The Domesticated Capsicums" by Jean Andrews (University of Texas Press, 1984).


No Headline
The whole country will tune in to see the two guys square off the way they used to tune in to watch Joe Louis or Rocky Marciano.
It has all the elements of a boxing match and they want to see one guy walk out a winner. -- DON HEWITT of "60 Minutes," who produced the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon debates.  [ 22:2. ]


Working to Save the Sound
The return of small-scale shellfish is a sign of how a concerted preservation effort has begun to restore Long Island Sound.
Article, page 46.


But Can You Dance to It?: MTV Turns to News
The television screen explodes with a flash of light and a riff of hard rock.
This is the "Bill of Rights," according to the rock group Aerosmith.
"Freedom," declares Joe Perry, the lead guitarist of Aerosmith, is the right "to use handcuffs for friendly purposes." And, as he licks whipped cream off the chest of a gorgeous blonde, Perry says: "Freedom to wear whipped cream as clothing." Finally, as two blondes wearing American-flag suits hold up the rim of a gigantic condom, a voice off-camera intones: "Freedom to wear a rubber all day -- if necessary."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 11, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Island/Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
2
37
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
26
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
4
2
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $12.50.) A countess and a British soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
5
1
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
6
3
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
7
3
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
8
7
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
9
3
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
10
13
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
11 *
3
FAMILY MAN, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The plight of a woman who falls in love with her employer, known as the toughest of bosses.
12
37
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
13
17
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
14
2
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) In the 23d century, astronauts contend with alien forces.
15
6
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is.
16 *
3
WAR DRUMS, by John Vornholt. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
25
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
73
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
1
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The Democratic candidates detail their program for "changing America."
5 *
466
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
6 *
8
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
7 *
7
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
8
65
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9
12
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
10
16
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
61
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
90
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
109
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
4
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) The revised edition of a book offering counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Slovak Leader Putting Pressure on the Press
Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar of Slovakia, whose opponents accuse him of governing autocratically since taking office in June, is making the press and television targets of sweeping criticism and threats.
In recent weeks the Government has in effect returned Slovak television to state control, as it was in the years of Communist rule.
A parliamentary steering committee, dominated by Mr.
Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, dismissed the director of Slovakia's one television network on Wednesday on a charge of incompetence.


Vienna Woods
To the Editor: Paul Hofmann's "Legends of the Vienna Woods" (Aug. 16) brought back fond memories of my youth.
However, the Vienna Woods were for us much more than a place of historic significance or heurige.
All week we looked forward to our Sunday family outings to the Vienna Woods, to breathe the fresh air, walk on the well-maintained and marked trails, enjoy a picnic lunch, and occasionally end the day at one of the many swimming pools.
There was an abundance of flowers; my father led us to secluded places to find some of the rarer ones, as well as berries and edible mushrooms.
In the winter, we skied.


Executive Action


A Full List of Recitals Begins the Fall Season
THIS may prove to be the most frustrating week of the year for Connecticut music lovers since there is an almost bewildering array of events from which to choose.
Among today's recitals are a 3 o'clock season-opener for Newtown Friends of Music at the Edmond Town Hall, the Ying String Quartet playing Beethoven, Schumann and Prokofiev (426-6470).
Also at 3, the Armstrong Chamber Concerts return to the First Congregational Church of Washington.
The program -- performed by the violinist Helen Armstrong, the trumpeter Raymond Mase, the cellist Warren Lash and the pianist Anne-Marie McDermott -- lists sonatas by Telemann and Kennan, Trios of Brahms and Beethoven (868-0522).


Of Optometrists And Ophthalmologists
The article "Optometrist vs. Ophthalmologist: Trading Barbs and Lawsuits" (Sept. 13) refers to "optometrists, who do not have medical degrees," and "ophthalmologists, who do." Optometrists may not have medical degrees, but they do have medical training.
These young people are given courses and training under qualified doctors, medical and optometric, in pathology that covers the gamut of physical diseases as well as clinical training in examining and diagnosing symptoms, because many show up in the human eye before the body sends out signals.
They have four years of intensive study of the eyes, in contrast to four years of medical school that professes to diagnose, treat and operate on every organ in the body.


Laurie P. Pesky, J. F. Rapaport
Laurie Pam Pesky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Pesky of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Jonathan Frederic Rapaport, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Rapaport of Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Martin Rozenberg performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Rapaport, 25 years old, is a marketing assistant at the Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach.
She graduated from Skidmore College, as did her husband.
Her father is the president of Zenith Travel Inc., a travel agency in New York.


Miner Contract Delayed
The National Basketball Association vetoed Miami Heat rookie HAROLD MINER's contract because of a technicality, and he had to sit out yesterday's practice while the problem was resolved.
Miner signed a restructured deal yesterday, clearing the way for him to join the team officially on the second day of camp at Palm Beach Community College in Lake Worth, Fla.


Let Students Help Choose Materials
I was appalled to read "Long Island Journal: Teachers Who Shop"  [ Sept. 13 ]  about a store that sells "education supplies for elementary school children." With all due respect for some of the items sold in the store, teachers who are buying things like birthday charts, weather charts, etc., have certainly missed a prime opportunity to encourage creative thinking in their classrooms.
Children learn by doing.
Children learn by developmentally appropriate activities.
Children learn about their surroundings and environment by being a part of it.
Teachers who purchase "educational decor" for their classrooms, instead of having the children produce the decorations have missed a few fundamental points concerning the development of critical thinking.
If children are a part of the decision-making that takes place while personally creating educational classroom decorations, their classroom becomes a wonderful child-centered environment.
ANGELA MILNER Dix Hills The writer teaches a course on creativity in the early childhood division of Suffolk Community College.


The Day-by-Daze Events For a Beleaguered Coach
SUN. 10/4 -- After a disappointing 13-10 loss to the Raiders, Handley had angry words for his players, then told reporters: "I'm not angry with the team. Don't put an emotion to everything. I am obviously ticked off, but it doesn't have to be directed at anybody. I'm upset." MON. 10/5 -- Handley concludes that the team's biggest problem was that it "didn't exhibit a killer instinct." When pressed to elaborate, Handley declined then suggested the writer would write what he wanted to no matter what.


The Need for Federal Earthquake Reinsurance
To the Editor:
Peter Kerr's article "How Big a Disaster Can Insurers Survive?" (Sept. 13) discusses the reasons the insurance industry could be severely impaired by a catastrophic earthquake that might cause $40 billion or more in insured damages.


Georgia to Hold New Vote Under Shadow of New War
The first to hold multiparty elections and the first to topple its elected President, Georgia on Sunday will also become the first former Soviet republic to hold a second national ballot.
But after two bloody conflicts and a brutal new one in the region called Abkhazia, this time there is no jubilation or illusion.
The outcome of the voting is known to all.
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister and leader of the provisional Georgian State Council, is certain to win an overwhelming electoral endorsement for his leadership from this nation, which has found in its former Communist boss the lone anchor in a whirlwind of conflict and grief.


He's Been Very Good For a Very Bad Team
One of the greatest punters in the history of pro football has been in the league since 1982.
But how many fans would know it was Rohn Stark?
That's what happens when you perform for mostly poor, unattractive Colts' teams in Baltimore and Indianapolis.
Yet Stark is, once again, the league leader, and he brings his 47.1 average into the Hoosier Dome today against the Jets.
He has led the league in punting average three times and has been to three Pro Bowls.
And coming into the season, he held the fourth-highest career mark: 43.9 yards.


Cityspire Building
To the Editor:
The Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing mentioned in the article entitled "Remaking Spaces for Public Use" in the Sept. 27, 1992, Real Estate section, was not a bankruptcy filing by the Cityspire building, but rather by the developer, West 56th Street Associates, of which Ian Bruce Eichner was the general partner.
It is as a result of the sponsor's bankruptcy filing that the public portions of the Cityspire building were not completed.


Cynthia A. Long, Christopher Willis
Cynthia Ann Long, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Everett G. Long of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Hammond Willis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Willis of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Willis, 29 years old, is an associate designer at the Echo Design Group, a textile design company in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a degree in textile design from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


In Trip Insurance, Small Print Is No Small Matter
TRIP cancellation insurance is a fast-moving area of the travel business.
As terrorist attacks surged at the start of the 90's, questions flooded in about insuring for cancellation if terrorism broke out in the area of a planned visit.
At the time of the Persian Gulf war, readers described disputes over getting insurance companies to pay prospective travelers who called off trips out of anxiety, not an allowable reason in most policies.
As the recession bears down and big travel companies go out of business more frequently, questions emerge as well about protecting oneself if the tour operator or airline goes bankrupt or stops operating.


The Roster Grows As Trips Shrink
SO many millions of Americans took advantage of last summer's bargain air fares that some travel industry executives wondered if all that spur-of-the-moment travel would cut into fall and winter cruises.
While a final answer won't be known for months, early indications are that the cruise industry will post its 22d consecutive annual increase, thanks in large part to fall and winter travelers.
While some analysts see storm clouds on the industry's horizon, a few years from now, cruise line officials expect 4.4 million passengers this year, up from 4 million in 1991, and some winter cruises already have "sold out" signs on them.
"Several ships are already full for cruises around Christmas and New Year, and most others for that time are filling up quickly," said Cheryl Myerson, president of the National Association of Cruise Only Agents.
But hundreds of other cruises scheduled between now and spring are yet to be filled.


From Ben Hodges to Nat Love, Blacks Had a Place in Old West
To the Editor:
"Deep in the Heart of Montana, a Black Woman Finds Home," (news article, Sept. 27) notes that Hollywood has largely ignored the many significant roles played by blacks in the Old West.
But then it proceeds to mangle several facts about black Western American history.
Ben Hodges (not Ben Hodge) was never a black deputy to Wyatt Earp; he was a black Mexican cowboy, who trailed cattle north from Texas and settled in Dodge City, where he became a clever, apparently well-liked swindler and lived to a ripe old age.


Lilian Shackelford and Michael Buhl
Lilian M. Shackelford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. Shackelford Jr. of Woodberry Forest, Va., was married yesterday to Michael A. Buhl, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank C. Buhl of Wilmington, Del.
David Breuer, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Kenwood (Calif.) Inn.


The Dawn Shows New Respect for American Indian Relics


When the Wind Blew From Vichy
When German tanks rolled into Paris in June 1940, much of the art world rolled out.
Among those who thrived under Vichy were Aristide Maillol, Georges Rouault, Maurice de Vlaminck and Andre Derain.
Not only were they non-Jewish (and often willing to sign a register saying so), they also painted in styles their occupiers liked; many were romantic realists (celebrating ideal human bodies) and Fauves (whose joyful colors blotted out "world decadence").
As for the "Judeo-Marxist-decadent" artists (including Marc Chagall, Andre Masson and Max Ernst), most of them (with the notable exception of Pablo Picasso) took refuge outside Paris.
Unable to exhibit in galleries, they often turned inward, producing self-portraits "as if to reassure themselves of some continuity in their own self-images," and they used "improvised materials" because of shortages.
Though Ms.
Cone does not presume to "lift the final veil from the imponderable factors" affecting individual choices during the occupation, her admirable, detailed record documents exactly what those choices were.


Cleaning Outdoor Items Prolongs Their Lives
TAKING sufficient time to clean, repair and store outdoor items carefully will prolong their lives and make them immediately available for use in the spring.
Wash aluminum or chromed lawn furniture before storing it.
First, rinse items with hard spray from a garden hose to loosen dirt, and then scrub them with a stiff bristle brush dipped in household or car-washing detergent and water.
Rinse again with clear water, and then allow the items to dry.


Foreign Affairs; If All Is Character
The central test of character for Bill Clinton has come down to whether he lied about his conduct during the Vietnam War; and for George Bush, it is whether he lied about his role in the arms-for-hostages swap with Iran.
Any fair reading of the record will find both men wanting.
The voters will soon have to decide who committed the greater sin.


Ms. Scorese, Robert McCafferty
Jacqueline Anne Scorese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick E. Scorese of Saddle River, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Kevin McCafferty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas McCafferty of the Bronx.
Msgr.
Edward F. Kavin performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Gabriel the Archangel Church.
Mrs.
McCafferty, 27 years old, is an assistant media planner at the Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from New York University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the senior vice president of corporate administration at Security Pacific National Trust Company in New York.
Her mother, Angela M. Scorese, is an interior designer in Saddle River.


Journey Into the Heart of Russia
THE waters of Lake Onega are a deep and velvety green, reflecting the slow unwinding of a ribbon of firs and birches.
Soon we will enter the Volga Baltic Canal, whose seven high locks, built by slave labor in the 1930's and reconstructed in the 1960's, are a triumph of Stalinist engineering.
Barges carrying logs pass each other, going both upstream and down.
We shall see them throughout our cruise from St.
Petersburg to Moscow, and the exercise will always seem pointless.
But then, even in 1992, much of Russia remains mysterious.
My husband, Tom, and I are passengers on the Russ, a five-deck, 426-foot vessel built in what was once East Germany for the Russian waterways trade.
The Russ, now owned by the city of Nizhni Novgorod and leased out to OdessAmerica, a company based in Mineola, L.I., carries a maximum of 240 passengers in a fair degree of comfort.
On this late spring voyage, there are 214 of us, including 72 British and a half-dozen Russians.
The rest of us are Americans, with a large Texas delegation, among whom are 36 enthusiastic members of a travel-study program from the University of Texas at Tyler.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
NO STRANGER TO TEARS A Surgeon's Story. By William G. Cahan. Random House, $25.


20 Are Rescued From Burning Tenement
Firefighters rescued about 20 people from the fire escape of an abandoned tenement on the Lower East Side yesterday evening as a fire raged through the building, spreading rapidly and causing much of the rear wall to collapse, fire officials said.
No injuries were reported among the rescued, apparently all squatters, but at least one person believed to have been living in the building was reported missing, a spokesman for the Fire Department, Lieut.
Andrew F. Clarke, said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Illinois; Senate Nominee Gets Caught Up In an Ethics Issue
The charmed campaign of Carol Moseley Braun, whose race for a seat in the United States Senate at times has seemed more like a celebrity road show, is trying to recover from its first major stumble on the eve of a debate against the newly emboldened Republican candidate, Richard S. Williamson.
Ms.
Braun has watched her 2-to-1 lead narrow since a local television station, WMAQ, broadcast accusations last week of possible Medicaid fraud involving her handling of a windfall profit paid to her ailing mother.


New &amp; Noteworthy
NIXON: Volume Three.
Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.) Ever since Watergate, former President Richard Nixon has been trying to rebuild his reputation as a foreign-policy expert.
His partial success attests to his abilities as a consummate politician, demonstrated in this book by a wealth of fact and anecdote.
"Though this accretion of detail does not establish a definitive interpretation, its sheer massing has a repellent illuminating effect," Sidney Blumenthal said here last year.
MATING, by Norman Rush. (Vintage International, $12.) The female narrator of this novel, winner of the 1991 National Book Award for fiction, embarks on a journey of 100 miles and many thousands of words, all in the service of love.
A former doctoral candidate in anthropology, she leaves Botswana to join a feminist utopia in the Kalahari Desert founded by a male scholar who appears to be her ideal man.
According to our reviewer, Jim Shepard, "Mr. Rush has created one of the wiser and wittier fictive meditations on the subject of mating. His novel illuminates why we yield when we don't have to." In addition, Vintage has restored to print the author's 1986 short-story collection, WHITES ($9), which also draws upon his experiences in the Peace Corps in Africa.
"The world could use a few more books from human beings like Mr. Rush," Leslie Marmon Silko said here.


Miami's Reluctant Hero Didn't Want to Stay There
There it was, opening up in front of Darren Krein.
A defensive lineman's dream.
A 3-point game, Miami winning by 10-7.
A football floating into his hands.
Nothing between him and the goal line except bright, green grass.
Except it wasn't Krein's dream.
Kevin Patrick, Krein's roommate on Miami road trips and the other end on the Hurricane defensive line, had described a dream he had this week: his intercepting a pass and scoring a touchdown.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LIKE A HOLY CRUSADE Mississippi 1964 -- The Turning of the Civil Rights Movement in America.
By Nicolaus Mills.
Ivan R. Dee, $22.50.


A la Carte; A New Look and a New Name for a Landmark in Glen Head
WHEN Jerry McCarthy and Bahman Tehrani met 14 years ago, they were waiters at Old Gerlich's in Glen Head.
Recently they bought the restaurant.
It is no longer Old Gerlich's, which closed a few years ago, but has been transformed into the 150-seat California Grille.
It is the only restaurant on Long Island concentrating exclusively on cutting-edge California cuisine.


In Defense of His Brother
To the Editor:
As a faithful reader of The New York Times Book Review, I was angered that you would insert The Book Review into the Presidential race.


Holiday Tomorrow
Monday is Columbus Day. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
PARADE Today, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 77th Street.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Cable TV: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill to regulate cable television prices.
Approved 74 to 25, Oct. 5.
2.Tax Bill: Vote on passage of a tax bill that includes $27 billion in tax reductions over five years, and a matching amount of tax increases, to avoid increasing the debt.
The measure also includes enterprise zones to encourage investment in poor urban areas.
Approved 67 to 22, Oct. 8.
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
House
1. Energy: Vote on passage of a wide-ranging energy bill. Approved 363 to 60, Oct. 5.
2.
Cable TV: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill to regulate cable television prices.
Approved 308 to 114, Oct. 5.
3.
Tax Bill: Vote on passage of a tax bill that includes $27 billion in tax reductions over five years, and a matching amount of tax increases, to avoid increasing the debt.
The measure also includes enterprise zones to encourage investment in poor urban areas.
Approved 208 to 202, Oct. 6.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
N
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
N
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
Y
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
Y
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
A
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
17. Vacant . . .
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
N
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Is It the Playoffs or the Shoes?
Call it a stunt.
Call it a marvel.
Call it official.
Deion Sanders today told the Braves he will go forward with his increasingly controversial and patently commercial plan Sunday to try and play for both the Falcons and Braves.
Sanders, in an adventure said to be financed by Nike and that could well be recorded for later commercial use, is set to charter a plane to fly to Miami to play for the Falcons against the Dolphins in a National Football League game at 1 P.M.
He will then attempt to return here for Game 5 of the National League playoffs, which begins at 8:37 P.M.


D'Amato: 19 Words on Abrams and Spending
THE SCRIPT
Narrator: "Bob Abrams wants a 30 percent increase in spending, and that can only mean higher taxes and fewer jobs." On the Screen: A mechanic is working under the hood of a pickup truck.
At the end of the audio track, steam rises from the radiator, and the mechanic hits his head on the hood.


Elyse D. Salman, David J. Spiewak
Elyse Debra Salman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Salman of Marlboro, N.J., was married there yesterday evening to David Jay Spiewak, the son of Helene Spiewak of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Kenneth Spiewak.
Rabbi Daniel Teplitz performed the ceremony at the Marlboro Jewish Center.


Variety Is the Spice of an Asian Menu
THE Empire Szechuan dynasty has reached Long Island.
This 16-year-old chain, with Chinese restaurants that run the length of Manhattan, has established an Eastern outpost in Syosset.
On a recent evening, Empire Szechuan Gourmet had a party air.
Its exterior was festooned with grand opening banners, flags and balloons.
Inside, there were plants sporting red good luck ribbons and more helium-filled balloons.


Miss Kilcommons, John Ruvane Jr.
Sharon Maureen Kilcommons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene F. Kilcommons of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Austin Ruvane Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ruvane of New York and Buck Hill Falls, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard J. Kelly performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Trinity.
Mrs.
Ruvane, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president in Jersey City for the Global Assets division of the Bankers Trust Company.


Deborah Lewittes and Paul Berman
Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Lewittes of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Lewittes, to Paul Schiff Berman, a son of Benjamin Berman and Dr.
Ellyn Berman of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lewittes, 25 years old, and her fiance, 26, are the artistic co-directors of Spin Theater, a nonprofit theater company in New York.
They both graduated from Princeton University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in art history at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.
Her father is a managing director of Balis &amp; Zorn, an investment advisory firm in New York.
Her mother, Judith A. Lewittes, is a fund-raising consultant based in Poughkeepsie.


SURFACING
POLITICS --
Bush and Clinton tattoos:
Temporary, of course.  FITNESS --
Double-Dutch Duke:
Jump-rope aerobics at Equinox Fitness Club. FASHION --
Cigar logos:
First it was Phillies Blunt. Now, look for White Owl and Dutch Masters T-shirts. CAR --
Land Rover Defender 110:
Only 500 of these $40,000 vehicles are being shipped to the United States this year.
WORD --
Power faxing
:
The same fax sent simultaneously to hundreds of people, by computer.


Mets Hit Wallet
To the New York Mets:
I'm sorry that I did not attend many of your games this year.
But your management traded away my favorite players, fired my favorite manager and raised my ticket prices in the midst of a national recession.
The only hardball I saw at Shea this year was the beating my wallet took at the box office, parking lot and concession stands.
NANCY A. JENSEN Holmdel, N.J.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; Perot's Spokesman, a Former Prisoner of War, Is His Boss's Truest Believer
With the candidate out of sight, the voice of the Ross Perot campaign speaks these days not with a Texarkana twang but with the droopy drawl of southwest Georgia.
It belongs to Orson G. Swindle 3d, who seems to share Mr.
Perot's penchant for both patriotic fervor and backwoods philosophy.
Ten weeks ago, Mr.
Swindle was minding his own business, running an association of preschools in Honolulu, where he had recently moved.
Now, as executive director of United We Stand, America, Mr.
Perot's political organization, he spends his days jousting with the likes of Ted Koppel on "Nightline" and John H. Sununu on "Crossfire," when, of course, he is not appearing on "Good Morning America" or the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour."


Substance Behind Mask Of Latest 'Phantom'
WHILE "The Phantom of the Opera," the London and Broadway phenomenon, is a paean to instant gratification, "Phantom," now at the Westchester Broadway Theater, appears built to last.
To liken the one to sex and the other to love might be stretching a simile, but the conspicuous tonal and stylistic disparities between the two works invite such comparison.
Unlike the extravagant English import, crediting Andrew Lloyd Webber as composer, librettist and co-orchestrator and emphasizing bloated music, eroticism and extraordinary technical effects, the collaboration between Maury Yeston (composer and lyricist) and Arthur Kopit (book) is a heartening throwback to the tradition of romantic musical theater.


A Weary R.E.M. Seems Stuck in Midtempo
Pop music fans often treat their favorite songs like piggy banks, turning words and melody upside down until the coin of meaning drops into their hands.
They can get it all wrong, transforming a lyricist's scribbles into Proustian reflections.
Michael Stipe, singer for R.E.M. and hero to a decade's worth of moody college kids, expresses his frustration over such misunderstandings on "Drive," the first single from the group's 10th album, "Automatic for the People" (Warner Brothers 4-44505; CD and cassette).
The song echoes with the weariness of lamentation.
Peter Buck's acoustic guitar weaves a gentle ring around accordion, strings and ponderous drums as Stipe grumbles a canticle of dismissive phrases.
"Hey, kids, rock-and-roll, nobody tells you where to go," he sings, sure that if he were to disappear, the song would go on as before.


Some Ex-Prostitutes Are Helping Those Left Behind
JUNE 26: Loretta Melendez, 28 years old, is found shot to death on Morgan Street.
On June 27, an unidentified woman is found dismembered and left in a trash container behind a pizzeria on Midland Avenue.
On Aug. 24, Veronica (Ronnie) Cooper, 26, is found dead in an overgrown lot behind a vacant house on Waverly Street.
Medical reports said Ms.
Cooper, who died two weeks before she was found, had been hit on the head with a blunt instrument.
Both Ms.
Melendez and Ms.
Cooper, police said, had histories of drug and prostitution arrests.


Clinton Economists Cast A Wide Net, for Liberals
TO judge by the polls, Bill Clinton's economic advisers have been far more successful than their 1980's Democratic counterparts in finding campaign themes fit for a majority party.
The Clinton economic package dodges the questions that divide generations, while dishing up a stew of policies -- everything from national health insurance to college loans -- that is apparently palatable to sometime Republicans hungering for economic security.
But a Clinton victory would sorely test whether the idea makers who have smoothed the candidate's path can serve him equally well in the White House.
"The stuff of campaigns is different than the stuff of governing," said Lawrence Katz, a Harvard economist.


Cinema's Lens Sees the Photographer as Lonely Voyeur
Film makers who put still photographers on the silver screen take pleasure in spelling out what a sticky business photography is.
Like as not, photographers featured in the movies will be attracted to violence, or fall into it, or even cause it.
What's more, they tend to be beset by ethical problems and sexual unease.
At the heart of such films lurks a suspicion that cameras can be dangerous and that those who use them, having interposed a mechanical instrument between themselves and the world, are emotionally and possibly morally limited.
The movies, of course, are the offspring of stills, and children have been known to have jaundiced views of their parents.
The latest evidence is "The Public Eye," directed by Howard Franklin and opening on Friday.
Joe Pesci plays a tough, live-by-his-wits news photographer in the early 1940's who is loosely modeled on Weegee, then at the height of his career.
Weegee, whose real name was Arthur Fellig, was nicknamed after the Ouija board because he got to the crime so fast he was thought to have a sixth sense.
More likely it was his police radio, but in the film, when the police arrive at a murder scene and find Mr.
Pesci, a k a Bernzy Bernstein, already there, he dryly says he killed the guy to get the picture.


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
OFFENSIVE FIREPOWER: Brian Underwood had 2 touchdowns and rushed 17 times for 159 yards as LEHMAN (2-2) trounced CLINTON (1-3), 30-0. . . . .
Franke Sinclair had 3 touchdowns and rushed for 272 yards as LINCOLN (4-0) defeated CURTIS (3-1), 42-30.
Sinclair has 11 touchdowns this season. . . . .
Marcos Madera threw for two touchdowns to Dimy Cedore to lead NEW UTRECHT (3-1) over JOHN JAY (0-3), 18-12.
SPECTACULAR RETURN: Nothing like three touchdown pases and one touchdown run to let Tom Reali know that his bruised shoulder is feeling better.
His exceptional day led SUSAN WAGNER (5-0) to a 42-8 victory over TOTTENVILLE (2-2).
Reali, who had missed the three previous games, had scoring strikes to three different receivers: Andrew Lafatta, James Pedro and Jason Cintron.


Pleasant Tap Breezes To a Gold Cup Victory
More than 60 of the country's fastest horses took steps on the road to the Breeders' Cup yesterday at Belmont Park, but the longest steps were taken by Pleasant Tap, who outran Strike the Gold by four and a half lengths and won the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup.
The 5-year-old son of Pleasant Colony, who won the Suburban Handicap at Belmont in July and ran second in the Woodward in September, flew the mile and a quarter in a rousing 1:584/5.
He also flew to the head of the list of candidates for the Breeders' Cup Classic, the world's richest race and the final test for the sport's ultimate prize: the title Horse of the Year.


Jimbo's Jumbos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Clinton Praises Bush's Father
In the Presidential debate last night, Gov.
Bill Clinton recalled the anti-McCarthy stance taken by President Bush's father, Senator Prescott S. Bush of Connecticut, and tried to contrast it with recent comments by the younger Mr.
Bush.
"When Joe McCarthy went around this country attacking people's patriotism, he was wrong," Mr.
Clinton said.
"And a Senator from Connecticut stood up to him named Prescott Bush. Your father was right to stand up to Joe McCarthy. You were wrong to attack my patriotism."


First Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
On rare occasions the pasteboard world of bridge intersects with the real world of life and death, and one of them is the annual tournament supporting the People With Aids Coalition of Long Island.
The fourth event was played eight days ago at the Grand Bridge Studio in Franklin Square, L.I., and was dedicated to the memory of Rich Tirman, a regular player at that club who died of complications from AIDS in July.
The charity gained $5,700, and supplementary contributions can be sent to P.W.A.C., 1170 Route 109, Lindenhurst, L.I. 11757.
The winners were Marilyn Leiter of Roslyn, L.I., and Harry Stappenbeck of Uniondale, L.I., with Helene Goller and Rhoda Rauch, both of Lawrence, L.I., in second position.
The diagramed deal helped the winners, who skillfully sidestepped the obvious contract.
They located their spade fit and seemed headed for defeat in four spades, losing three top tricks and a diamond ruff.
But South suggested three no-trump as an option, and North happily went along.


Dance in Review
Tennessee Dance Theater
Symphony Space
The Tennessee Dance Theater, an eight-year-old modern-dance company from Nashville, made a brightly impressive New York City debut on Friday night.
Andrew Krichels and Donna Rizzo, the troupe's co-founders and artistic directors, do not bite off more than this kind of pioneering group can chew and they knew, in this single-night showcase, how to make the most of ingenuity and excellent dancers.


Christopher Columbus, Then and Now
Michelangelo was a teen-ager when Columbus sailed west.
Leonardo da Vinci was 40.
It was a long time ago.
A different time.
And that's a point to remember on this 500th anniversary of the great explorer's first landing in the Americas.
There were some 60 million people living in Europe in 1492, emerging from medieval hopelessness into a period of renaissance.
Indeed, the excitement of finding a "new world" helped hasten Europe's rebirth and led, of course, to further discovery and expansion.


Dance in Review
Compagnie Philippe Saire
Gould Hall
Philippe Saire's "Don Quixote" was billed as a contemporary look at the world of that antihero and Cervantes, his creator.
With a few exceptions, just about any text would have served as a peg for the full-evening piece, presented by the Lausanne-based Compagnie Philippe Saire on Friday night.
The exceptions included a brief flamenco-flavored solo and a horde of wooden statuettes of the Don, carefully placed by Mr.
Saire at the edge of the stage as the audience filed in, and later swept off by the slung body of a woman to startlingly theatrical effect.
There were also pretty pastel-painted panels, some inscribed with "Don Quixote," which fell from time to time during the 75-minute piece.


Tridex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


A New Course at Duke
A new course at Duke offers fans an inside look at the sport that has made the Research Triangle area famous: college basketball.
The course, offered in Duke's continuing education curriculum, is called Insights Into College Basketball.
It offers no credits or grades but is already filled and has a waiting list of 100.


Alcoa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How Come New York State Builds So Little at So Much Cost?
To the Editor:
In "Stop Swindling New York" (Op-Ed, Sept. 14), Joseph Rose of the Citizens Housing and Planning Council charges that New York State's Wicks Law inflates the cost of municipal construction for the benefit of politically influential specialty contractors and demonstrates the contemptuous unresponsiveness of New York legislators to the public interest.
Mr.
Rose goes astray by assuming that the public is interested in the timely and economical construction of courthouses, hospitals, police stations, firehouses, shelters for the homeless, jails and water pollution control plants, all of which the Wicks Law renders more expensive and long-in-coming.
However, we New Yorkers do not care strongly about any of those things, as the remarkable longevity of Wicks shows.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article on Saturday headed Critic's Notebook, about Ross Perot's first television commercial, included jumbled type.
The affected passage, at the start of the fifth paragraph, should have read:
"The citizenry's natural disposition to be told that Washington is going to shovel money into their pockets or neighborhoods, lately catered to by President Bush, is compounded by commercial television's disinclination to treat viewers as grown-ups, and political campaigns are run these days along the lines established by television. The presence of a camera can turn even a poll-tormented pol like Mr. Bush into a happy warrior.


State Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rachel H. Berek, Kenneth B. Rader
Rachel Hillary Berek, a daughter of Ellen and Peter Berek of South Hadley, Mass., was married there yesterday to Kenneth Barry Rader, a son of Harriet and Lawrence Rader of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Carolyn Braun officiated at Abbey Memorial Chapel at Mount Holyoke College.
Mrs.
Rader, 27 years old, is the senior publicity agent at Little, Brown &amp; Company, the publisher, in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Yale University.
Her father is the dean of the faculty, the provost and a professor of English at Mount Holyoke.
Her mother is the news director at Williams College in Williamstown, Mass.


New York a Hard Town for High-Tech
Willow Peripherals, a small high-technology company, is in many ways a typical Silicon Valley start-up.
But the view from its windows is not of sleek glass buildings on landscaped grounds, but of bars and razor wire.
Willow, founded by a group of young New Yorkers, sits under the shadow of the Bruckner Expressway and the Triborough Bridge in the South Bronx.
When the intrepid entrepreneurs set up there in 1986, the lure of the South Bronx was dirt-cheap rent, $3 a square foot.


Kodiak Journal; At Dig Site, Hope for Saving a Culture
It smelled bad, as 600-year-old garbage will.
But to Rick Knecht, the 40-yard-long dirt mound has become the latest in a series of unusual archeological finds that he says is rewriting the history of Pacific Eskimos.


Christine M. Long, Kevin M. Barry
Christine Mary Long, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Long of Armonk, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kevin Michael Barry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Barry Jr. of Marshfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles Hughes performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Barry, 27 years old, is a marketing manager at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm, in Boston.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is an executive vice president and the corporate secretary of Citicorp in New York.


Baryshnikov and Minnelli To Open Graham Season
Mikhail Baryshnikov and Liza Minnelli are to serve as onstage hosts for the benefit gala tomorrow night that will open the Martha Graham Dance Company's season at the City Center, 131 West 55th Street, in midtown.
Claire Bloom, the actress, is to appear as the narrator in "Salem Shore," a 1943 work by Ms.
Graham that has not been performed since 1947.
Ms.
Bloom is to recite a text by the poet Elinor Wylie during a solo performed by Terese Capucilli.
A new set has been designed by the artist Stephan Weiss.


Some Leading Clients Favor A Shift In Selling Strategies
SOME of America's largest, most influential advertisers are shifting their marketing strategies, the departing chairman of the Association of National Advertisers says, as they return to advertising intended to bolster brand images over the long term and forsake price-cutting and other promotions meant to generate short-term gains.
"We're beginning to see some people move in that direction," L. Ross Love said in an interview before the start here of the group's 83d annual meeting and business conference.
"It's not a mass movement yet, but we're seeing a turn."


Stars' Free Agency Holds No Fears for Leyland
Barry Bonds, who finally broke out of his playoff slump tonight, can become a free agent next month.
The Pirates don't expect to be able to sign him.
He could be negotiating with teams as the National League's most valuable player for the second time in three years.
Whatever happens during October, Manager Jim Leyland said, players like Bonds and Doug Drabek, a two-time loser in this series, who also can become a free agent, should not let it detract from the experience on which they are about to embark.


Merryl I. Hoffman And Saul Sadka
Merryl Ivy Hoffman, an associate at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, was married yesterday to Dr.
Saul Sadka, a fellow in child and adolescent psychology at New York University Medical Center in New York.
Rabbi Howard Handler officiated at the Swan Club in Glenwood Landing, L.I.
Ms.
Hoffman, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is the daughter of Sanford Hoffman of New York and Lynda Gotbetter of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Her father is a freelance illustrator in New York.
Her mother is a legal assistant in the Manhattan office of the State Attorney General.
She is a stepdaughter of Howard Gotbetter of New York.


Fab Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Surrounding Scene; Who Got More Laughs; Who Ate Chili Macaroni
When great things are at stake, small things count.
The three Presidential candidates may have discussed serious matters on stage at Washington University, but off stage, the level of discourse was deeply, awesomely petty.


Dallas Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Celeste Koeleveld, Paul B. Haskel
Celeste Lidwina Koeleveld, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frans P. Koeleveld of Newport News, Va., was married yesterday in New York to Paul Benjamin Haskel, a son of Allen B. Haskel of New York and Joyce R. Haskel of Southbury, Conn.
Judge Kenneth Conboy of Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Mrs.
Haskel, 28 years old, is an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Columbia.
Her father is a textile engineer for the BASF Corporation in Williamsburg, Va.
Her mother, Caecilia Koeleveld, is a secretary for the Newport News public schools.


After Shaky Start, Giants Get to Smile
It was only one game.
But for the Giants, who have been struggling with distractions and inconsistency, it was the game they needed.
They have thrown away games this dismal season, and they could have thrown this one away when they allowed the Phoenix Cardinals to complete a 72-yard touchdown pass on a free play in the first three minutes.
But the offensive line became dominant, Rodney Hampton ran for 167 yards and the defense shut down the Cardinals' bland offense, all adding up to a 31-21 victory this afternoon for the Giants.


Shevardnadze, a Bit Daunted, Awaits a Mandate
It was not long ago that Eduard A. Shevardnadze decided the fates of nations as foreign minister of a superpower.
Now, as the anxious people of his small homeland stood in long, quiet lines to give him their ballots and their hopes, he acknowledged that the task he faces here is far tougher than any he had ever faced in the Kremlin.
"The most difficult challenge for me is what I am doing now for Georgia," he said in an interview today while awaiting his certain election as leader of a nation already bloodied and bracing for more.


Slicing Up Pie a New Way
In a move affecting hundreds of nonprofit agencies and tens of thousands of their clients, United Way of New York City is reassessing the way it distributes its campaign funds.
About 600 agencies providing health and human services share money collected in the annual appeal.
The sharing formula has barely changed since it was devised decades ago, despite major shifts in the city's demographics and the emergence of problems like AIDS and drug abuse.


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Falcons Put Up a Red Flag After Close Calls
The way the Atlanta Falcons see it, things would be just fine if they could only get Deion Sanders to officiate, too.
After leading the Miami Dolphins by 10-7 at halftime, by 17-7 late in the third quarter and by 17-14 late in the fourth quarter, the Falcons eventually lost, 21-17, before 68,633 fans here in Joe Robbie Stadium today.


Pamela Rodman, Robert Friedman
Pamela Beth Rodman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Rodman of the Bronx, was married there yesterday to Robert Howard Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Friedman of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin officiated at Wave Hill.
Miss Rodman is 27 years old and is keeping her name.
She is a project manager at the New York Blood Center.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Ellen Rodman, is a partner in LN Productions, a television development firm in New York.


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


No Headline
"With Columbus, revisionism has carried the day. Columbus has undergone what is perhaps the most dramatic reworking of any major historical figure in memory." -- GILBERT SEWALL of the American Textbook Council.  [ A1:2. ]


2 No. 1's Both Make Their Point
Five games into their 1992 seasons, the University of Washington Huskies and the University of Miami Hurricanes find themselves in a situation similar to the one that ended the 1991 college football season: neck and neck in a national-championship race that could become as inconclusive as it is unofficial.
And the existence of a new coalition of bowl games, designed to create the best possible matchups on New Year's Day, will be unable to bring together the teams from opposite corners of the country should they remain unbeaten.


Giving Healing and Hope to Priests Who Molested
Like other Roman Catholics, Stephen Montana is appalled at revelations about Catholic priests who have sexually molested minors.
But as the director of outpatient services at a small Catholic psychiatric hospital, Dr.
Montana says such offenders can be effectively treated.
"I have two kids, 7 and 5 years old, and I would want to know, as a member of a parish, that the church is acting responsibly," he said.
"But I'd also want to know that the church is dealing with these problems compassionately."


Neogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Charter Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MISCARRIAGES TIED TO CHIP FACTORIES
I.B.M. has warned its workers and other companies that two chemicals widely used in manufacturing semiconductor chips -- and in other industries -- may significantly increase the risk of miscarriage.
The computer maker acted after a study it commissioned by health researchers at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore found that among 30 women who worked with the chemicals at two I.B.M. plants and then became pregnant, 10 had miscarriages -- a 33.3 percent rate.


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


CHRONICLE
Remember that photo of POPE JOHN PAUL II that the singer SINEAD O'CONNOR ripped up on "Saturday Night Live" a week ago?
It's back together again, at the request of last Saturday's host, the actor JOE PESCI.
"Sinead O'Connor tore up a picture of the Pope and I thought that was wrong," Mr.
Pesci said at the start of the show.
He held up the patched-up photo, to the audience's applause.


Abroad at Home; No Knockouts
The bottom line of the first Presidential debate, as viewed from this corner, is that it is unlikely to have any substantial effect on the course of the campaign.
Nobody scored a knockout.
Governor Clinton dealt powerfully with President Bush's main tactic in these closing weeks: to attack Mr.
Clinton's patriotism.
The Governor invoked an act of courage by Mr.
Bush's father that in fact, though he did not say so, shamed the son.


Hubco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mid Am Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonn Journal; Kohl's Protege Turns Into Kohl's Challenger
While much of the world watches Germany, many Germans are busy watching the ascent of Wolfgang Schauble, heir-apparent to Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Chancellor Kohl is steadily losing popularity, and many commentators believe Mr.
Schauble is preparing to replace him.
Although the two have been friends and colleagues for years, recent headlines have strained their relationship.


O'Sullivan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dividend Meetings


First Act as President Is Getting Acquainted
After finally gaining the presidency of the United States Olympic Committee today, LeRoy Walker said his first wish was to go on a retreat with George Steinbrenner and the committee's other newly elected officers.
Walker might have to wait awhile because Steinbrenner will have trouble carving out time for such introspective activities.


Nancy Rainford, T. R. Meinelschmidt
Nancy Constance Rainford, a daughter of Patricia L. Irving of East Norwalk, Conn., and Osborne Carl Rainford of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Timothy Richard Meinelschmidt, the son of Richard and Barbara Meinelschmidt of Eltingville, S.I.
The Rev.
Elwood Stark officiated at St.
Michael's Lutheran Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas F. Pike, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Meinelschmidt, 34 years old, is an artist representative at the Irv Schechter Company, a talent agency in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Brockport.
Her father is a real-estate investor in Manhattan.
Her mother retired as an associate executive director for the North Central Bronx Hospital.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Michael H. Irving of East Norwalk.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Luby's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Four Are Arrested in Subway Killing
Four men were arrested Saturday night and charged with second-degree murder in the stabbing death earlier Saturday of a subway rider who had tried to stop them from harassing a sleeping passenger, the transit police said.
The victim, Joseph F. Scott, 23 years old, of 383 East 143d Street in Manhattan, was riding the No. 6 train from the Bronx to his home when he was stabbed at 2:37 A.M., Albert O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police, said yesterday.


Center That Treats Priests Responds to 3 Abuse Suits
This tiny town in the mountains of north-central New Mexico is a quiet close-knit community where the weekly Saturday night dance at the town watering hole, Los Ojos Bar, is the biggest event.
For a small town there are many churches and, up and down the main street, a handful of religious retreats.
Among them are the Bodhi Mandala Zen Center, a convent of the Order of the Handmaids of the Precious Blood, and one that is attracting attention, a retreat and treatment center for Roman Catholic priests called the Order of the Servants of the Paraclete.


Sarajevo Is a City Exhausted by Grief
Samra Kapetanovic lay dead in the Sagrdjia mosque today, a 16-year-old girl who went looking for her little sister when the shells started falling and ran into a mortar instead.
Beside her, in the darkness of the morgue in the mosque's basement, were a boy of 10 and a girl of 5 who died in the same flash of high explosives.


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brookie Maxwell, Christopher Dolin
Brookie Maxwell, an artist and social worker, was married yesterday to Christopher Dolin, a social worker.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Maxwell, who is 35 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the founder and executive director of the Creative Arts Workshop for Kids, a nonprofit organization for underprivileged children and adolescents in New York.
Her husband is its executive director and the therapeutic director.
She graduated from the School of Visual Arts.


Helen of Troy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


For Most Part, Just Winded in Action
A.P.
Indy lost his right front horseshoe.
Thunder Rumble showed signs of minor pulmonary bleeding.
And in a paddock mishap, trainer Pat Kelly reported that his foot was stepped on by Sultry Song and nearly broken.
But that seemed to be the full casualty report from Belmont Park's Super Saturday after the 74th running of the Jockey Club Gold Cup, the race that will send some of the contestants on to Florida for the last, richest and most important test of the thoroughbred year: the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic at Gulfstream Park on Oct. 31.


Atrix International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southwest Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Media General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Iomega Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Rare Fate for Eckersley Brings Relief for the Jays
Dennis Eckersley stood in front of his locker stall for 5 minutes, then 10 minutes, then 15 minutes, answering one question after another with barely a trace of emotion in his voice.
He shook his head occasionally, he stared quietly at the floor and once he even looked into the ceiling and said, "Sheesh." But nothing could quite capture his emptiness.
Eckersley is a sure thing, perfection personified for the Oakland Athletics.
He saved 51 games this season, won seven others and helped carry the A's to the American League West championship.
But he is also mortal.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reading the Medical Notes From Underground
To the Editor:
Here's the American health problem as seen from my subway seat:
The Laser Medical Association, more than 10 years service, promises to cure your warts and piles.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Columbus Day
NEW YORK  PARADE Begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
STREET FAIRS Christopher Columbus fair, Broadway between Battery Place and Murray Street, noon to 7 P.M.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Bush: A Risky Republican Attack
Hours before last night's debate, the Bush organization began broadcasting its first commercial devoted entirely to questioning Gov.
Bill Clinton's credibility on the draft.
Bush aides said the 30-second ad would appear for several days in select markets nationwide but would not specify which ones.
ON THE SCREEN -- Extreme close-up of a grainy black-and-white photograph of Bill Clinton slowly enlarges to reveal it is the picture of Mr.
Clinton on a recent Time Magazine cover, with the headline, "Why Voters Don't Trust Clinton." The camera zeros in on the words in quick succession, and finally shows the entire cover, which is an ominous-looking photo-negative image of the face.


How Come New York State Builds So Little at So Much Cost?; Too Many Cooks
To the Editor:
Re "Now Ask Contractors About Wicks Law" (letter, Sept. 24):
Glad you asked.
To perform public construction a contractor must have confidence, iron nerve, reckless contempt for catastrophe and a good word processor for filing daily claims for extras and delays.
This is why after four public works projects in the 1970's, I swore never to do one again.


Derek Walcott's Embrace
Readers of the poet Derek Walcott have predicted for years that the Nobel Prize would one day be his.
The prize has arrived.
It is richly deserved.
It also honors a writer who was a "multiculturalist" long before the term was invented.
Mr.
Walcott has been producing extraordinary verse for more than 40 years.
Much of his imagery is drawn from St.
Lucia, the tiny Caribbean island of his birth.
But Mr.
Walcott's themes are as timeless and universal as anything in Homer.


Learning Channel's Ad-Free Strategy
The man who brought cable television viewers "Shark Week," "Bug Week" and "Big Cat Tales" on the Discovery Channel is about to introduce yet another programming concept.
John Hendricks, the creator of Discovery, the cable channel aimed at science lovers, has won good ratings with sharks and bugs.
Now Mr.
Hendricks, chairman and chief executive of Discovery Communications Inc., hopes to do the same with educational programming for children 6 years old and younger on the Learning Channel, a 24-hour advertiser-supported cable service that his company bought two years ago.


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Oldsmobile Begins Its Agency Review
The Oldsmobile division of the General Motors Corporation is beginning to narrow the list of agencies it will consider as it reviews its account, estimated at $110 million to $140 million and now at Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago.
Advertising executives who insisted on anonymity said Oldsmobile managers would visit about a half-dozen shops later this month and early next month, including Ayer Inc. in Detroit and New York; W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore and Southfield, Mich.; Deutsch Inc. in New York; Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York, and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.
Burnett is also participating in the review.


Thyssen Art Collection And Its New Quarters Are Unveiled in Madrid
After five years of preparations and negotiations, one of the world's great private art collections has finally gone on display here, lent to Spain by its owners, the Swiss billionaire Baron Hans Heinrich von Thyssen-Bornemisza and his family, until 2001.
The collection, which comprises 800 works dating from the 13th to the 20th centuries, has been valued by Sotheby's at close to $2 billion.
Until now, most of the collection has been kept at the industrialist Baron's family mansion, Villa Favorita, near Lugano, Switzerland.


He's the Explorer/Exploiter You Just Have to Love/Hate
To paradegoers around the country yesterday, Christopher Columbus was distinguished, a navigational genius who did not care about conventional wisdom and the idea that the earth was flat.
To protesters, he was disgusting, a missionary who spoke of gold more than of God.


Review/Music; A Flavorful Fiesta of Spanish Works
American commemorations of the Columbus quincentenary have been relatively few and muted, lest anyone appear to be taking unseemly glee in the mixed social and political legacy of the "discovery" and conquest of the New World.
But visitors do not necessarily labor under the same compunctions.
The concert presented by the veteran Spanish conductor Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos and the National Orchestra of Spain on Saturday evening at the Tilles Center on the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University was a celebration, pure and simple.
In fact, the program flew in the face of another American sensibility, opening with Joaquin Turina's "Prayer of the Bullfighter." The rest of the Spanish program (even Ravel's "Bolero" seemed wholly Spanish for the occasion) was similarly light, fanciful and atmospheric.


Bonds Resurfaces To Propel Pirates
Inspired perhaps by a father-son type talk with his manager the night before, Barry Bonds rediscovered his in-season ability tonight, rapped his first post-season hit with a runner in scoring position and helped keep the Pittsburgh Pirates alive in the National League pennant playoff.
Bonds, a .091 hitter in the first four games of this series, erupted from his three-year October malaise by lashing a run-scoring double in a rapid-fire four-double, four-run first-inning outburst against Steve Avery that catapulted the Pirates to a 7-1 victory over the Atlanta Braves.


Holiday Moves
Most banks are closed today for the Columbus Day holiday, and the Government's regular Monday auction of three- and six-month bills has been postponed a day.
The stock market, however, will remain open.


National Westminster Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Afraid for the Children
When Hannah De Angelis tries to explain to her two daughters why she hasn't let them go out in the yard alone in recent weeks, she says, "I tell them that people will steal them."
Mrs.
De Angelis, like many parents in this normally tranquil rural community, is "extremely concerned, anxious and angry" that someone could be preying on children.


Group to Buy Giants Has Decided to Split Up
The group formed to buy the San Francisco Giants, led by GEORGE SHINN, announced yesterday that it would not make a formal offer for the team.
SPENCER STOLPEN, president of the the National Basketball Association Charlotte Hornets and Shinn Enterprises Inc., said the group broke up because "in final analysis it did not make business sense to go forward with the purchase."


Levi Strauss Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 23


Marble Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Curbing Violence in the Schools
A cafeteria fight that left one student at New York's Eastern District High School slashed in the head was the latest painful reminder that the violence on city streets is invading the schools.
Chancellor Joseph Fernandez wisely responded to last week's boycott by concerned parents by beefing up school security.
That is a necessary step.
But city officials and community leaders must also mount bolder responses.
The urgency of making schools safer was driven home earlier this year when two students were shot and killed by another student at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn.
The shooting occurred even though Thomas Jefferson was one of 21 high schools in which students were randomly searched for weapons once a week by teams of security officers using hand-held metal detectors.


Charter Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Checkpoint Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Doctors and Patients Are Pushed To Their Limits by Grim New TB
For the last 13 months, Roy Buckner has lived in a hellish prison without walls, under quarantine because he has active drug-resistant tuberculosis.
For over a year, he was forbidden to leave the grounds of his mother's home in Mohawk, Tenn., except for doctors' appointments.
At family reunions, his brothers or sisters would wear masks, and he would stand outside, afraid of transmitting his lethal germ.
Some of his siblings refused to come at all, and one by one his friends deserted him.
When asked his age, he falls one year short, 34, then quickly corrects himself:


Eastland Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alvin Rosenfeld, 73, Foreign Correspondent
Alvin Z. Rosenfeld, who was vicedirector for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and a foreign correspondent for newspapers and television, died of cancer at Georgetown Hospital in Washington, on Saturday.
He was 73 years old.
Born in St.
Louis, Mr.
Rosenfeld began his journalism career with The United Press in Washington during World War II and later covered the Middle East for The New York Post, The New York Herald Tribune, NBC News and The Washington Post.


When Race Emerges as a Political Issue, for Better or Worse
Q.
WHAT could possibly be worse for black America than to be personified by a convicted murderer who, released on a weekend furlough, rapes a white woman?
A. To be ignored altogether.
Willie Horton, meet "The Invisible Man." The Republican Party, Andrew Hacker wrote in "Two Nations" (Scribners), has "all but explicitly stated that it is willing to have itself regarded as a white party." This year, the Democrats imply that they are unwilling to be regarded as a black party -- particularly one defined by Mr.
Horton, the convict furloughed by the 1988 Democratic Presidential nominee, or by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the two black Americans whom Mr.
Hacker said "played critical roles" in George Bush's victory four years ago.


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline


Midnight Ramble, Deion Sanders Style
DEION SANDERS jumped the club.
In the old days, the term described mythic insurrections.
To jump the club sounded like defecting with state secrets, turning up in some foreign capital.
In these days of free agency, both legal and psychological, Deion Sanders didn't jump the Braves for some Quixotic notion of the open road.
He didn't even miss a game.
But he did miss a good night's sleep and he did miss batting practice, if any of that matters.


CHRONICLE
It is time, HUGH HEFNER said recently, for the public to get to know him as he really is.
"I have felt for a long time that the public's images of my life and of me are a kind of ink blot test because my life is so interconnected to the fantasies and guilts that are part of the American experience," he said from his home in Holmby Hills, Calif.
So the 66-year-old founder of Playboy has bestowed his blessings on a documentary film, "Hugh Hefner: Once Upon a Time" that is not altogether flattering.
It was made by Lynch/Frost Productions, the company headed by DAVID LYNCH and MARK FROST that was responsible for the surrealistic "Twin Peaks."


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alyssa Karger, N. C. Lovegrove
Alyssa Jill Karger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Karger of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Nicholas Charles Lovegrove, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Lovegrove of London.
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Helmsley Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Lovegrove, 32 years old, is a senior project manager at McKinsey &amp; Company, a management consulting concern in London, where her husband is a partner.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Relativity Among the Giants' Ruins
Up on the scoreboard, the numbers showed that the Giants had won, 31-21, but the 70,042 parishioners had never really cheered with any faith.
Or with any hope that the Giants' world had turned for the better.
And in their locker room, the Giants were smiling but they were smiling tightly, as if they had just heard a weak joke at a wake.
Yes, the Giants are 2-3 now.
They might go to 4-3 after games against the Rams and the Seahawks and before their final nine games, which include the Eagles twice, the Redskins twice, the Cowboys, the Broncos and the Chiefs.
But against the Phoenix Cardinals yesterday, the Giants resembled a bush of wilted wild roses in the ruins of a medieval castle.


Market Place; Safecard's Dispute With U.S. Grows
THERE'S a reason that the military avoids using nuclear weapons in a ground skirmish: while effective, they also would destroy both sides.
Now if only that kind of logic applied in legal battles.
Take the longrunning fight in Florida between the founders of Safecard Services Inc., which trades on the New York Stock Exchange, and the Internal Revenue Service's criminal division.
Late Friday, lawyers for the founders, Peter and Steven J. Halmos, filed suit in Federal District Court in Miami, naming agents of the I.R.S. and other defendants, including the United States.


Joe Who? Young Rescues 49ers Once Again
49ers 24, Patriots 12
FOXBORO, Mass., Oct. 11 (AP) -- Steve Young rescued San Francisco from the brink of humiliation, commanding two fourth-quarter scoring drives that gave the 49ers a 24-12 victory yesterday over the New England Patriots.
Young's pinpoint passing and stunning running saved the 49ers for the second straight week.
He teamed with Ricky Watters, who scored both fourth-quarter touchdowns.


Nina Kellman, Zachary Bregman
Nina Kellman, a daughter of Ruth Monheit of Commerce Township, Mich., and the late Arthur Kellman, was married in New York yesterday to Dr.
Zachary Bregman, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar Bregman.
Rabbi Laurence A. Sebert performed the ceremony at the Provence Restaurant.
Ms.
Kellman, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, is a harpist in New York.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree from the Manhattan School of Music.


A Test for Women Who Build Cars
After everything they have been through, after all the victories won so slowly over the years, there is one more test for the women of General Motors.
Sometime next year, the company's Willow Run assembly plant here will shut forever.
Seniority is everything when it comes to jobs at other plants, and the women have less of it than their male co-workers.
Now, as she has to be strong all over again, Kelly Arter finds it helpful to remember the foreman she took on 14 years ago.
She had just moved up from assembler to replacement operator, the only woman on the job.


Bias Attacks Draw Anger Of Dinkins
Seven anti-Semitic incidents in recent days -- attacks on Jews, an apparent attempted kidnapping and swastikas painted on Jewish-owned stores and other buildings -- were under investigation by the police yesterday as an angry Mayor David N. Dinkins lashed out at hatemongers and hundreds of New Yorkers protested anti-Semitic violence.
The Mayor, in a City Hall statement, cited three incidents over the weekend -- a failed attempt by two men to drag a Hasidic Jew into a car in Staten Island, a tire iron hurled through a Jewish woman's window in Greenwich Village by thugs shouting anti-Semitic slogans and an ugly verbal assault on a Jewish woman in the Riverdale section of the Bronx by six men in a car, who threw a lighted cigarette at her.


Books of The Times; Back on the Beat With Investigator Renko
Red Square  By Martin Cruz Smith  418 pages. Random House. $23.
August 1991.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Acordia Inc., 4.85 million common shares, 3.8 million in the U.S. and Canada.
First Boston Corp.
Alomar Biosciences Inc., 850,000 units, each representing 1 common share and 1 warrant.
Commonwealth Associates.


Masha Schiller, Gary S. Belkin
Masha Schiller, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mikhail Schiller of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gary Stuart Belkin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Myron D. Belkin of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Chiam Shapiro performed the ceremony at the Touro Synagogue in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Schiller Belkin, 27 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Brandeis University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in clinical psychology from the University of Rhode Island, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in that subject.
Her father is an environmental engineer in Boston.
Her mother, Sophie Schiller, is a painter and a freelance book-jacket designer in Boston.


Lauren Katzowitz, Marc H. Shenfield
Lauren Pearl Katzowitz, the executive director of Foundation Service, a philanthropic management group in New York, was married yesterday to Marc Howard Shenfield, a freelance advertising copywriter and landscape painter.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shenfield, 43 years old, is a daughter of Max Katzowitz of Eastchester, N.Y, and the late Freda Katzowitz.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Polls Show Lead By Clinton Holds
Two polls taken immediately after the debate last night showed Gov.
Bill Clinton holding to his lead over President Bush and Ross Perot.
In a CBS News telephone poll of 489 registered voters Mr.
Clinton drew 47 percent of the support, Mr.
Bush had 35 percent and Ross Perot had 12 percent.
The poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 5 percentage points.


Elise Baruch, John Trainor
Elise Baruch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Baruch of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Trainor, a son of Charles Trainor of West Orange, N.J., and Karen Hughes of Montclair, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at the ceremony at the Fairview Country Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Trainor, 26 years old, is a television producer at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University, as did her husband.
Her father is a theatrical producer in New York.


Essay; Clinton Doesn't Lose
"You
have
attacked my patriotism," counterpunched Bill Clinton, in the most dramatic moment of the first Presidential debate of 1992.
President Bush had carefully said that Clinton's organizing anti-war demonstrations abroad as a youth was "a question of character and judgment," and claimed not to be impugning his patriotism.


Transcript of First TV Debate Among Bush, Clinton and Perot
Following is text of last night's Presidential debate in St.
Louis, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Distinctive Points
Q: The first topic tonight is what separates each of you from the other.
Mr.
Perot, what do you believe tonight is the single most important separating issue of this campaign?


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Cook Gets His Third Victory of Season  John Cook, a disappointed runner-up in the British Open and PGA Championship, scored a front-running victory yesterday in the Las Vegas Invitational.
Cook's two-stroke triumph, secured with a bogey-free final round of 68, was his third of the season and tied Fred Couples and Davis Love III for the most on the PGA Tour this year.
The victory, engineered over five days, 90 holes and three courses, was worth $234,000 from the $1.3 million purse and enabled Cook to join Couples and Love as a $1 million winner this year.
Couples leads with $1,268,188 and Love has $1,157,630.
Cook has earned $1,119,971.
Cook shot 334, 26 under par.
David Frost of South Africa finished second. (AP) Faldo Takes 2d Match-Play Title: Nick Faldo overwhelmed Jeff Sluman, 8 and 7, yesterday in Virginia Water, England, to win his second world match-play championship.
Faldo, the British Open champion, romped into a six-hole lead on the first trip over the Wentworth course despite a bogey-bogey-double bogey slump from the 13th hole to the 15th hole.
Sluman was the first American finalist since Ben Crenshaw in 1981. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; BUSH STRESSES HIS EXPERIENCE BUT 2 RIVALS CITE ECONOMIC LAG
In the long-awaited first debate of the 1992 Presidential campaign, with his Presidency in jeopardy, George Bush asked the American people last night for more time to right the economy, but his economic stewardship drew withering fire from Bill Clinton and Ross Perot.
White House officials said later that if he was re-elected Mr.
Bush planned to dismiss his three top economic advisers, as demanded for months by Republican conservatives outraged over tax increases.
They are Nicholas F. Brady, the Treasury Secretary; Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and Michael J. Boskin, the top White House economist.


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mark Is Broken And No Scrapes
Although racing a stock car at more than 175 miles an hour doesn't qualify anyone for a safe-driver discount on auto insurance, the recent track record of the sport's fastest drivers might be worth a break on collision-damage coverage.
Including today's Mello Yello 500, won by Mark Martin in a Ford Thunderbird at a race-record speed of 153.602 miles an hour, the drivers in Nascar's Winston Cup series have gone more than two races -- representing over 870 laps of racing -- without as much as a fractured fender or rumpled hood.


43 Are Injured In Smoky Fire In the Subway
An intense track fire spewed thick, choking smoke into a subway station and two subway trains in downtown Brooklyn yesterday.
At least 43 people were injured, most of them overcome by smoke, as roughly 150 passengers scrambled in virtual darkness to escape.
A quick, smooth evacuation by transit workers and firefighters, coupled with the relatively light weekend ridership, prevented a much more serious tragedy, said fire, transit and emergency rescue officials.
None of those injured, which included passengers and transit workers, were seriously hurt, the officials said.


Bytex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NEW SMOG ALARMS SCIENTISTS
A vast pool of pollution over the South Atlantic is causing alarm among scientists, who say it may harm people and contribute to global warming.
The cloud is also calling attention to the complex role of theozone as villain and blessing.
A1  SARAJEVO MOURNS ITS CHILDREN
The death of three children in a mortar blast deepened Sarajevo's sense of desperation and bitterness.
Numbed residents appear convinced that hope is finally lost.
A7


World Economies


Digital Sound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WD-40 Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nationwide Health Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pope and Columbus


Passing From Pepsi, Taking On Coke
Lee Garfinkel is switching from Pepsi to Coke.
Mr.
Garfinkel, who as an executive vice president and senior creative director at BBDO New York created many of Pepsi-Cola's memorable television commercials, is joining Lowe &amp; Partners in New York, the agency for Coca-Cola's Sprite and Minute Maid brands, in the new position of vice chairman and chief creative officer.
Lowe's snaring of Mr.
Garfinkel, 37 years old, was not entirely unexpected.
He was one of three high-profile creative executives who discussed joining Lowe several years ago, Adweek reported last week.
"I've respected his work for a long time," Andrew J. Langer, Lowe's chief executive, said.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST DRUG-RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS ON THE RISE
While scientists bemoan the recent resurgence of tuberculosis, what has made the current epidemic most terrifying is the recent dramatic rise of TB strains that are resistant to one or more standard drugs.
At best, only a few medicines can kill the tuberculosis germ.
As the patients will testify, once the bacterium grows invulnerable to these drugs, the remaining remedies demand extravagant cost and suffering.
A1.
NEW DISCOVERIES ABOUT COLUMBUS
The Great Navigator is under revisionist siege in schools around New York and the nation on the 500th anniversary of his landfall in the New World.
Even at Christopher Columbus High School in the Bronx, where the choir still sings the Italian national anthem at gatherings, students are questioning everything they have been taught about Columbus.
Though Columbus's bust still gazes proudly from a school pedestal, in its classrooms he is a tarnished figure who blundered into the New World and made a hash of its exploration.
Compared with many schools, though, the treatment is fairly generous.
A1.


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Castro Steels a Suffering Nation for Confrontation
In the kind of consumer bulletin that has become depressingly familiar to Cubans, the country's domestic press agency provided instructions last week on how to make candles.
The candles are needed because of electricity shortages, and like scores of other ordinary goods they have disappeared from store shelves.
Other recent press reports have shown how to cure headaches with common plants, for lack of medicine, and how to cook without oil or tomatoes, mainstays of the traditionally rich Cuban cuisine.


Transcript of First TV Debate Among Bush, Clinton and Perot
Following is text of last night's Presidential debate in St.
Louis, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Distinctive Points
Q: The first topic tonight is what separates each of you from the other.
Mr.
Perot, what do you believe tonight is the single most important separating issue of this campaign?


Adeline Cruz, Ronald Jose Lugo
Adeline Cruz, a daughter of Hector and A. Iris Cruz of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Ronald Jose Lugo, a son of Socorro Lugo of the Bronx and the late Ricardo Lugo Sr.
The Rev.
Carlos Rodriquez performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Blessed Sacrament Church in the Bronx.


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lie by Texas Politician Puts Twist in Campaign
Lena Guerrero started in politics young and put the dusty poverty of South Texas behind her quickly.
After she addressed the Democratic National Convention in July her backers said this young, talented Hispanic woman could go to the top.
Governor, senator, even President, some said.


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


This Toronto Team Isn't Scared of Ghosts
The Toronto Blue Jays have said time and again this post-season that they are a different team than their three predecessors in the last eight years who were forced from the post-season before they could reach the World Series.
Now, after inspired victories in three straight games, including a remarkable Game 4, which they won after trailing by five runs entering the eighth inning, people are starting to believe.
These guys are different, not only from Blue Jays teams of the past but from any team that ever played in the post-season.
Their comeback from five runs down after the seventh inning came partly at the expense of Dennis Eckersley, perhaps the greatest relief pitcher ever to grace the game, and gave them a victory over the A's in 11 innings, 7-6.
Those accomplishments left Toronto players no choice but to joyously slay demons right and left.


Invincibility of Avery Unravels in First Inning
Steve Avery would spin the baseball in his left hand as if it were some foreign object.
He'd throw another pitch and then spin around on the mound, staring at another base hit and sinking further into that feeling usually reserved for the ordinary: helplessness.
Gary Redus doubled to start the first inning.
Jay Bell rocketed a single and Avery was behind, 1-0.
Three Rivers Stadium erupted, the applause first having to overcome the disbelief that ruled the atmosphere.


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Knuckleball and Knucklehead: Leyland Knows the Difference
When Jim Leyland got out of his car at Three Rivers Stadium today, about a dozen fans rushed to him and asked for his autograph.
"I signed for them," the Pirates' manager related, "and a second later they said, 'You dumb S.O.B., you should pitch Wakefield tonight.' "


The Jets Say Farewell A Week Before the Bye
Confused?
The Jets, who have a bye next week, certainly seemed to be confused today about which Sunday they were supposed to take off.
Actually, the defense did make an impressive appearance at the Hoosier Dome, but someone forgot to tell the offense that their presence was also required if the Jets were going to win.
The Jets' offense dozed through the game until the last 5 minutes 20 seconds of regulation, when they put together a 10-play, 52-yard drive that was capped by Cary Blanchard's 35-yard field goal with 30 seconds to play in regulation.


Federal National Mortgage Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justice Dept. Now Clashes With F.B.I. Over Inquiry Into Bank Loans to Iraq
Even as Justice Department officials leveled new accusations at the Central Intelligence Agency, they found themselves in a dispute today with the F.B.I. over how the Department should investigate whether evidence was concealed in a politically sensitive case involving Iraq.
At issue is whether the C.I.A. or the Justice Department is to blame for providing incomplete, and therefore misleading, information to prosecutors and a Federal judge in Atlanta about one of the largest bank frauds in history.


Dance in Review
Cydney Wilkes
Bessie Schonberg Theater
Cydney Wilkes must have been a painter in a previous life.
Most of the four pieces in "Dive Marker," a program Ms.
Wilkes presented on Saturday night, looked like landscapes dotted with small, bright figures who just happened to be in motion.
That is not to deny the compelling dance invention of the title work, a premiere set to a cheerful score by Eve Beglarian that sounded like high-tech player-piano music.
"Dive Marker" didn't begin or end or build.
It just happened, as two pairs of combatants went at their sleek crawls, lunges, jumps and bounces.
They were moved, it seemed, by their own playful alert physicality.
Poking through were shards of oddity, as when one woman climbed slowly up another's body, upside down and balancing on one hand.
"Dive Marker" was performed by Sarah Gamblin, Kate Gyllenhaal, Andrea Sferes and Ms.
Wilkes.


Massive Ozone and Smog Defile South Atlantic Sky
In the skies above the South Atlantic Ocean, a region far from factories and human beings, and long thought of as pristine, scientists are studying an unusual cloud of pollution that they fear will harm people and contribute to global warming.
The pollution, a vast pool of ozone and smog, is particularly alarming, the scientists say, because it is the largest concentration of pollution found so far in the Southern Hemisphere, the cleaner half of the planet.


Review/Theater; Rummaging An Era For Names And Words
In her one-woman show "You Could Be Home Now," Ann Magnuson reveals herself as an omnivorous collector of names and buzz words that have gained at least temporary currency.
Listening to her monologue at the Joseph Papp Public Theater is a bit like browsing through a stack of trendy magazines and reading everything in bold print.
For a performer who seems to pride herself on her timeliness, the references can seem slightly out of sync: for example, she imagines throwing Beluga caviar at Jay McInerney rather than at Donna Tartt.
During the 90-minute performance, she impersonates a variety of characters but without the chameleonesque agility of Lily Tomlin and others who have explored related territory.


Cynicism Marks Veto Of Family Leave Bill
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis criticizes President Bush's veto of the family leave bill in "The Bush Constitution" (column, Sept. 25).
Mr.
Lewis focuses on the President's argument that family leave should not be compelled by the government.
He counters that the President's position takes too narrow a view of what the Federal Government should do at the workplace.
Mr.
Lewis's criticism is well taken, but misses the depth of the cynicism underlying the veto.
The President, in his veto message, preferred "employee-employer negotiations" for family leave over a law requiring family leave.
Two years ago, in California, Gov.
George Deukmejian vetoed a California family leave bill on the ground that family leave should be won through "collective bargaining."


Playoff Shoves Debate Aside
Facing what the network president called a "Faustian bargain of epic proportions," CBS-TV did not interrupt its coverage of a baseball playoff game last night to cover the Presidential debate.
The president of the CBS Broadcast Group, Howard Stringer, said the network's contractual obligation to Major League Baseball to carry the playoff game superseded its commitment as a news organization to carry the debate.
He called it "the most difficult thing I've experienced in programming since I've been in this job."


Italy's Premier Wins Vote on Austerity Plan
After two days of debate and a stormy walkout by legislators from the old Communist Party that left the Chamber of Deputies with barely a quorum, Italy's Government survived a crucial economic vote of confidence late Saturday.
The vote on a package of measures to lop $18 billion from state spending was an important step in bringing Italy out of a financial crisis that has undermined business and revealed the true cost of the so-called Italian economic miracle.


Corrections
An obituary last Monday about William L. McGuire, a Long Island lawyer, misstated the name of a law firm where he worked and his relationship to it.
In 1965, he was a founding partner of Graham &amp; McGuire in New York City.
In 1973, he left the firm to join Garcia Sporting Goods in Teaneck, N.J., where he became president in 1978.
When he returned to the law firm in the early 1980's, its name was Graham, Campaign &amp; McCarthy.


Little Progress as Trade Talks Begin
European Community officials reported some progress in trade negotiations with the United States today, but it remained far from certain that a breakthrough would be reached in the long-stalled talks.
Officials provided no details of the day's discussions, which were led by Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, and Frans Andriessen, the European Community's External Affairs Commissioner.
Mrs.
Hills and Mr.
Andriessen were scheduled to continue their negotiations here on Monday.


Seacoast Banking Corp. of Fla. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Writers Taking Part In a Series of Talks
Anna Quindlen, David Halberstam, Linda Ellerbee and Calvin Trillin will be the guests in a series of conversations with writers called "An Evening With . . ." at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village.
Ms.
Quindlen will be the first guest, on Oct. 27, to be followed by Mr.
Halberstam (Dec. 1); Ms.
Ellerbee (March 2), and Mr.
Trillin (April 20).


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Horace Mann Educators Corp., Springfield, Ill., registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission a proposed offering of $50 million of step-up convertible subordinated notes due 1999, through First Boston Corp. *
New England Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., a unit of Nynex Corp., New York, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for as much as $400 million of debt securities.
The company did not list underwriters.


Reading the Medical Notes From Underground; Tests, Not Treatment
To the Editor:
"Nationwide Tests Set for Prostate Cancer, but Doubts Surface" (front page, Sept. 20) covers the controversial issues concerning screening for prostate cancer.
Irrespective of whether or not the national effort to screen half a million middle-aged men for prostate cancer you describe is effective, another issue should be addressed before we proceed with more screening programs.
Screening for disease implies treatment is available for the care of the condition.
Is the Shearing-Plough Corporation, which is sponsoring the program, willing to pay for the subsequent studies and treatment for the millions of Americans who do not have any health insurance and the many millions of men whose insurance does not cover the follow-up costs of this screening program?


Defining the Cosmo Girl: Check Out the Passport
Who is the Cosmo girl?
And what does the Cosmo girl in New York have in common with the Cosmo girl in Lisbon or Istanbul?
These are questions that face Cosmopolitan's editors around the world.


Review/Opera; Triumph and Tragedy In 'Christophe Colomb'
Events of the historical magnitude of Columbus's voyage across the Atlantic often inspire flights of the imagination that offer a perspective and perhaps a kind of truth that scholarship cannot approach.
It may be, too, that an insightful work of art can retain its currency longer than a scholarly study, if only because by nature it presents symbols rather than specifics.
This year's quincentenary has yielded comparatively few new works in honor of Columbus's arrival: two films and Philip Glass's "Voyage," a meditation on discovery that opens tonight at the Metropolitan Opera.
But there is also a related backlist, and on Saturday evening at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, the Brooklyn College Opera Theater gave the belated New York stage premiere of Darius Milhaud's grandly scaled 1928 opera "Christophe Colomb."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; New Mystery: Where Are Viewers?
The prime-time television season has been disappointing so far, defined by a string of unexpected and somewhat bizarre developments.
Viewers have disappeared in the middle of Friday nights and have all but boycotted network television in the early hours of Saturday nights.
The most expensive programming on television, Major League Baseball, is not doing as well as the far less costly entertainment programming it replaced.
And Ross Perot has proved to be more of a prime-time hit than Delta Burke.


Service Merchandise Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury to Sell Only Bills At Its Auctions This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill markets, beginning with the regular auction of three- and six-month bills, rescheduled for tomorrow because of the Columbus Day holiday.
On Thursday, one-year bills will be auctioned.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 2.81 percent and on the six-month bill, 2.95 percent.
In when-issued trading, the new one-year bill was being offered at a price to yield 3.04 percent.


Hunger Strike Lights a Spark Among Palestinians
A hunger strike for the last two weeks by Palestinian inmates here and at other Israeli prisons has breathed new life into the anti-Israel uprising, which had looked moribund for many months.
Thousands of Palestinians have demonstrated solidarity with the hunger-strikers by pouring into the streets of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip each day, battling Israeli soldiers, throwing rocks and in turn being fired on.


Kidder Is Settling Maxus Suit
Closing another chapter from the Wall Street scandals of the 1980's, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company has agreed to pay $165 million to the Maxus Energy Corporation to settle a lawsuit in which the Texas oil company contended that it was damaged by the insider trading of a former Kidder executive.
The civil settlement, announced Saturday night by Maxus, is the highest reached with a single company claiming to have been financially injured by illegal trading on Wall Street.
It is more than six times the $25.3 million that Kidder agreed to pay the Government in 1987 to settle charges related to the insider trading of the former executive, Martin A. Siegel, once Kidder's top takeover star.


Line Moves Quickly; Hampton Does, Too
It was time to ignore the pain, to try to keep alive a Giants season of little form and no consistency.
So Rodney Hampton, running on a sprained ankle, broke through the debris that was the Phoenix Cardinals' defensive line to produce a 63-yard touchdown run today.
That first-quarter dash set the tempo, and the Giants went on to a 31-21 victory.


Pamela Kogen, Michael Morandi
Pamela Jo Kogen, a daughter of Betty H. Kogen of Norwalk, Conn., and the late David H. Kogen, was married yesterday to Michael Ernest Morandi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reno Morandi of Belle Mead, N.J.
John S. Alley, a justice of the peace, officiated at Clam Cove Point in Chilmark, Mass.
Mrs.
Morandi, 34 years old, is a freelance magazine and book illustrator in New York.
She graduated from the Parson's School of Design.


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valerie Hartman And Jeffrey Levy
Valerie Hartman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. K. Hartman of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Charles Levy, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Paul G. Levy of Lawrenceville, N.J.
Rabbi Norman Kahan officiated at the North Shore Country Club in Glen Head, L.I.
Mrs.
Levy, 29 years old, is a lawyer at Turner Broadcasting in Atlanta.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Gloria Gay Coats, a New York clothing maker.


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Talk of Hollywood; The 'Glengarry' Math: Add Money and Stars, Then Subtract Ego
In the final days of filming "Glengarry Glen Ross" in New York, several of the stars began to weep.
Al Pacino told the cast and crew that the weeks of shooting the David Mamet drama had been the best work experience of his life.
He cried.
Jack Lemmon, one of the other stars, began speaking, but he, too, cried.
Jerry Tokofsky, the producer who shaped the film, was also overcome.
"It was such a long, hard struggle," he said with a wan smile the other day, shortly after the movie opened to some of the best reviews of the year and big box-office returns in its limited opening.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Oct. 2, about the United Hospital Fund's Distinguished Community Service Award to Randolph Guggenheimer for his work on behalf of North General Hospital, characterized the hospital incorrectly.
It is not the only nonprofit community hospital in Harlem; Harlem Hospital is another.


Pope's Mass at Dominican Monument to Columbus
One day before the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the New World, Pope John Paul II celebrated a Mass today before church leaders from throughout Latin America and thousands of Dominican worshipers.
The open-air Mass, the first given abroad by the Pope since he was operated on for an intestinal tumor in July, was celebrated in steamy heat at the foot of a massive monument to Columbus at the capital's edge.


Behind the Scenes At the First Debate
Should all three Presidential candidates be already on stage as the debate coverage begins, or could George Bush stride in with a Presidential air?
What should Ross Perot do with his hands -- and would he stand on a booster platform?
What happens when spin doctors collide?
Which famous politician wins the prize for the longest spinning? (Hint: he's a well-known New York Democrat.)


Capital Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Waldenbooks Inc., Stamford, Conn., to Deutsch Inc., New York, for its estimated $3 million account, previously unassigned.
A campaign is expected for the holiday shopping season.


Abrams Takes Campaign To Conservative Region
In a manic, seven-stop trip through the rolling hills and cornstalk countryside of central New York, Attorney General Robert Abrams today branded Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's television commercials as purposeful distortions, his recent Senate filibuster as a cynical attempt to obscure his voting record, and his 12-year Senate tenure as a hemorrhage of jobs, business and hope for New York's middle class.
Supporters met Mr.
Abrams, the Democratic Senate nominee, with genuine warmth and rounds of applause at his appeals for national health care, abortion rights and job protection.
But others cast a jaundiced eye on the upstate tour and said the Attorney General would have difficulty winning broad support in a predominantly conservative region that Mr.
D'Amato has stroked and stumped for years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; Bush Didn't Score the Needed Knockout
One way to score a Presidential debate is to ask: What did each candidate need to achieve and did he do it?
Measured by that standard, the first of the three Presidential debates was less than a triumph for President Bush and a fair night for his two opponents.
Mr.
Bush, still trying to revive his candidacy for re-election with just over three weeks to go, needed a surprise, some reason for voters to change their minds about a President who has become well defined for most Americans over the last four years.
He did not achieve it.


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Wake of Turmoil, United Ways Remain Strong
When United Way was reeling last spring from revelations of extravagance and mismanagement at its Washington headquarters, a national poll of past donors found 25 percent saying they would give less money or none at all in the next drive.
Early evidence from campaigns for United Way contributions in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut indicates that pledges are not dropping off sharply.
And when they are, United Way officials suggest, the reason is the recession as much as the shadow over the organization.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parkway Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fischer Coasts to a Draw In a Peaceful Game 18
Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer slogged to a draw yesterday in Game 18 of their exhibition chess match in Belgrade.
The score stays the same: Fischer 7, Spassky 3.
In this series with a $5 million purse, draws do not count.
Three more victories would give Fischer the winner's share of $3.35 million.
Then why was Spassky not trying something more dramatic, more aggressive, more ambitious when he had the initiative of the white pieces?
You may guess that he either wanted to take it easy after the solid defeat he suffered the day before in Game 17 or that he may have lost his nerve against a player who was so deadly with the endgame advantage in the previous encounter.


Only One Answer Deep
With his very first question, Jim Lehrer, the moderator of last night's initial Presidential debate, tried to draw out the ways in which the three candidates differ.
But good intentions notwithstanding, after 90 minutes it was hard to tell.
None of the three fell into any traps or blunders.
Each performed capably, particularly Ross Perot, who demonstrated such crisp, relaxed salesmanship skills that he probably tempted many listeners to consider his candidacy afresh.
If there's a fairer way to collect needed revenues than his proposed gasoline tax, he observed with self-deprecating wit, "I'm all ears."


Samantha Rosen, K. E. Brumberger
Samantha Rosen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin S. Rosen of Coral Gables, Fla., was married in New York last night to Dr.
Kenneth Eric Brumberger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Alan Brumberger of New York.
Rabbi Albert Steurmer performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room.


Michele L. Groer, Andrew G. Rudin
Michele Lee Groer, a daughter of Lynn J. Sapoff of Princeton, N.J., and Robert Groer of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Gifford Rudin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rudin of Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi Jack Stern, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Lambert Estate in Princeton.
Mrs.
Rudin, 26 years old, is a teacher at the Arie Crown Day School in Chicago.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Boston.
Her father is the housing-planning director for Tinton Falls, N.J.
Her mother is a tax and financial planner in Princeton.
The bride's stepfather, Meyer Sapoff of Princeton, is the chief executive of Thermometrics Inc., a maker of thermistors in Edison, N.J.


Companies Expect Benefits From U.S.-China Trade Pact
Executives of several corporations expressed guarded optimism yesterday about the potential benefits of the accord signed by China and the United States to remove a broad range of trade barriers to American goods, including computers, chemicals and cameras.
"It sounds very encouraging to us," Paul Allen, a spokesman for the Eastman Kodak Company, said of the agreement, which was signed Saturday.


A Nicer Park Is Worse, Bayside Says
For three decades the small patch of park beside the Little League ballfield in Bayside, Queens, was not a park as much as an empty, bedraggled lot, choked with weeds and crabgrass that only rarely encountered a lawn mower.
No one around it even knew it had a name.
Then, a few days ago, construction crews arrived and began repairing the ballfield, clearing the lot and pouring a concrete path that will ultimately become an esplanade around a leafy oasis.


Review/Opera; Those Greedy Little Foxes, Set to Music
If Marc Blitzstein's "Regina" were properly viewed as a flawed musical theater piece of modest achievement, the New York City Opera's new production of the work, presented for the first time on Friday night, could also be properly viewed as a great success -- a pleasant evening, well acted and well sung, including moments of affecting charm and melancholy.
But a lot of baggage comes with "Regina." Blitzstein himself was one of the great American hopes for music; he was acclaimed as a native-born Kurt Weill. (He even prepared an English version of the "The Threepenny Opera.") His advocacy of left-wing causes as a Communist Party member and his belief in a music that was both populist and sophisticated helped inspire the young Leonard Bernstein.
His musical drama "The Cradle Will Rock" (1937), a pro-union morality tale, was championed by John Houseman and Orson Welles and still finds its advocates today.
"Regina," which he adapted from Lillian Hellman's 1939 play "The Little Foxes," was to be his masterpiece, a great American opera written in English, the story of the purportedly ruthless capitalist incursion on the genteel American South by the Hubbards -- led by the most grasping Hubbard of them all, Regina.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Retail Sales . . .
Sept.
Producer Prices . . .
Sept. 10-Day Auto Sales  Thursday  Consumer Prices . . .
Sept.
Business Inventories . . .
Aug.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Aug.
Industrial Production . . .
Sept.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Sept.


John Bogart, 80, Dies; Was Times Executive
John Bogart, a longtime labor relations executive at New York City newspapers, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a stroke, his family said.


Review/Television; Many Styles, Many Indiana Joneses
Beginning with its title, "The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" seems curiously destined to being cumbersome.
By far the most impressively mounted weekly show on television, at least in terms of rich production values, this ABC series keeps running up against its own unwieldy conception, devised by its executive producer, George Lucas.
Latest evidence: tonight's "Barcelona, 1917" episode, at 8, directed by Terry Jones, once of "Monty Python's Flying Circus."
Mr.
Lucas, of course, working as executive producer and in other capacities, shares credit for the enormous box-office success of the "Indiana Jones" trilogy (the "Star Wars" saga is also his).
Then he had a perfectly admirable idea.
Why not a coming-of-age series about the formative years of the fictional Indiana Jones, a series set in the early decades of this century and incorporating real events and historical characters into its plots?
Aimed at younger audiences, "Young Indy," as it more felicitously might have been titled, would bring new life to the concept of educational television.
Great excitement, justifiably so.


Kohl's Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Review/Pop; Appeal That Cuts Across Boundaries of Sex and Age
The American pop firmament doesn't have a star quite like Joan Manuel Serrat, the 48-year-old Spanish singer and songwriter who received a hero's welcome from a mostly Spanish-speaking audience at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday evening.
Mr.
Serrat, who was born in the barrio in Barcelona, is one of the rare pop personalities from any country who is both a sex symbol for women and a role model for men.
Although he was besieged by female fans proffering floral tributes, an equal number of male admirers crowded to the edge of the stage at the end of his solo concert to shake his hand.
Mr.
Serra's fans don't belong to any narrow age group, as they tend to do in America.
They ranged mostly in age from their early 20's to their 50's.


Thai Publisher Plans to Expand Empire in U.S.
Early last year, a new California magazine called Buzz was short of money and had to suspend publication.
Two weeks later, like the deus ex machina of Greek tragedy who drops in improbably and resolves everything, a Thai businessman appeared and provided the astonished founders of Buzz with the money they needed.
The man was Sondhi Limthongkul, chairman of the Manager Group of Bangkok, which includes more than 30 companies in Asia and Europe involved in publishing, printing, global advertising sales, information service and information technology.
The 46-year-old Mr.
Limthongkul has ambitious plans to become a major media figure on both sides of the Pacific.


What Smoking Ads Say
To the Editor:
The women's magazine editors whose Sept. 25 letters criticize Elizabeth Whelan's Sept. 8 Op-Ed article on their health reporting ignore the main point: it is contradictory for magazines presumably concerned about women's health to carry advertising for a product, namely, cigarettes, that brings disease, miscarriages, premature widowhood or death to women.


Drug Trade Complicates Haiti's Problems
To the Editor:
Human rights organizations would lead us to believe that Haiti's current leaders are solely responsible for the state of lawlessness and the crimes and assassinations that have been committed in that country over the last few years.
The international community is told over and over by organizations like Amnesty International that death squads and criminal acts are a mere extension of the military repression that followed the military coup of Sept. 30, 1991.
It is possible that paramilitary or military personnel are abusing power by engaging in repressive private or official acts that violate the civil rights of citizens who are seen as potential threats or opponents to them or to their position in government.
Unfortunately, such a state of affairs has existed in Haiti for two centuries, having become even more widespread and quasi-institutionalized during the Duvalier regime.


A Failing Dance Presenter Looks to a Gala for Rescue
Fred Colby has been getting a lot of fan letters these days.
Mr.
Colby is not a movie star or even a famous violinist.
He is the energetic and visionary director of the San Diego Foundation for the Performing Arts, perhaps the most established presenter of dance in the western United States.
The 10-year-old foundation has put on highly regarded yearly series of dance by major ballet, modern and ethnic troupes from around the world in two theaters in San Diego.
But last week Mr.
Colby announced the cancellation of its season, which was to have included performances by the companies of Mark Morris, Paul Taylor and others.
Unless it can raise $200,000 by Oct. 20 , Mr.
Colby contends, the foundation will have to close permanently.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. warned its workers and other companies that two chemicals widely used in manufacturing semiconductor chips -- and in other industries -- may significantly increase the risk of miscarriage.
The company acted after a study by Johns Hopkins University found that among 30 women who worked with the chemicals and then became pregnant, 10 had miscarried.
The chemicals, diethylene glycol dimethl ether and ethylene glycol monethyl ether acetate, are used as solvents in part of the chip-making process.  [ Page A1. ]
Kidder Peabody agreed to pay $165 million to Maxus Energy to settle a lawsuit in which the Texas oil company claimed it was damaged by the insider trading of a former Kidder executive.
The settlement closed another chapter of the Wall Street scandals of the 1980's.  [ D1. ] International
Scientists are studying an unusual cloud of pollution in the skies above the South Atlantic Ocean, a region far from factories and people and long thought of as pristine.
The vast pool of ozone and smog is the largest concentration of pollution found so far in the Southern Hemisphere.  [ A1. ]


Corrections
An article on Friday about the close of the 102d Congress misstated the location of the Glen Canyon Dam.
It is on the Colorado River, not the Rio Grande.


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Virginia Star Sidelined
Virginia tailback TERRY KIRBY, the nation's leading rusher, likely will be out of action for three weeks after breaking his left shoulder blade.
Kirby, who rushed for 884 yards in six games, hurt the shoulder with 11 minutes left in Saturday's 29-28 loss to Clemson.
Kirby took a handoff, bulled through the line and gained 10 yards before he was slammed to the artificial turf by 286-pound tackle PIERRE WILSON and 224-pound roverback DARNELL STEPHENS.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Have You Heard the One About the Presidential Race That Wasn't Funny?
Driving through the hilly night shadows at the edge of the city, the cab driver got lost in a joke, one he was telling about President Bush.
"He was overseas somewhere -- Iraq? -- and got sick to his stomach, and the really funny part was why he got sick." He paused, groped.
"But I can't remember that part."
Take my driver, please.


INSIDE
Fighting on Angola's Streets
Fighting between policemen and opposition forces in the capital stirred fear of renewed civil war.
Page A9.
United Way, After Scandal
Early evidence from United Way campaigns indicates that pledges are not dropping off sharply after revelations of mismanagement.
Page B1.
Blue Jays Rally for 3-1 Lead


Individual Feats Provide No Comfort
Freeman McNeil needed 3 yards to reach 8,000 yards during his career with the Jets.
Al Toon needed one catch to stretch his string to 98 consecutive games with at least one reception.
And Cary Blanchard, the recently acquired kicker, needed one more chance to prove what he could do.
McNeil got his yards, finishing with 7 on 4 carries for 8,004.
Toon got his catch, finishing with 3 for 62 yards in the game, but Blanchard, picked up on waivers from the Saints last week in time to get three field goals and three extra points in last week's Jets victory over New England, only got one chance to kick a field goal in today's 6-3 loss to the Colts.


Review/Cabaret; Endangered Species Defined
What is a cabaret diva?
In the opinion of Jack Wrangler, who wrote, directed and appears in the musical comedy revue "An Evening With Anne and Margaret," it is an endangered species of performer who can be sighted in only a few remaining habitats.
And on Tuesday night in a between-acts monologue notable for its strained wit, he named the Ballroom, where the show plays through Saturday, as one of the only places left where "you can watch them but you can't shoot them."
The Anne and Margaret of the title are the veteran entertainers Anne Francine and Margaret Whiting.
Mr.
Wrangler, the former porn star turned writer and director whose dialogue has tarted up a number of Miss Whiting's solo acts in recent years, serves as master of ceremonies, diva expert and occasional droning singing partner.


Schools Growing Harsher In Scrutiny of Columbus
Even at Christopher Columbus High School in the Bronx, where the choir still sings the Italian national anthem at gatherings, the Great Navigator is under revisionist siege.
Though Columbus's bust still gazes proudly from a school pedestal, in its classrooms he is a tarnished figure who blundered into the New World and made a hash of its exploration.
Compared with that at many schools, though, the treatment is fairly generous.


Who's Sorry Now? The A's, Not Jays
When Jack Morris trudged to his dugout with one out in the bottom of the fourth inning today, the Blue Jays were trailing the Athletics by 5-1 and it looked as if their day was over.
It looked as if the Jays, those poor, haunted Jays, were flopping in the post-season again.
When Dennis Eckersley ambled to his dugout with two outs in the top of the ninth inning after allowing a two-run homer to Roberto Alomar, it was the Athletics who looked done.
The Jays had rebounded from a 6-1 deficit to tie the score by raking the usually untouchable Eckersley.
In a couple of hours, the mood changed from the poor Jays to the poor A's in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series.


China Party Congress May Drop A Bastion of Elderly Hard-Liners
A Communist Party official suggested today that the party congress that convenes Monday will abolish the Central Advisory Commission, which has long been a bastion of octogenarian hard-liners.
Such a move would be a victory for those who favor more rapid movement toward a market economy and a relatively open society.
Members of the commission, an organization of 199 party elders who look over the shoulders of younger leaders, played a central role in a purge in 1987 of moderates and in the crackdown on the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement.


FIGHTING ERUPTS IN ANGOLA CAPITAL
Heavy street fighting erupted in downtown Luanda today between the local police and opposition party soldiers in the worst breach yet of Angola's 18-month-old cease-fire.
The fighting, which lasted more than an hour, broke out after a car bomb exploded near a hotel where senior officials of the opposition, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, were staying.


A Snapshot Memory of the Summer


Dance in Review
Ballet Metropolitano de Caracas
92d Street Y
Ballet Metropolitano de Caracas was thoroughly charming on Thursday night.
The program also revealed that the troupe could dance cleanly and without affectation, and it raised fascinating esthetic questions.
It is not easy to be charming in the Y's Buttenwieser Hall, which is not a theater but simply a large meeting room.
Nevertheless, this Venezuelan group succeeded.


Maureen White, Britain O'Connor
Maureen Bernadette White, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. White of Parsippany, N.J., was married yesterday to Britain Alan O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian J. O'Connor of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Olenowski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Assumption Church in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
O'Connor, 31 years old, is the pharmacist and manager at Scotchwood Pharmacy in Fanwood, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a supervising mechanical engineer at Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J.
Her mother, Eileen E. White, is a medical technician at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.


Glacier Holdings reports earnings for Year June 27


Of Paradise, Nuisance and Parrots Singing in Trees
ON a hilly road in the exclusive enclave of Black Rock, where sprawling homes overlook Long Island Sound, stands a tall fir tree, a tree that can be heard from three blocks away thanks to the chirping, squawking and screeching of several hundred parrots.
The parrots, lime green with royal blue wings, are native to South America, but they have made their home in Bridgeport for more than a dozen years.


Meek Bird's Survival Secret: Picking Protective Neighbors
FOR sand-colored nighthawks, choosing the right neighbors can mean the difference between life and death.
A biologist working in Peru has found that this species is so helpless against predators that its eggs and chicks can survive only if neighbors protect them.
When predators come to devour precious eggs and nestlings, the mild-mannered nighthawks fly off.
But if they have chosen wisely, terns and skimmers from nearby nests dutifully attack the threat.
The defenders seem to get nothing in return for their help.


A.T.&amp; T. and Mitsubishi Settle Phone Suit
A.T.&amp; T. and the Mitsubishi International Corporation said yesterday that they had agreed to settle their legal dispute over the intrusion last year into Mitsubishi's private United States telephone system by computer "hackers" who made thousands of illegal long-distance calls.
The case had been closely watched because it involves an increasing form of telephone fraud using some of the most widely used equipment by major corporations.
The case also illustrates the challenge facing manufacturers in building equipment that is easy to use yet difficult for computer intruders to break into.


Police Officer Hurt By a Passing Truck
A police officer trying to push back a crowd of spectators at the Columbus Day Parade in Manhattan yesterday was injured when he was struck by the side-view mirror of a truck as it entered a midtown intersection, the police said.
The officer, Howard Graves, 49 years old, suffered severe head lacerations and lost several teeth as the truck's mirror hit him and he fell to the ground at 48th Street and Fifth Avenue, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
Officer Graves, who is assigned to the 72d Precinct in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, was listed in stable condition last night at Bellevue Hospital Center, said Ronald Costello, a hospital administrator.


Unfair Shots at a Fair Tax
There was one point in Sunday night's debate when Ross Perot, otherwise sailing along smoothly, was buffeted by both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Mr.
Perot was asked about his proposal to raise gasoline taxes 50 cents a gallon over five years.
He defended it, then took a double broadside.
Governor Clinton said the tax would stifle an already stagnant economy.
Mr.
Bush complained that it would unfairly hit certain families harder than others.
These two criticisms seemed to confirm Mr.
Perot's earlier fear that a responsible deficit-reduction plan would be subjected to unreasonable pot shots -- a fear that helped drive him from the Presidential race in July.


Simms Undergoes Surgery
Phil Simms, the Giants' 36-year-old quarterback, underwent successful arthroscopic surgery today to remove several large bone chips from his right elbow.
Dr.
Russell Warren, who performed the surgery at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, said there was no ligament damage, just a mild sprain of the medial collateral ligament.
Coach Ray Handley said that Simms, who has indicated he will retire after this season, was expected to be sidelined four weeks.


Voyage on Fifth Avenue Brings Out Politicians
Embracing tradition over revisionism, several of the state's leading political figures, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor David N. Dinkins, Geraldine A. Ferraro and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, joined yesterday in celebrating a fabled Italian who is now under siege as more exploiter than explorer.
But for all the advantages -- and now, perhaps, disadvantages -- of honoring Christopher Columbus at the Columbus Day Parade in Manhattan, one politician was conspicuous by his absence.
State Attorney General Robert Abrams, a frequent participant in the past who is running to unseat Senator D'Amato, skipped the march this year to appear, instead, at a similar parade in Binghamton, N.Y., as part of a campaign swing upstate.


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


Intel Reports Record Profit In 3d Quarter
The Intel Corporation reported record earnings and revenues today, but the company's shares slipped in heavy trading, possibly because a court ruling late Friday appeared to clear the way for the company's chief rival, Advanced Micro Devices, to compete with Intel on the advanced 486 chip for personal computers.
Intel shares closed today at $65.875, down 62.5 cents, in over-the-counter trading.


Two Towns Use Different Tactics to Fight Beach Erosion
As two of the metropolitan area's most eroded oceanfront communities, this splinter of a coastal town and the town of Westhampton Beach, L.I., have much in common.
But they could hardly be further apart when it comes to staving off the sea.
Sea Bright, at the northern tip of the Jersey Shore, is an eager partner in an Army Corps of Engineers' project to build a 200-foot-wide protective beach -- roughly equivalent to 18 million truckloads of sand -- as part of the most expensive beach restoration in the nation's history.


Term Limits Limit Choice
Leaders of the campaign to limit Congressional terms call it "the largest grass-roots citizens' movement in U.S. history." Maybe so, but it is also the most mischievous proposal of the year.
It would give voters less choice while claiming to give them more.
Term limits will be on next month's ballots in 14 states, including four of the biggest -- California, Florida, Michigan and Ohio.
Those states contain almost 30 percent of America's population, and of the seats in Congress.


New Study Questions Hiroshima Radiation
THE atomic explosion that leveled Hiroshima 47 years ago is turning out to be far more subtle and mysterious than scientists ever suspected, raising important new questions about radiation and its health effects.
New evidence suggests that an important ingredient of the bomb's radiation was more prevalent than generally believed, and that finding has touched off a rush of disbelief, rethinking and new studies.
If proved true, it might mean that a given dose of radiation is less dangerous than currently believed, forcing an alteration of international standards meant to avert human harm.


2 Die and 13 Are Injured in Car Accident
Two men were killed and 13 other people were injured last night when a car struck a sports-utility truck at a Bronx intersection, causing the truck to flip over and collide with a van taking a group of people to a church meeting, the police said.
The car, a white, four-door sedan, fled the scene of the accident, which occurred at 7:20 P.M. at 174th Street and Croes Avenue in Soundview, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


Review/Television; Teen-Agers Face Reality On Both Sides of Screen
Trying to attract more subscribers, Home Box Office has been noticeably more vigorous lately in its pursuit of original programming.
Viewers obviously want something more than theatrical-release movies that they can already rent in video stores.
So, like all pay-cable operators, HBO has to work harder and in some instances is succeeding handsomely, from sitcoms like "Dream On" and "The Larry Sanders Show" to horror formats like "Tales From the Crypt." Tonight at 9:30, HBO goes to the reality-programming well with a new series of half-hour fact-based dramas called "Life Stories: Families in Crisis."


Fewer Fluttering Wings


What Empty Feeling?
Dave Winfield searched for the right words, something that would put this crazy series into an appropriate perspective.
On the way, he almost tripped over Yogi Berra.
The question was about momentum, about whether it was suddenly gone for Toronto in the Blue Jays' 6-2 loss to the Oakland Athletics today.
The American League playoff was heading back to Toronto for a sixth game, but Winfield shook his head emphatically.


INSIDE
Nobel for a Cell Discovery
Two Americans won the Nobel Prize in medicine for finding a regulatory mechanism that affects almost all cells.
Science Times, page C3.
Dinkins Retreats on Cab Plan
Mayor Dinkins will offer a more modest plan to put more taxis outside the Manhattan business core.
Page B1.
Abrams Calls Foe a 'Fascist'
Robert Abrams called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato a "fascist," then refused to apologize.
Page B1.
Waiting for Abortion
Two months after Mississippi started enforcing a waiting period, the number of abortions has fallen.
Page A14.
A's Still Alive in Playoffs
Oakland beat Toronto, 6-2, and trails 3 games to 2 as the American League playoffs shift to Toronto.
Page B9.


Despite G.O.P. Attacks, Florio Edges Up in Polls
Republican attack ads about Jim Florio have become something of a cliche in New Jersey.
Anti-Florio sentiment almost beat Senator Bill Bradley in 1990 and it worked wonders last year, when the Republicans swept to overwhelming control of the State Legislature on the strength of it.
Now, the Republicans are issuing fliers depicting Gov.
Bill Clinton with his arm around Mr.
Florio's shoulders, with the caption, "Clinton and Florio -- Perfect Together." A series of radio spots sounds the same theme.


A Mozambique Formally at Peace Is Bled by Hunger and Brutality
Southern Africa's most brutal bush war, a 16-year ordeal of indiscriminate murder and cruelty, has been declared formally over.
But to the survivors, the barefoot and ragged peasants here in the heart of drought-stricken rebel territory, it seems to make little difference.
With no radios and with leaders who chose not to tell them, most of the Mozambican families waiting for Red Cross food in Chihedeia, a gray and dusty outpost where even the towering trees have withered, did not know that a peace treaty had been signed.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 16


Schuler Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amdahl Will Lay Off 9% of Its Work Force
The Amdahl Corporation, the troubled mainframe computer maker, said today that it would lay off 900 workers, or about 9 percent of its work force, next month.
Company officials said that they had recently seen a significant drop in capital spending by major customers such as airlines and banks and that a strong backlog for its top-of-the-line machines had now disappeared.


Qume Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Officials Ponder Causes Of Subway Tunnel Fire
The subway fire in Brooklyn's Court Street station on Sunday was most likely caused when a massive electrical jolt was diverted from the track's power-conducting third rail to the iron casing in the subway tunnel wall, transit officials said yesterday.
The officials said an investigation into Sunday's fire had not yet found a conclusive cause.
But they described the fire, which injured at least 43 people and disrupted service on the N, R, and D trains for about six hours, as an unusual accident that did not signal a breakdown in subway infrastructure or emergency operations.


Sports of The Times; Payday Versus Pay Dirt
FIVE HUNDRED years to the day after Christopher Columbus discovered a new world -- new to him, that is, since it was old hat to those already domiciled here -- Bruce Coslet was hoping to find one of his own.
Yesterday, Coslet, the Jets' head coach, was seeking a world in which "blockers didn't miss blocks," where players "flew around the field" and where "five or six green helmets fell on the football."


Corrections
A calendar entry in "This Week" in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about a rally against breast cancer gave an incorrect date.
The rally is at 11:45 A.M. today, not on Thursday, outside State Supreme Court in Mineola.


Law Expected to Squeeze Refiners
For years refiners have worried about how much they pay for the crude oil they buy, how much they can get for the products they sell and whether the difference between the two leaves them a profit.
But their lives are about to become substantially more complicated, because of new laws that force changes in the composition of oil products.
The first of new rules under the Clean Air Act of 1990 takes effect next month on gasoline supplied in winter to nine of the metropolitan areas with the most polluted air.
More rules, still being drafted, are to follow.
The issue for most refineries now is what recipe the law will impose and whether the capital investment needed to make this gasoline is likely to be recouped through higher prices.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


U.S. and Europe Fail To Settle Trade Issues
Trade negotiators from the United States and the European Community were unable to reach an agreement today after two days of talks aimed at settling festering disputes that have blocked progress on a broader worldwide trade pact.
The two sides said that they had made progress, however, and held out some hope that a deal was still possible.
They said that meetings between their technical staffs would continue, and that Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, would meet again on Saturday in Toronto with Frans Andriessen, the European Community's External Affairs Commissioner.


Classical Music in Review
American Festival of Microtonal Music  N.Y.U. Theater
Classical composers began to explore spaces between and among tones of the Western scale early in this century.
Saturday night, in the second of four concerts in the Microfest Autumn series at New York University, the tenuous barrier between microtonal techniques and the parallel dialects of blues and jazz was broken.


Coslet: Piqued, Puzzled, Patient
In somber remarks that reflected his team's dire straits, Coach Bruce Coslet said today that he was disheartened by a drop-off in intensity on the part of the Jets, compared with last year.
Coslet said he doesn't believe the Jets (1-5) will be able to duplicate the 8-8 record they gained last season, and he said the remainder of this season would be used to weed out the players that won't be able to help the team next season.


Bridge
European players have long suffered from a small delusion: They refer to the Grand Slam Force as a "Josephine," in the belief that it was invented by Josephine Culbertson.
The inventor was her husband, Ely Culbertson, who allowed her to claim the credit.
The bid is one of five no-trump when a suit has been agreed, asking partner to bid a grand slam if he has two of the top three honors in the intended trump suit.
Sometimes it can be a highly dramatic leap.
On the diagramed deal, reported by Ira Herman from a duplicate game at the Beverly Club in Manhattan, North would have been in order to bid five no-trump at his second turn if he had held one more spade, and there was something to be said for that action with only three-card support.


Whitney Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


De Klerk Insists on Security for Whites, Suggesting Extended Debate
President F. W. de Klerk, beset by critics from across the political spectrum, vowed today that his Government would not surrender power until the security of the white minority had been firmly entrenched.
In a combative speech opening a special session of Parliament, Mr. de Klerk laid out his terms for a future democracy, including strong regional governments immune from central domination and a guaranteed share of executive power for minority parties.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Kuwait agreed to buy 236 American battle tanks instead of British-made tanks after President Bush, Vice President Quayle and Defense Secretary Cheney intervened with the Kuwaiti royal family.
The $4 billion sale is expected to preserve 5,900 jobs at General Dynamics plants in Michigan and Ohio.  [ Page A1. ]
American workers are the world's most productive, a new study shows.
In 1990, a full-time American worker produced $49,600 of goods and services, compared with a German worker's $44,200, a Japanese worker's $38,200 and a British worker's $37,100.  [ D1. ]


Perot Shows He's the Master of Live TV
If there was a clear lesson to the Presidential debate on Sunday night, it was this: Be careful whom you invite.
Ross Perot arrived at Sunday night's encounter with nothing to lose.
By yesterday morning, the consensus among the commentators was that in a sense, he had won.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ratings; TV Ratings for First Debate Top Baseball Playoff Game
The Presidential debate on Sunday was a much bigger attraction than the American League baseball playoff, according to the overnight ratings for the 25 largest cities issued yesterday by the A.C.
Nielsen Company.
The debate was seen on three broadcast networks measured in Nielsen's overnight ratings, ABC, NBC and Fox Broadcasting. (The debate was also carried by PBS, CNN and C-Span, but Nielsen does not report overnight ratings for any of them.) CBS intended to carry the debate as well but the baseball game went into extra innings and CBS, citing its contractual obligation with Major League Baseball, stayed with the game, which eventually extended throughout the 90 minutes of the debate.


Sierra Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Morris and Nets Closing In
The New Jersey Nets reached an agreement in principle today with Chris Morris, the team's restricted free-agent small forward and remaining holdout.
Morris's agent, Bob Woolf, confirmed that a three-year contract would likely be signed Tuesday, and that Morris would take his physical and be ready to participate in the evening practice session.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
New Mexico
The Lobos produced the biggest upset of the week with their 1-0 triumph over U.C.L.A., which is ranked second in the country.
The stunner took place in Albuquerque, N.M., on Friday with Richard Farrer scoring the only goal.
The Lobos could have had another goal, but Mike Strati missed a penalty kick.
Coached by Klaus Weber, who played in the semiprofessional German-American League in New York 20 years ago, the Lobos have taken some giant strides in recent years and are expected to be a factor in the newly formed Mountain Pacific Sports Federation, which had five teams in the Top 20 last week.


Abrams Calls Sen. D'Amato 'A Fascist'
Robert Abrams called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato "a fascist" at a political rally late Sunday, then refused to apologize today, although he acknowledged that the remark was "unfortunate" and said it was triggered by his anger and frustration over Mr.
D'Amato's campaign tactics.
Mr.
Abrams's characterization of his opponent for the United States Senate, coming at the end of a hectic nine-stop trek from Syracuse to Binghamton, was a departure from an otherwise issues-oriented three-day barnstorming effort to shore up Democratic support upstate, particularly in areas that had supported Geraldine A. Ferraro during the primary race.


SynOptics Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Electronic Arts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan  Qawwali Singer Town Hall
It takes a minute or two for the singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, a large triangular man, to get warmed up.
When he does, he and his ensemble move directly to the work at hand: to induce trances.
The music he plays, Qawwali, a classical style from Pakistan, is essentially religious.
It is also enormously detailed and improvisational, and it argues that virtuosity and the communal interconnectedness of an improvising group are the best way to transport an audience.
And in the thrill conveyed, improvisation came out the hero: a music hundreds of years old became fresh and vital.


Books of The Times; Who Is Mark Leyner? A Legend in His Own Mind
Et Tu, Babe  By Mark Leyner 168 pages. Harmony Books. $17.
Who is Mark Leyner?
According to the fictional testimonies offered in his cheerfully warped new novel, he is "the most intense, and in a certain sense, the most significant young prose writer in America." Stephen Hawking supposedly didn't publish "A Brief History of Time" until Leyner had "reviewed the book's fundamental theorem" and given his approval.


Bronx Street of Violence; 10 Killings Sap Hope on Beekman Ave.
They fixed the basketball court, across a rubble lot from Beekman Avenue, in time for the tournament this summer.
They patched the backboards, strung new nets from the smooth steel hoops.
The players wore T-shirts printed with 21 names, the names of young men who have been killed near Beekman Avenue in the South Bronx over the last two years.
Their average age was 18.
The shirts are an apt, if depressing emblem for life around Beekman Avenue, a cavernous and secluded street just one block long.
Ten people have died along that single block since a fierce snap of drug-related violence erupted last December.
Within a few blocks, at least 10 more have been slain.


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Joseph Toy Curtiss, 91, Member Of Yale Faculty for Four Decades
Joseph Toy Curtiss, a member of the Yale University English faculty for nearly four decades, died Sunday at his home in Simsbury, Conn.
He was 91 years old.
Professor Curtiss, who suffered a stroke recently, died of heart failure, said Prof.
David Calleo of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, a former student and longtime friend.


Coleman Aims High, Expecting Nets to Leap
Two goals Derrick Coleman has in mind for 1992-93: He makes the Eastern Conference All-Star team, and the New Jersey Nets make the National Basketball Association finals.
He thinks he will. He believes they can.


KUWAITIS WILL BUY TANKS MADE IN U.S.
Kuwait has agreed to buy 236 advanced battle tanks built in Michigan and Ohio, instead of British-made tanks, after President Bush, Vice President Dan Quayle and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney personally intervened with the Kuwaiti royal family, Administration officials said today.
The sale, including spare parts, training and ammunition, could be worth about $4 billion, according to a Pentagon official.
The tank, the M1-A2, is an improved version of the M1-A1, the weapon that decimated Iraq's huge Soviet-built armor corps during the Persian Gulf war.  5,900 Jobs at Stake
The extraordinary lobbying effort by high White House and Administration officials will help the tank's manufacturer, the General Dynamics Corporation, preserve 5,900 jobs, at least to the end of the decade, in two hotly contested states in this year's Presidential election.
Ohio has 21 electoral votes; Michigan has 18.


Rogers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Muzak's New Owners Seek Broader, High-Tech Market
Lily Tomlin once said: "I had a terrible dream last night. I dreamed that the man who invented Muzak invented something else."
Sit down, Ms.
Tomlin, and sip a chamomile tea.
He has invented something else, or at least the company that bears the Muzak name has.
Under the company's newly changed ownership, the service will eventually be offered to millions of stores, restaurants, factories, banks and other offices -- in other words, almost every business and government building in the country.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  MOZAMBIQUE SUFFERS IN PEACE  Peace is scarcely different from war for Mozambique's survivors.
Hungry, thirsty and victimized by extortionate soldiers from both Government and rebel sides, many of those who lived through 16 years of war did not even know that a peace accord had been signed.
A1  DEADLY QUAKE IN EGYPT  An earthquake near Cairo toppled buildings and caused stampedes of panicked residents.
The Egyptian Goverment said 370 were killed and at least 3,300 were hurt.
A1


Review/Music; The Mind Behind the Fingers of Glenn Gould
When Glenn Gould finished playing Bach's "Goldberg" Variations in Bruno Monsaingeon's 1981 film, shown at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Saturday night as part of a nine-hour memorial tribute to this Canadian pianist, his hands lifted from the keys and shook in the air above the keyboard, stiffly, insistently, as if reluctant to let go, as if wanting to feel the tension remaining in the air.
Throughout the performance, his hands jerked, conducted, marked time, but always quivered with tension, reacting almost tactilely to the music.
During the slow variations his head was just inches above his hands, as if he were watching his fingers pull threads through the eyes of minuscule needles, weaving a tensile web of contrapuntal lines.
"The Goldberg Variations" is an extraordinary film, revealing something about the musical interpretation by showing the struggles and ecstatic concentration of the man creating it (Gould's last, highly charged recording of the work is the film's soundtrack).
The screening was the climax of an entire day of such revelations, presentations of filmed performances and conversations, along with the New York premiere of Gould's String Quartet.
They showed the physical body and the personality behind the disembodied sound Gould preferred after he gave up his flourishing career in 1964, turned to recordings and proclaimed, "The concert is dead."


Keeping a Promise, Stewart Stays Perfect
There are very few things in this world that can truly be counted on -- fewer than the Oakland Athletics once thought, that's for sure.
Old reliables, showing they are most human, have shown that even the best can erode confidence because on some days they, too, have clay feet.
Dennis Eckersley, the "you can take that to the bank" relief pitcher, suddenly looks vulnerable.
Rickey Henderson, brilliant in flashes yesterday, first ran cold, now runs hot through the series, the cause and effect of that obvious on the A's.
Carney Lansford, the A's heart and soul, seemed worn out enough for Tony La Russa not to start the A's third baseman in Game 5 of the American League Championship Series against Toronto, even though it could have been the team's final game of the year.


Smiles and Movie Stars Are All Part of Columbus Day Festivities


Stewart Sends Blue Jays a Message: Not So Fast
The Oakland Athletics were facing elimination from the post-season today, facing the conclusion of a hectic six-month ride that saw them overcome odds and injuries to position themselves for one more chance at a World Series.
They did not want the ride to end today.
Neither did Dave Stewart.
With his steely eyes glaring at every batter and his nasty pitches fooling them inning after inning, Stewart lived up to a guarantee he made on Sunday by pitching the A's to a 6-2 victory over David Cone and the Blue Jays in Game 5 of the American League Championship Series at Oakland Coliseum.


INDIANS IN PROTEST AGAINST COLUMBUS
Up and down Latin America today, the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the Americas was marked by tight security around Spain's embassies and by calls for cultural renewal by Indian peoples.
To highlight the achievements of pre-Columbian cultures, indigenous peoples from around the Americas converged today near Mexico City at the great Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon.
At this Aztec monument, they erected steam lodges, smoked peace pipes and chanted Indian prayers.


Etiquette for Handling Otherworldly Calls
ASTRONOMERS are already thinking about what they will do if one day their radio receivers should crackle with signals of a pattern that they think could only come from intelligent beings elsewhere in the universe.
The man who has probably given the most thought to this exciting prospect is Dr.
John Billingham, chief of the NASA search for extraterrestrial life at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif.
Largely through his efforts, the leading international astronomical societies have agreed on what they call a "Declaration of Principles Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterrestrial Intelligence."


Senate Panel Will Question Feuding Officials in Iraq Bank Case
Senator David L. Boren said today that the Senate Intelligence Committee would begin taking sworn statements this week from Central Intelligence Agency and Justice Department officials regarding their handling of a politically sensitive bank fraud case involving Iraq.
The Oklahoma Democrat, who is chairman of the committee, is investigating whether the Justice Department, in collusion with the C.I.A., concealed information on the matter from Atlanta prosecutors, the Federal judge in the case and the public.
He also wants to know why the C.I.A. did not turn over to the Justice Department all its intelligence reports about the activities by the Atlanta branch of one of Italy's largest banks.


Knick Rookie Delivers And Takes Orders, Too
Hubert Davis has decided to obey when Patrick Ewing asks him to do a rookie chore, such as carrying basketballs to practice.
"Patrick's a little bigger than me," Davis said. "I figure I better do it."


Campbell Seeks the Rest Of Australian Cookie Maker
The Campbell Soup Company made a $590 million bid yesterday for the two-thirds of a large Australian cookie maker that it does not already own.
The bid for Arnotts Ltd., described as "the Nabisco of Australia," is the latest in a series of offers for medium-sized food companies overseas made by American manufacturers, facing slow growth at home.


Manila May Let Some U.S. Forces Stay
President Fidel V. Ramos of the Philippines said today that he was willing to accept the stationing of American troops in the Philippines even after the United States withdraws from its last major military base here.
The President's remarks, made in an interview, mean that the American military presence in the Philippines will not necessarily end next month, when the Navy is scheduled to lower the flag for a final time over the huge American naval base at Subic Bay.
But it was unclear what kind of military presence was contemplated, or whether the United States would be interested in any proposal that could also satisfy the Philippine Senate, which voted last year to force the United States out.


Police Board: Seeking Compromise
After weeks of unexpected progress, negotiations over an all-civilian police review board for New York City are at a standstill, thwarted by differences over who appoints board members -- the mayor alone or the mayor and the City Council.
The only sensible solution is compromise.
If political leaders remain inflexible, they will risk further inflammation.
Mayor David Dinkins says that Council incursion into his appointive powers would violate the City Charter and thus require a polarizing public referendum.
Council Speaker Peter Vallone contends that the Charter allows Council participation.
But to argue on legal grounds invites a protracted court tangle that could generate even more friction.
That's unnecessary, since each side is saying sensible things that could lead to a solution.


'Creatures' Get a Life
THE idea of artificial life probably goes back further than the golem or Frankenstein's monster, but only recently has it gained wide attention in the computer and biological sciences.
Basically, artificial life concerns "creatures" -- computer instructions, or pure information -- that are created, replicate, evolve and die as if they were living organisms.
"Within 50 to 100 years a new class of organisms is likely to emerge," wrote James Doyne Farmer, a physicist who worked at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
"These organisms will be artificial in the sense that they will originally be designed by humans. However, they will reproduce, and will evolve into something other than their original form; they will be alive under any reasonable definition of the word."


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Amerihost Properties Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., a company that manages, develops and acquires limited service hotels, has privately placed $4.5 million of 7 percent subordinated debentures due in 1999 largely to institutional investors.
Ratings


California Draws On Ports' Profits
The State of California has found a sugar daddy to help bail it out of its financial hole.
The State Legislature, facing a $10.7 billion budget gap, passed a measure last month that for the first time allows cities to draw on the profits of their ports, which have become the busiest, fastest-growing and most profitable in the nation.
What's good for the state, though, could be bad for business.
The ports worry that channeling tens of millions of dollars to city coffers will force them to curtail much-needed expansion plans and, ultimately, to raise rates, sending shippers hunting for better buys at ports in the Northwest, Canada and Mexico.


VWR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Task Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- The Environment; Clinton and Bush Show Contradictions in Balancing Jobs and Conservation
Both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton say promoting economic growth is just as important as protecting the environment.
But the two candidates clearly differ on how the Government should be used to set priorities and promote these goals.
Though the candidates have taken pains to prepare position papers and deliver speeches to make their differences apparent, both men have histories that are filled with contradiction on the issue.


Dinkins Narrows Plan for Improving Taxi Service
Retreating from a plan to fundamentally reorganize New York City's taxi industry, Mayor David N. Dinkins has prepared a more modest proposal to improve cab service outside the Manhattan business districts.
The Mayor is scheduled to announce today that he will seek approval for the creation of new hack stands in northern Manhattan and the boroughs outside Manhattan, along with a new class of "community cabs," livery taxis that would be allowed to wait for riders at the hack stands, an adviser to the Mayor said yesterday.


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; In London, Clothes for Real Life
No mad careering down old hippie highways for designers here.
They packed their spring and summer fashion shows into a long weekend from Saturday to Monday and kept their eyes resolutely on the future.
The revival of fashions from the 60's and 70's was cheerfully left to the Italians, who examined the period exhaustively in their shows in Milan last week.
The prevailing attitude in London was expressed succinctly by Jean Muir, the most respected British designer, who got her start during the hippie era.
"I'm more concerned where fashion is going, or should be going, than where it came from," she said.
An Easy Grace
Most designers have decided that to survive in a worldwide recession, they must make clothes that look relatively normal.
Extravagance is considered in bad taste.
The best of the styles presented in 15 runway shows and close to 100 exhibitions at the Duke of York's Headquarters on King's Road were not conceived to change the course of fashion but to be palatable and appealing.
They looked comfortable and soothing.


Automotive Industries Holding Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Robert Trumbull Dies at 80; Reported on War for Times
Robert Trumbull, who chronicled war, the birth of nations and sweeping economic change in Asia and the Pacific region in more than three decades as a correspondent for The New York Times, died on Sunday at a hospital in Honolulu.
He was 80 years old.
Mr.
Trumbull had been suffering from cancer of the throat, his daughter Suzanne said.
He had been admitted to Queen's Medical Center in August for radiation treatment.


U.S. Output Per Worker Called Best
A new study of productivity in different countries -- the most authoritative comparison to date -- shows that the United States commands a significant lead over Europe and Japan in output per worker.
In 1990, a full-time American worker produced $49,600 of goods and services a year.
In dollars of equivalent purchasing power, a German worker produced $44,200, a Japanese worker $38,200 and a British worker only $37,100, according to the study by the McKinsey Global Institute, a Washington offshoot of the McKinsey consulting firm, together with three of the nation's top productivity experts, including the Nobel Laureate Robert Solow.
Competition Is Cited
America's secret productivity weapon, the report concluded, is not bigger companies, more robots or even brainier managers.
Instead, it is Washington's relative reluctance to protect companies from the rigors of competition, domestic or foreign.


Spec's Music Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


McCarver Can't Keep a Knuckleballer Straight
Tim McCarver has labored through a curious mental block during the National League Championship Series.
Seems he can't get a retired, cup-of-coffee pitcher named Bill (not Tim) Wakefield out of his mind when referring to Pirates knuckleballer Tim (not Bill) Wakefield.
At least McCarver told us why he's suffering from the Wakefield Woes: He roomed with Bill (not Tim) Wakefield in spring training, 1960. (Scouting report: "Good sinker, good slider, real bright.")


By Design; Dressing Alike
It's true that women are wearing men's ties.
What's untrue is the rumor that skirts will catch on with men.
Nevertheless, as men's and women's notions of dressing converge, the most significant changes are in store for men.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW FEAR AMONG HEALTH WORKERS
As tuberculosis has resurged in the inner cities, the disease has once again become a serious occupational hazard for health-care workers and others.
Just as they have grown accustomed to the risk of getting AIDS at work, which is minuscule, tuberculosis has emerged as a new and far more serious threat.
"All we need is another epidemic, and it will become impossible to staff city hospitals," said Dr.
Lee B. Reichman, president of the American Lung Association.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PRESENT AND ABSENT FROM THE PARADE
Embracing tradition over revisionism, several of the state's leading political figures joined in celebrating a fabled Italian who is now under siege as more an exploiter than explorer.
But for all the advantages -- and now, perhaps, disadvantages -- of honoring Christopher Columbus at the Columbus Day Parade in Manhattan, one politician was conspicuous by his absence.
State Attorney General Robert Abrams, a frequent participant in the past who is running to unseat Senator D'Amato, skipped the march this year.
Page B3.


China Leaders Stress Both Market and Orthodoxy
The Chinese Communist Party opened its 14th congress today with a call for an economic "revolution," linking the country's future to the development of a market economy and placing priority on economic growth rather than ideology.
But the key speech at the gathering made clear that the party wants free markets only for goods and services, not for ideas.
Nearly 2,000 delegates gathered for the congress, held in the Great Hall of the People.
Under a 150-foot red banner reading "Long live the great, glorious and correct Chinese Communist Party," they listened as the party's general secretary, Jiang Zemin, delivered a two-hour speech that is supposed to establish the party line until 1997.


Review/Television; Multiple Splits on Clarence Thomas
From the start, Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court divided white liberals from many of their accustomed allies in black America.
As tonight's plain-talking "Frontline" documentary reports, the N.A.A.C.P. was "conflicted and paralyzed": the civil rights organization disagreed with Judge Thomas's record in almost every particular, yet some of its leaders were reluctant to oppose a black man.
Democratic senators who would ordinarily have gone on the attack against so conservative a Bush Administration nominee held back for fear of opening themselves to charges of racism.
And when a black woman came before a panel of white men at the Senate hearings last October to charge that Mr.
Thomas had made sexual advances to her, the situation became excruciating for many black Americans.
"Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill: Public Hearing, Private Pain" brings out their reactions to the public attention given to a conflict between a black woman and a black man about sex.


Executive Changes
CYPRESS SEMICONDUCTOR CORP., San Jose, Calif., named Pat Verderico vice president of administration and chief financial officer.
HPSC INC., Boston, a unit of Healthco International that leases dental equipment, named Raymond R. Doherty chairman and chief executive.


Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford
To the Editor:
As a Vietnam veteran I have followed the debate over the war records of Presidential and Vice-Presidential candidates with interest.
News accounts tell us that Gov.
Bill Clinton's uncle may have interceded with his draft board to allow him to accept a Rhodes scholarship for graduate study at Oxford University.
The Bush campaign implies that if Mr.
Clinton were a true patriot he would have forgone the Rhodes scholarship and volunteered for Vietnam.


Classical Music in Review
Santiago Rodriguez  Pianist 92d Street Y
Santiago Rodriguez's Rachmaninoff series, begun last spring, continued on Sunday afternoon with the Chopin Variations, the Second Sonata, and the Opus 32 Preludes.
The aim of these programs is to establish Rachmaninoff as a major, even progressive voice in 20th-century piano music; Mr.
Rodriguez may not succeed completely, but his powerful advocacy makes the music sound fresh.


Laserscope Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Resurgent Sing-Alongs Mix Banjos With Environmentalism
IF Saturday night at the Walkabout Clearwater Coffeehouse here is any indication, the spirit of the 60's has survived the me-decade of the 70's and greed decade of the 80's and found new life.
This tranquil, tony town -- just beyond suburbia and just before the country -- has become a mecca for amateur singers and banjo pickers, who turn out in droves for regular weekend sing-alongs and coffeehouses.
By the hundreds, ex-hippies and environmentalists, folk-music buffs and people who simply like to sing, trek here to sing Woody Guthrie standards, hymns to the Hudson River, sea chanteys and irreverently topical political ballads.


Corrections
A listing of murder-mystery events in Weekend on Friday misstated the information telephone number for mystery dinners that start on Nov. 21 at the Yankee Clipper restaurant, John and South Streets, in lower Manhattan.
It is (212) 362-7569.


Market Place; Money Managers Considering the Clinton Effect
Fred Alger, who manages $2 billion for several mutual funds, pension providers and other accounts, plans to vote for George Bush.
But last month, having become convinced that Bill Clinton would win, he sold his drug stocks to buy shares in health maintenance organizations that might profit from Mr.
Clinton's efforts to control medical costs.
"I'm a Bush supporter, but Clinton looks like he's a shoo-in," Mr.
Alger said.
"Go with the flow, I guess."


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Mississippi Law Fails to Reduce Abortion Strife
Two months after Mississippi became the first state to enforce a 24-hour waiting period for abortions, the two sides in the abortion debate agree on only one thing: a one-day waiting period is about a lot more than a single day.
To abortion opponents, the law is a last chance to save a life before the irrevocable action of having an abortion.
Some of them, using the license numbers of cars parked at abortion clinics, have tracked down women and their families to try to dissuade the women from having an abortion.


Victory Brings No Delight For Brooks
Coach Herb Brooks of the Devils tonight demonstrated his unhappiness when his players neglected his concept of team play in favor of individualism, even with a three-goal lead in the third period.
Brooks detected so much individual play in the third period of the Devils' 4-2 victory over Washington that he called a timeout with about eight minutes left in the game and his team sailing along with a 4-1 lead.


Dow Corning reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
ROBERT SIMMS, a 29-year-old security guard at Madison Square Garden, has filed a harassment complaint against ELTON JOHN, accusing the singer of striking him on the head and neck in the middle of a concert on Friday evening.
Mr.
Simms, who was hospitalized at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center, was listed in satisfactory condition there yesterday.
He was not taking calls.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; A Libertarian Fails to Make The Big Time
Ever hear of Andre Marrou?
Probably not.
But he's out there on the Presidential campaign trail too, somewhere, running hard, just like George Bush and Bill Clinton and Ross Perot.
And like them, he's even managed to get his name on ballots in all 50 states, something most of the 19 other obscure Presidential wannabes haven't come close to achieving.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Purchased the contract of Yorkis Perez, pitcher, from Jacksonville of the Southern League.
Sent Shawn Barton, pitcher, outright to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Named Larry Duensing trainer.


Franklin Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


COMPANY NEWS
IMMUNE RESPONSE CORP., San Diego, said it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Targetech Inc., a privately held biotech drug company.
INGERSOLL-RAND CO., Woodcliff Lake, N.J., and Dresser Industries announced the formation of a new pump company, Ingersoll-Dresser Pump Co.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Board Is Said To Warn G.M.
The General Motors Corporation's outside directors have urged the company's chairman, Robert C. Stempel, to stand up to the United Automobile Workers' union and to step up the pace of streamlining the company or risk losing his own job, perhaps by the end of the year, The Washington Post reported in today's issue.
The Post article, citing company sources, said the "get tough" message was delivered to Mr.
Stempel and other top managers at a meeting of the board last week in New York.


F.B.I. CHIEF'S TRIPS PROMPT AN INQUIRY
William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, is under scrutiny in a Justice Department ethics review of his travels aboard official aircraft, Government officials said today.
The inquiry, first disclosed tonight by ABC News and confirmed later, appears to center on whether Mr.
Sessions, his wife, Alice, or other family members used Government planes, automobiles and F.B.I. personnel for unauthorized travel, an issue that has dogged the director since soon after he was appointed in 1987.
Spokesmen for the Justice Department and the F.B.I. declined to comment on the matter.


Daniel Horn, Who Linked Cancer With Cigarette Use, Is Dead at 76
Dr.
Daniel Horn, whose research on the negative effects of cigarette smoking helped to influence government policy and public attitudes, died on Wednesday at the Hunterdon Medical Center in Flemington, N.J.
He was 76 years old and lived in Frenchtown, N.J.
Dr.
Horn died of a heart attack, said a daughter, Marguerite Horn Palmer, of Rio Rancho, N.M.


Pirates Not Awed a Bit By the Braves' Front Line
Exhibiting a large dose of resiliency, the Pittsburgh Pirates went to Atlanta today buoyed by their success in piercing the Braves' supposedly impenetrable front line of defense and cautiously optimistic of reversing the outcome of 1991.
"I'm very confident we can go down there and do the job," said Bob Walk, whose three-hit pitching Sunday night kept the Pirates alive in their quest for the National League pennant after failures the previous two years.
"They came up here last year and did the same thing to us. They came into our ball park and won two in a row."


Classical Music in Review
Aeolian Chamber Players  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
To celebrate its 30th anniversary, the Aeolian Chamber Players gave two concerts on Sunday.
The afternoon concert was devoted to works written for the quartet in the 1960's by Ralph Shapey, Mario Davidovsky and George Crumb.
This reviewer heard the evening program, which examined the more recent end of the Aeolians' repertory.


Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford; Divisive and Peripheral
To the Editor:
Following my endorsement of Gov.
Bill Clinton for President, I have heard from a lot of people, both supportive and otherwise.
I even heard from a Republican questioning if it was appropriate for retired military officers to be involved in politics.
I replied that he obviously hadn't heard about Dwight Eisenhower or Alexander Haig.


Corrections
Articles yesterday and on Sunday about the Presidential debate misstated the location of the field house of Washington University, where it took place.
The field house is in an unincorporated area of St.
Louis County, not in Clayton, a suburb.


Alvin Rosenfeld, 73, Foreign Correspondent
Alvin Z. Rosenfeld, who was vice director for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and a foreign correspondent for newspapers and television, died on Saturday at Georgetown Hospital in Washington.
He was 73 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Judith Shepard Rosenfeld.


Both Czechs and Slovaks Must Rebuild
To the Editor:
Henry Brandon, asking "Who Split Czechoslovakia?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 24) apportions the blame judiciously among Vladimir Meciar, Prime Minister of Slovakia; Vaclav Klaus, his Czech counterpart, and Vaclav Havel, former Czechoslovak President.
But he fails to note that the greatest share of the blame belongs to the Communist regime, which for 42 years discredited the state to its citizens and disrupted its social and moral texture, leaving it vulnerable to the passions of the moment.


Corrections
An article yesterday describing the scene surrounding the Presidential debate rendered a quotation from Bill Clinton incorrectly.
Referring to his half brother, a recovering drug addict, Mr.
Clinton said, "If drugs were legal, I don't think he'd be alive today"; Mr.
Clinton did not say "illegal."


Peter Ornstein; Finance Executive, 64
Peter Ornstein, a vice president at Merrill Lynch in Manhattan who was active in civic affairs in Greenwich, Conn., died on Sunday at Greenwich Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in Greenwich.
Pending an autopsy, the cause of death was unknown yesterday.


Wheels of Justice Lurch After Los Angeles Riots
Thousands of people were arrested during the riots last spring on charges of arson, assault, looting and curfew violations, clogging the courts and jails beyond capacity.
But five months later only a handful of people have been imprisoned, and officials say most of the serious offenders are likely to go unpunished.
During three days of near-anarchy here, dozens of people got away with murder: only two cases have been brought in connection with any of the 52 riot-related deaths, a spokesman for the Distict Attorney said.


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Phar-Mor Stake Erodes Westinghouse Earnings
Stung by losses related to its investment in Phar-Mor Inc., the Westinghouse Electric Corporation announced yesterday that its third-quarter net income was only $14 million.
Revenue for the quarter dropped 10.6 percent, to $3.04 billion, compared with $3.4 billion a year ago.
The earnings were so modest that on a per-share basis they were rounded to zero cents a share.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  November Snow Wins
November Snow won her third stakes race in a row and also raced to the head of the class of 3-year-old fillies yesterday when she outran Vivano by a neck and Easy Now by more than six lengths in the Rare Perfume at Belmont Park.
It was the fourth victory in five starts for November Snow, who raced into prominence at Saratoga in August when she won the Test Stakes and the Alabama.
This was her first race since then, and she came back with a powerful performance, carrying 124 pounds and spotting 12 to Vivano in a small but select field of four fillies.
"I think we ran into a champion today," said Jimmy Pascuma, who trains Vivano.
"We got weight from her, but she beat us." November Snow, who is owned by Earle I. Mack and trained by Allen Jerkens, stalked Vivano for three-quarters of a mile, but Easy Now seemed to be laboring in the heavy track.
In the homestretch, Chris Antley edged November Snow into the lead, but she lost it, then won it back and held off her challenger in a duel to the wire.
Vivano had six and a half lengths on Easy Now, the half-sister to Easy Goer, who in turn had six on Perfect Gem.
The winner ran the mile in 1:354/5 , paid $4 for $2 to win as the even-money favorite and earned $66,480.
"We'll see about the Breeders' Cup," Jerkens said afterward.
"She cut herself a little on the left hind leg, but I don't think it bothered her." TENNIS  Shelton Advances
Bryan Shelton of the United States and Goran Prpic of Croatia used accurate service games yesterday to advance to the second round of the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Shelton, ranked 76th in the world, was successful on 79 percent of his first serves, and beat Patrik Kuhnen of Germany, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2, at Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium.
Prpic, successful on 83 percent of his first serves, outlasted Byron Black of Zimbabwe, 6-4, 4-6, 6-4. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Bellwether County; Bellwether County Gravitates To Clinton, if Only by Default
In the high desert country of Crook County, a tie is something that looks like a shoelace, Ross Perot haircuts never went out of style and the gas station serves dog biscuits for your pet while you wait.
It may not seem like the rest of America, but in the last 27 Presidential elections this place has been an uncanny mirror of the national mood.
As the only county in the nation to vote for the winner in every Presidential election it has taken part in, Crook County has been politically correct, in the true sense of the term, since Grover Cleveland.


TB, Easily Transmitted, Adds a Peril to Medicine
Dr.
John Norris recalls a recent patient in his walk-in clinic at University Hospital in Newark who listed his complaints as weight loss, cough and blood-tinged sputum.
Today these symptoms, the classic signs of tuberculosis, strike new fears in doctors and nurses, prison guards and those who help the poor and homeless.
"The first thing in my mind is I'm breathing the same air," said Dr.
Norris, chief medical resident at the hospital.
"I'm pretty concerned about getting infected. I really don't want to bring it home to my kids."


Why a Hunter Uses An Assault Rifle
To the Editor:
In "Assault Weapons Are Designed for Murder" (letter, Sept. 23), Wilbur Edel accuses Gary Kleck of "distortions and false claims" in "Assault Weapons Aren't the Problem" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1).
Mr.
Edel's claims are equally false as exemplified by his final sentences: "But no true hunter would include an assault rifle in his hunting arsenal. That weapon is designed to kill people, not game."


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush Asks for Resignations Of Top Aides After Election
President Bush today asked for the resignation of all Cabinet members, agency heads and senior political appointees immediately after the election.
The President's order, in a memo from his chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, to all Cabinet officers and agency heads, was the latest effort by the White House to invigorate the re-election campaign by promising that Mr.
Bush would respond in a second term to the criticism that he needs to be more aggressive and responsive.


Vintage Redskins, And a Nod To Monk
The Washington Redskins entered tonight's game with the Denver Broncos as if their season, if not their pride, was squarely in jeopardy.
Their 34-3 victory kept them from falling below .500 and set up their first of two divisional bouts with the Philadelphia Eagles here on Sunday.
But the game will me remembered for other reasons.


Man Charged in Stabbing of Son
A 19-year-old Brooklyn man trying to prevent his father from driving while intoxicated was stabbed and critically injured yesterday afternoon, and the police later charged the father with the assault.
Neighbors -- some of whom witnessed the stabbing -- called it a tragedy in a decent family.
The police said the incident occurred outside the family's home at 429 Amboy Street in Brownsville shortly before 2 P.M. when Samuel Watford Sr., 52, got into his 1992 Nisson Maxima and his son, Samuel Jr., pulled his 1980 Cadillac in front, barring his way because the father was drunk.


Hey Aleksei, Welcome to the N.H.L.
Aleksei Kovalev had never seen anything like this.
Sure the lights and laser show prior to last night's Rangers' home opener were a bit daunting.
And the Madison Square Garden crowd noise, he said, was greater than what he'd heard at all his Russian games combined.
It was the fighting, though, that really stunned him.
Never in his life had he seen five-on-five fights in a hockey game.
Never in his life had he seen entire lines sent -- en masse -- to the penalty box. 46 (Count'em) Penalties
And, in a way, Kovalev was at the center of it all.
From the start, the visiting Hartford Whalers greeted Kovalev the way they would any expensive rookie playing in his first National Hockey League game.
They hit him.
They pushed him.
They tugged on his jersey and held onto his stick.
Mostly, they tried to dump him flat on his back every chance that they got.


Q&amp;A
Bats in the Belfry
Q.
What should you do if a bat gets in the house?
A.
Relax and enjoy it might be the best advice, according to Heidi Hughes, an ornithologist who is a co-founder of the American Bat Conservation Society in Rockville, Md.


Observer; All Joy Departed
While fending off coma during the Presidential "debate" Sunday night, I reached for the restorative memory of Franklin Delano Roosevelt but couldn't grasp it.
The previous week had been too depressing.
Getting a grip on F.D.R. takes a powerful appetite for living, and mine was fading fast.
Within the past few days, television's tirelessly smiling news readers had struck again.
Milk could kill you, they announced.
Then a few days later: So can margarine.


Astronomers Start Search For Life Beyond Earth
On the day marking that fateful landfall of Columbus 500 years ago, introducing America into world history, astronomers began searching the heavens for other new worlds, where there may dwell civilizations thriving in the warmth of other stars.
Like Columbus, these new explorers have overcome opposition and ridicule, persevering in a fervent belief in their enterprise.
Unlike Columbus, they set out knowing that if they succeed, there will be no pot of gold at the end, but there could be an exciting and bewildering awakening to the smallness of all previous concepts of life.


Bacteria Are Found to Thrive on a Rich Social Life
"NO man is an island, entire of itself," John Donne wrote.
Surprisingly, the same is now turning out to be true even for bacteria, the simplest of organisms.
These single-celled creatures, long viewed as independent and self sufficient, nonetheless are endowed to lead a rich social life.
They rarely live alone.
They travel in packs, cooperate and are willing to be sacrificed so their fellows may survive.
Some aggregate so closely as to mimic a multicellular organism.
Others bind themselves together into a cluster for protection against an enemy.
Molecular biologists who are dissecting the strange social life of bacteria say they are discovering promising chinks in their defenses and communications systems that may help in the design of new drugs.


No Headline
It's because we got so many cowboys here, and cowboys get it right.
We don't have an overpopulation of lawyers or accountants or whatnot.
We got people who are close to the earth. -- AARON COCHRAN of Crook County, Ore., which has never voted for a loser in a Presidential election.  [ A16:1. ]


Business and Health; Dealing in Myths On Malpractice
BOTH President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton want to change the system under which patients can bring medical malpractice lawsuits against doctors and hospitals.
But the Congressional Budget Office and other experts who have studied the numbers say such proposals are based on sketchy and often misleading beliefs about the costs involved.
Mr.
Bush brought up the issue again in the debate Sunday night.
He challenged Mr.
Clinton to take on "the medical malpractice people," who Mr.
Bush said are responsible for "these frivolous trial-lawyer lawsuits that are running the cost of medical care up by $25 to $50 billion."


Print Shop Program Changes And Grows
THE PRINT SHOP has been around for nearly nine years, an age as computer programs go, producing greeting cards, signs, banners, letterheads and calendars for school and club, home and small business.
In that time, it has evolved as computers and printers have advanced from the early systems with slow displays and crude output to today's hot rods.
People clinging to Neanderthal X.T.'s or A.T.'s need not apply for the newest version.
The Print Shop Deluxe, from Broderbund Software, of Novato, Calif., requires, at a minimum, a computer with an 80386SX microprocessor running DOS 3.0 or later, a megabyte of memory, a hard disk with about four megabytes of free space, a V.G.A. display and, preferably, a mouse.
It works with a long list of printers (their names are on the back of the box) but performs best with 24-pin dot-matrix, ink-jet or laser machines.


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Five Said to Be Gang Members Plead Guilty to Armed Robberies
In a case that prosecutors said put a crimp in a violent Asian-American gang, five people identified by the Queens District Attorney as members of the Green Dragons have pleaded guilty to a series of armed robberies and a shootout that left one man dead and three others wounded.
Four of the defendants were given prison terms of up to 18 years by Justice Robert J. Hanophy in State Supreme Court in Jamaica.
He imposed the sentences on Thursday.
The fifth, a 15-year-old, was given the maximum possible sentence for a juvenile offender.


Music Notes
Musical Umbrella
Ten years ago, a handful of contemporary-music groups decided that if they joined forces in a loose confederacy -- which they called the New York Consortium for New Music -- they could promote new music more effectively than any of the ensembles could alone.
Their hope was that with the consortium as an umbrella organization they could attract contributions large enough to share.
The member ensembles also collaborated on commissioning composers, and on educational programs.
Tomorrow, the consortium opens its first Sonic Boom Festival, a series in which each of its five ensembles is to perform one program.
The festival runs through Nov. 21, with performances at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater of Columbia University, Alice Tully Hall and the Manhattan School of Music.
The festival's opening salvo is a performance by the New York New Music Ensemble at the Miller Theater.
The program includes Joan Tower's "Noon Dance" and the world premieres of James Dashow's "Ashbery Setting," Edmund Campion's "Collection of Eddies," Charles Wuorinen's "Twang" and William Brooks's "Makers."


Main Topics for Marketers: Economy and the Election
THE dual concerns of the sputtering economy and the looming election dominated the discussions yesterday here at the 83d Annual Meeting and Business Conference of the Association of National Advertisers.
At one point, the twin topics converged for America's largest marketers when L. Ross Love, the association's 1991-92 chairman, read greetings from President Bush.


Where Have All the Monarch Butterflies Gone?
EVERY fall millions of reddish-brown and black monarch butterflies move southward across the United States to the lush fir forests in Mexico, where they spend the winter.
But this year some of the normally crowded migration routes are nearly empty.
Although the monarchs were relatively plentiful from the Appalachians west to the Continental Divide, biologists say that the number in the East fell 90 percent from the record high last year.


Slaking California's Thirst
Congress approved new water policies last week to help California defeat drought and start restoring rivers and marshes severely damaged after having been pumped nearly dry for decades, to keep irrigation ditches full.
The package was written by a rare coalition of Eastern and Western members of Congress, led by two Democrats, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Representative George Miller of California.
It prevailed despite objections from California's Governor, Pete Wilson, who called it the opening shot in "a second century of California water wars."


Seville Journal; It Was a Nice Fair (Just Don't Mention Columbus)
Organized as the central event of Spain's celebration of the Columbus quincentenary, the World's Fair in Seville ended today much as it began six months ago -- with barely a word of thanks to the man who made the $2.2 billion extravaganza possible.
Poor Columbus!
He was the excuse for what was proclaimed as the Year of Spain, a year that included the Barcelona Olympic Games as well as the World's Fair, Expo '92.
But in the end he was an unwanted guest, an embarrassing reminder of a great adventure that turned rapidly into a bloody conquest.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about Sunday night's Presidential debate omitted a passage in some copies.
The affected paragraph should have read: "Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot offered similar visions of the nation's post-cold-war needs: to rebuild the country's financial strength, reduce the former superpowers' nuclear arsenals and help promote democratic societies, especially in the Soviet Union."


Chiat/Day/Mojo Given MTV Work
MTV Networks in New York yesterday named Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York to handle the Nick at Night, Nickelodeon and MTV cable television network accounts, with combined billings estimated to exceed $14 million.
The accounts were previously handled by Fred/Alan in New York, which closed in June.


ICF International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Frank Mercurio, 80, an Enforcer Of Labor Laws for Four Decades
Frank B. Mercurio, a longtime enforcer of labor laws, died on Saturday at St.
Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 80 years old.
The cause of his death was not immediately available.


Both Czechs and Slovaks Must Rebuild; Hungarian Minority
To the Editor:
The validity of Czechoslovakia as "Eastern Europe's most exemplary democracy" -- the words of Henry Brandon in "Who Split Czechoslovakia?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 24) -- is contradicted by 850,000 Hungarians living in Slovakia under Czech-sponsored Slovak oppression.
They live mostly along the border with Hungary and do not want to be second-class citizens in their 1,000-year-old homeland!


Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford; What of Bush's Sons?
To the Editor:
It is time President Bush stops calling Gov.
Bill Clinton a "draft dodger" and explains the advice he gave his own sons concerning military service during the Vietnam War.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Project Ars Nova  Frick Collection
Ensemble Project Ars Nova presented an exceptionally thorough and thoughtful program of period music for Columbus Day on Sunday evening.
"The Age of Discovery and Time of Dispossession" was the theme.


Parking Rules
Because of the second day of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Shevardnadze Wins in Georgia; Hard Tasks Loom
An overwhelming vote for Eduard A. Shevardnadze in national elections on Sunday has given the Georgian leader a strong hand with which to try to reimpose control in the rebellious province of Abkhazia.
Preliminary figures today indicated that more than 83 percent of the electorate took part in the voting, and that 90 percent of them voted for Mr.
Shevardnadze as Speaker of the Parliament, an office tantamount to the presidency.


Pop Artists in AIDS Benefit
Tony Bennett, Vic Damone, Eydie Gorme, Peter Nero and others are to take part in a benefit for the Upper Room AIDS Ministry on Thursday at 11:30 P.M. at Tavern on the Green.
The ministry is a Manhattan organization that provides help to homeless people with AIDS.
The benefit is a tribute to the restaurateur Jilly Rizzo, who died in May.
Tickets, at $150, are available at Tavern on the Green, in Central Park at West 67th Street.
Information: (212) 491-9000.


Texas Utilities Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


IBP Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Clinton Basks in Glow Of Easy Lead in Race
In readying their candidate to debate George Bush, the advisers to Bill Clinton prepared for the worst.
In mock debate sessions that lasted hours, the men playing the President and the panelists hit the Democratic candidate with hard and sometimes brutal questions about his draft record, his marriage, his honesty and his patriotism.
But the debate, when it at last arrived, turned out to be a relatively polite affair, and very easy on Mr.
Clinton, thanks in large degree to its tricornered nature.


CHRONICLE
CLAIRE BLOOM was about to go to bed one night 17 years ago when she got a call from Halston, the fashion designer, summoning her to his home in Manhattan to meet Martha Graham.
"I got up, got dressed and went there as quickly as I could," the actress recalled yesterday.
"Who would not want to meet such a woman? She was sitting in a chair looking very beautiful and told me that she wanted me to narrate a ballet called 'Letter to the World' that her company was doing."


No. 2 in Arkansas Is Planning Transition to No. 1
Some fear a jinx.
Others want to avoid the appearance of being presumptuous.
Whatever the reason, it is hard to find anyone in the state Capitol here eager to discuss their plans for Nov. 4.
Other than Jim Guy Tucker, that is.
"Oh, I understand the Clinton people's concern and unwillingness to talk about it openly, but to me it would be foolish to not be prepared," said Mr.
Tucker, the state's 48-year-old Lieutenant Governor.
By his reading of the state Constitution, if Bill Clinton is elected President, Mr.
Tucker would succeed him as governor.


Tartikoff Examines The Ups and Downs Of an Eventful Life
Wealthy, ambitious, competitive and enormously self-assured, Brandon Tartikoff has seemed almost Gatsbyesque in his smooth climb to success.
In 1980, at the age of 31, Mr.
Tartikoff was promoted to the presidency of NBC Entertainment, where he remained 12 years.
Now, at the age of 43, he is one of the most powerful men in the movie business, having served as chairman of Paramount Pictures for more than a year.


Gibson (C.R.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ShowBiz Pizza Time Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


CUBAN EXILES TRY TO STOP PBS SHOW
The leaders of the most powerful Cuban exile political group here are threatening to sue to try to stop the showing of a new television documentary, saying its portrayal of the group's role in shaping American policy toward Cuba is defamatory.
The group, the Cuban American National Foundation, warned the producer and writer of the hourlong documentary, "Campaign for Cuba," that officials of the group had reviewed the program and considered it to be "false and patently defamatory." The documentary is to be broadcast Wednesday by Public Broadcasting System stations around the country.


Americans Win Nobel for Clues to Cell Signals
TWO American scientists, Dr.
Edmond H. Fischer and Dr.
Edwin G. Krebs, won the 1992 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine yesterday for an accidental discovery about cell proteins made in the 1950's.
The discovery is now known to "concern almost all processes important to life," the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm said in announcing the award to the scientists, who are from the University of Washington in Seattle.


Rave Reviews as Handley Is Finally Roaring
It was only one play in a game that lasted almost three hours.
But it showed a side of Ray Handley that many people do not usually see -- raw, emotional anger.
The crowd loved it and his players loved it.
Today, Handley himself seemed pleased by it.
It happened Sunday in the first quarter of the Giants' 31-21 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals.
With the score 7-7 and the Cardinals with a first down on their 49-yard line, Chris Chandler attempted to pass to Butch Rolle.
The ball was overthrown, and Greg Jackson of the Giants seemingly made a diving interception.
One official said it was.
But after the officials huddled, they decided Jackson never had control of the ball and ruled it an incomplete pass.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
N.A.
3.00
5.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
2.81
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
2.95
5.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
6.08
7.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
N.A.
7.52
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer N.A.- Not available because of Columbus Day holiday Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A's, Eck and Etiquette, Dear Reader
While the American League playoff between the Blue Jays and Athletics continues, the verbal battle between pitchers Jack Morris and Dennis Eckersley is escalating.
Oakland's Eckersley was upset by comments Morris made about his mound antics following Toronto's 7-6 victory in Game 4 on Sunday.
The Jays felt that Eckersley celebrated prematurely by pumping a fist and staring down Ed Sprague after striking him out in the eighth inning with the A's ahead, 6-4.


Council Backs AIDS Effort
The Advertising Council is helping to distribute broadcast commercials created by Ads Against AIDS, the advertising industry's nonprofit group formed last year to disseminate public-service messages about AIDS prevention.
It is unusual for the council, known for campaigns supporting causes like seat-belt use, the United Negro College Fund and forest-fire prevention, to assist in distributing campaigns it was not involved in producing.


5 HURT IN LONDON BY ANOTHER BOMB
A small bomb went off today in a pub near the heart of London's crowded West End, wounding five people, one seriously, in the latest in a weeklong wave of attacks linked to the Irish Republican Army.
The explosion during the busy lunchtime period in the neighborhood between Leicester Square and Covent Garden, one of London's most popular tourist destinations, blew out the leaded-glass windows of the Sussex pub, and sent hundreds of people in the area running for cover.


Gaining From Turmoil in Currencies
The recent turmoil in the world's currency markets produced its share of casualties: central bankers who spent billions in a futile effort to prop up Europe's weaker currencies, government leaders who have seen the drive to European unification stalled and small American investors in global money-market funds who got burned when currencies like the pound fell sharply.
Yet the last few weeks have been made to order for trading profits at the big commercial banks.
Their trading floors are the hub of the $1 trillion-a-day currency market, and the banks thrive on the volatility that central bankers and government leaders fear.


Q. Who's on First? A. It Isn't Pendleton
The failures have been largely inconspicuous, dwarfed by the dimensions of Barry Bonds's troubles and as often as not reduced to a peripheral concern by the general success of the Braves.
The numbers, though, are there, and the spotlight is destined to find them before Tuesday night's Game 6 of the National League Championship Series.
Terry Pendleton, Bonds's chief rival for the league's 1992 Most Valuable Player Award, has matched Bonds empty at-bat for empty at-bat in the playoffs, just as he did last year.
The third baseman for the Braves will walk to the plate Tuesday night with his bat on his shoulder and the burden of a .182 average on his back.


On My Mind; Mr. Bush Steps Aside
Months ago, even before the embarrassing Republican Convention, a number of important Republican politicians, thinkers and money-raisers began saying that President Bush should step aside and let some other Republican get a crack at the White House -- somebody who could win.
Usually they said it privately.
But occasionally the idea was allowed to surface -- as when William Bennett wondered out loud whether Mr.
Bush really wanted the job.
You can't get much more blunt with a first-term President of your own party without handing him his hat on TV.


U.N. OFFICIAL ASKS SERBS TO END SIEGE
The United Nations military commander for this war-ravaged country opened talks here today with Serbian nationalist leaders on a plan to lift the siege of Sarajevo before winter by opening what he called "a gate" to the city through a strategic suburb now controlled by Serbian forces.
The United Nations commander, Maj.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, started what United Nations officials hope will be ongoing negotiations for the easing of the six-month siege.
But the Muslim-led Bosnian Government refused to attend the meeting at Sarajevo airport, and the Serbs told the general that any relaxation of their grip on the city could result in genocide against Serbs by Bosnian Government forces.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westinghouse Credit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bill T. Jones Thinking Small This Season
Bill T. Jones stretches like a cat in the sunshine on the plaza outside the Harlem theater where his company is rehearsing.
Barefoot with thin, crisp braids tumbling from his head, Mr.
Jones looks like anything but a hardheaded, indefatigable producer of dances.
But that is what he is.
Over the last two years Mr.
Jones has created seven new dances and a performance-art piece, choreographed two operas and toured Europe and the United States with "Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land," a sprawling full-evening theater-dance piece.
Now he is returning to the shorter pieces with which he and his partner, Arnie Zane, made their name and which Mr.
Jones last presented in New York in 1989.
Tonight at the Joyce Theater, the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company opens a two-week season, sponsored by Absolut Vodka, that is not only a celebration of the troupe's 10th anniversary but also of Mr.
Jones's drive to create.


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A chronology on Saturday about the Iraq bank fraud case referred incorrectly to a letter that the Central Intelligence Agency provided the Justice Department on Sept. 17.
The letter was unclassified.


The Biologist Who Saw a Pattern
DR.
JAMES SHAPIRO drags a well-worn film projector in front of his laboratory refrigerator.
He wants to show an astonishing film of myxobacteria.
The refrigerator door is his screen.
Like most scientists, Dr.
Shapiro works with sometimes makeshift equipment in a laboratory furnished largely in tones of gray.
But, for him, the visual stimulus comes from watching and pondering the striking patterns that bacteria make as they grow on jelly-like agar in petri dishes.


Latin Bishops Reopen Debate on Church Role
Pope John Paul II opened a major meeting of Latin American bishops today that was called to assess the Roman Catholic Church's work in the region, including its deep involvement in social and economic issues.
Church leaders in Latin America and Rome have been struggling behind the scenes for two years to set the agenda for the deliberations of the Latin American Episcopal Conference here.
At issue is whether the church should maintain the course it has taken.


Patterns
London's Lot in '93
Now is the time for many American retailers and magazine editors to build up their frequent-flier miles.
Not to mention their jet lag.
After Milan's spring shows ended on Thursday, it was time to hop back across the Atlantic to catch up on business and freshen the wardrobe before heading to Paris.
The shows get under way there this week.
But a few dedicated souls spent the weekend in London, among them Barbara Weiser, chief executive of Charivari; Jon Weiser, Charivari's president, and Rose Marie Bravo, the new president of Saks Fifth Avenue.


Trade Pact With Mexico Expected to Have Mixed Impact on Employers
In his 60 years as a garment maker in the New York region, Ralph Shomer has seen his share of competition from companies that have fled in search of cheaper labor.
First came the flight of garment manufacturers to the South, and then to Asia.
Now, Mr.
Shomer said angrily, comes the last straw: the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement, which he and many others say provides new incentives for manufacturers to move to Mexico.


Review/Pop; The Past Without Nostalgia
With her band plinking and fiddling an old mountain tune, Michelle Shocked stood onstage at Carnegie Hall on Friday night and, like a square-dance caller, led the audience in "chair dancing." After telling the audience to lean left and right, forward and back, she instructed, "Put your hands in the air, and wave 'em like you just don't care" -- a ritual of hip-hop.
Ms.
Shocked prizes history and heritage, but she has no fear of anachronism.
Her opening song proclaimed, "When I grow up, I want to be an old woman," and her voice can take on the twang and quaver of an Appalachian grandmother, the slides and clarity of a Celtic singer, or the sultry insouciance of a blueswomen.
Yet with all of her connections to musical roots, she doesn't treat the past as a nostalgic refuge or a quaint relic, but as an area for unsentimental investigation, for interrogation.
Her songs about the present are conversations and chronicles, full of homey details and gentle humor; "Anchorage" is simply a catching-up letter from a friend.
Taking songs from the past, Ms.
Shocked examines them for similar details, even if they're hidden.
At Carnegie Hall, she described trying to figure out what lay behind well-known but enigmatic tunes, finding the story of an abortion in "Cotton-Eyed Joe" and morphine for wounded Civil War troops in "Soldier's Joy."
Those are two of the fiddle tunes that Ms.
Shocked adapted, with her own lyrics, for her current album, "Arkansas Traveler" (Mercury).
They're part of Ms.
Shocked's heritage; she learned them from her father, Dollar Bill Johnston, who joined her onstage, along with her brother Max Johnston.
On her current tour, Ms.
Shocked leads a modified string band, including fiddle (Ray LeGere) and banjo or flat-picked guitar (Alison Brown, who plays with a traditional banjoist's poker face), and often without drums.
In songs from earlier albums, though, the band brought an assured touch to Western swing and electric blues.
Her one new selection, "Custom Cutter," was a Celtic-tinged song about a farmer nervously awaiting help for a make-or-break harvest.
Ms.
Shocked's touring Arkansas Traveler Revue also includes the group Uncle Tupelo, which updates rural styles with modern pessimism, and Taj Mahal, who reanimates old blues songs with his own playful traditionalism; knocking out shuffles and boogie-woogie on piano or picking country-blues on guitar, he showed off a master's offhand syncopation and mercurial vocals.
He returned during Ms.
Shocked's set for "Jump Jim Crow," a ragtimey song about stereotypes of black entertainers: "Who is really the jigaboo?/Is it the white man, the white, talking that jive/Or the black man, the black, trying to stay alive?"
Obviously, Ms.
Shocked has serious topics in mind, but she doesn't let them interfere with the pleasure of the music.
"Arkansas Traveler" itself was a backdrop for corny jokes, like a vaudeville routine; "Over the Waterfall" is a tall tale about someone who shoots the rapids in a barrel, concluding, "It don't hurt you when you fall, only when you land." Like her traditional forebears, she tucks any anger or despair between the lines, not concealing it, but keeping it in perspective.
From the stage, Ms.
Shocked said her albums so far have been tributes looking back to her models: Texas songwriters, swing (both Western and big band) and fiddle tunes.
She has already gone far beyond imitation.
And her abundant musical gifts, her light touch and her clear ambition promise even more as she moves forward into songwriting that she can call her own.


Street Litter in Time Fouls New York's Waters
To the Editor:
I was pleased that your Sept. 30 report on the New York City Council's suspension of alternate side-of-the-street parking for two Muslim holidays points out that reduced street cleaning is an environmental problem that goes beyond just dirtier streets.
The litter left on the streets can be washed into sewer drains and, in turn, be washed out into our waterways and onto our beaches.


14 STATE MEASURES ON U.S. TERM LIMITS GATHER MOMENTUM
Proposals to limit the terms of United States senators and representatives will be on the ballot in 14 states next month, and most of the measures are considered likely to pass.
Never before has the same issue been decided simultaneously by voters in so many states, including the behemoth California, which reflects the sour mood of the electorate and the general clamor for change.


Health Industry Gives Freely in Election
If the flow of money is any indication, health care promises to be a lively issue on Capitol Hill next year.
Campaign contributions to Congressional candidates by the health and insurance industries have been surging in recent months, as the Presidential candidates and leading lawmakers promise to make changes in the health-care system a priority when the 103d Congress convenes in January.


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis Bush's Burden; Promise of Better Times in a Second Term Not Matched by Specific Agenda in Debate
Instead of giving President Bush the forward motion he needed so badly for his campaign, the first of the three Presidential debates became a showcase for his political problems.
The debate made especially clear what a crushing burden the economy has become for this President who courts country singers to display his common touch, but seems unable to make voters trust his instincts on bread-and-butter issues.


Proposed Treaty Is Causing Concern for Businesses in Region


Molex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Specialty Retailers reports earnings for Qtr to Auig 1


Defense on the Offensive in Crown Heights Trial
Three weeks into the trial of a black teen-ager charged with murdering a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights, there has been hardly a courtroom echo of the emotions that erupted into racial violence two summers ago.
In a trial filled with endless hours of tedious, minutely detailed testimony, the defense attorney, Arthur Lewis Jr., with his booming voice and trademark scowl, has been just about the only sustained source of courtroom drama.


Swastika Etched on Wall
A swastika was discovered yesterday morning etched into a wall in the lobby of a Brooklyn apartment building, Mayor David N. Dinkins said in a statement.
It was the fourth time in a week that a swastika had been daubed on a New York City building and the eighth anti-Semitic incident in the city in recent days.
In the most recent incident, a swastika was carved at 28 Old Fulton Street in Brooklyn Heights sometime between 7:30 P.M.
Monday and 7:30 A.M. yesterday, Mayor Dinkins said.
The Mayor, who said that about a third of the building's residents were Jewish, noted that the incident had occured during a Jewish holiday, Succoth.


SPS Transaction Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMC West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


CHRONICLE
BILLY FRANK JR., who was arrested more than 40 times for his efforts in behalf of American Indian fishing rights in the Pacific Northwest, was awarded the Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism yesterday at Johns Hopkins University.
Named the recipient of the Albert Schweitzer Gold Medal was MARY W. LASKER, president of the Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation, for her support of medical research and her lobbying for increased government financing.
Mrs.
Lasker, 92 years old, was unable to attend the ceremonies.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Syracuse
Dan Conley, an inside linebacker from Carnegie, Pa., who was recruited as a likely Dick Butkus of the 1990's, started and starred as a freshman for the Orange.
But his second season ended in the second game a year ago because of a knee injury.
Now the inspirational Conley is out again, for at least two games after arthroscopic surgery on Sunday to repair torn cartilage in his right knee.
This second injury was not related to the first, however.


Court Allows Gorbachev a Visit to Germany
An international uproar brewing over a travel ban against Mikhail S. Gorbachev was averted today when the Constitutional Court, acting at the request of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, allowed the former Soviet President to go to Germany this weekend for the funeral of Willy Brandt.
But the court's chief judge, Valery D. Zorkin, is still insisting that Mr.
Gorbachev appear before the court, either before or after his trip, to give testimony in a landmark case that is supposed to decide the fate of the defunct Communist Party, which Mr.
Gorbachev once headed.


Weldotron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


P.&amp; G. Sees Big Savings In Price Plan
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it expected to save $175 million a year from its controversial new pricing strategy and that it would soon report record first-quarter profits.
The pricing announcement by Edwin L. Artzt, the chairman, at the company's shareholder meeting yesterday in Cincinnati, was the first time Procter had publicly detailed the benefits of its new strategy, which calls for eliminating discounts and special deals to grocers in favor of consistently lower prices.


Green Tree Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Meredith Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sprint's 3d-Quarter Profits Grew by 13.2%
Apparently profiting from a marketing gamble in the second quarter, the Sprint Corporation yesterday reported a 13.2 percent rise in third-quarter earnings.
The nation's third-largest long-distance telephone company said profits of $109.6 million, or 49 cents a share, were up 13 percent from $96.8 million, or 44 cents a share, a year earlier.
It said revenues grew 5.3 percent, to $2.33 billion from $2.21 billion.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walsh Has Stanford Team Looking Like 49ers
A squadron of Stanford students marched into the Rose Bowl on Saturday night chanting: "We've got Walsh. We've got Walsh."
At an eclectic university that has more geniuses per capita than most, Bill Walsh fits in.
He wears his Ph.D. on three fingers -- a trio of Super Bowl rings -- and has Stanford improbably settled in the top 10 of both The Associated Press and CNN/USA Today college football polls before midterm exams.
The New York Times computer ranking released on Tuesday placed Stanford, which will play Arizona at home on Saturday, at No. 5.


Justices Show No Support For Reviewing Flag Issue
If anyone is going to reignite the legal and political battle over burning the American flag, it will evidently not be any current member of the Supreme Court.
Without comment and apparently without dissent, the Justices today turned down an unusually direct request by the State of Texas to reconsider the Court's rulings in 1989 and 1990 that burning a flag is a form of expression protected by the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech.


Wellfleet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Jensen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Diceon Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Nassau County Government at Work: Details, Details at Center of Partisan Debate
How many government officials does it take to approve a light bill?
In Nassau County, the answer depends on whether you ask a Republican or a Democrat.
The Board of Supervisors, which oversees a budget of about $2 billion, convened a special meeting today to consider whether to authorize borrowing $665,000 to pay a utility bill for the Nassau County Medical Center.
It also weighed borrowing about $150,000 to finance payroll and fringe-benefit payments for the county's Recreation and Parks Department.


Stocks Higher in Japan
Stocks were higher here today.
In the afternoon, the Nikkei index of 225 shares was up 33.6 points, or 0.19 percent, to 17,524.27.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei gained 188.66 points.


The Pop Life
A Big Splash
Here's how long it took the tribute to Bob Dylan at Madison Square Garden that's scheduled for Friday night, featuring everybody from George Harrison, Eric Clapton and the rock poet himself to members of the group Pearl Jam, to sell out: 70 minutes.
That's for 18,200 seats, and each person was allowed to buy only one pair of tickets at a time.
The tickets started at $80 for the public and at $150 for industry types.
What recession?
"We were pleasantly surprised about the response," said Kevin Wall, the chairman of Radiovision, the company producing the show.
"The demographic is the same as has been buying back-catalogue records for years and saving the music industry. It's getting people out of the suburbs into cars to go to a concert in New York, which is hard to do. The demand is much greater than the tickets we had, and I think we could have done five nights. To have George and Dylan and Eric, it's magical. I think when value is put out here in the market place, people will buy, even if we're deep in a recession."


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


One Minute to Doomsday
In October 1962, the Soviet Union, Cuba and United States came to the verge of military conflict and brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster.
None intended to create such risk.
To understand what caused the crisis and how to avoid such risks, participants in the events have convened several times.
A meeting in Havana in January was the fifth.
By the third meeting, in Moscow in January 1989, it had become clear that each nation's decisions immediately before and during the crisis had been distorted by misinformation, miscalculation and misjudgment.
Here are four of many examples.


Andover Togs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bosnian Serbs' Forces Agree to Grounding of Military Planes
In response to the Security Council ban on military flights over Bosnia, Serbian forces there agreed today to send their military aircraft to airfields under United Nations supervision so they cannot be used in further fighting.
The agreement was reached in Geneva in talks between the European Community mediator, Lord Owen, and Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs.


ERLY Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Israel Offering Aid to Victims
Israeli leaders, sending condolences to Egypt today, offered help to victims of the earthquake.
There was no sign, however, that the offer had been accepted.
In recent years, Israel sent army rescue teams after devastating earthquakes in Mexico and Armenia.
Asked if the team could be sent this time, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told Israel radio: "It's their decision what kind of assistance. Whatever kind of assistance, we are more than ready to offer it."


BONN PLANS CURBS TO HALT REFUGEES
The parties in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's coalition Government agreed today on a proposal for a change in the country's Constitution to curb an influx of refugees in an effort to halt a rash of violence against foreigners.
The change would require a two-thirds majority in both houses of Parliament, but many members of the opposition Social Democratic Party, which controls one of the legislative chambers, are against it, and one Social Democrat said the party would not take participate in a debate on the amendment.
To the Social Democrats, an amendment to the Constitution would be a shameful political concession to neo-Nazi brutality after a series of firebombings and beatings that have killed 10 foreigners so far this year.


Working Mothers Have a Predictability Factor
To the Editor:
The idea that Barbara Bush and Marilyn Quayle are models of "family values" because they have not pursued careers is nonsense.
Wives of people in government are extremely busy, not only with charitable works, but also with parties, receptions and banquets in the evening, when their children are at home.
Until I was 9 years old, we lived the quiet, underfunded life of a Midwestern professor's family.
My mother didn't work full time, but often did part-time work to supplement our income.
When my father went overseas to teach under the auspices of the United States Government, our lives changed dramatically.


American List reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Relief Aides Find U.S. Slow To Accept Balkan Refugees
Governments outside Europe are being asked to provide temporary housing for thousands of civilians being released from detention camps in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but refugee organizations say the plan is meeting resistance from the Bush Administration.
In a letter sent to the United States and other nations outside the region on Sept. 29, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees made an urgent request for 1,600 places abroad to accommodate the first group of detainees.
The agency said that as many as 10,000 people may be released soon.


No Excuse for Mr. Barr's Outrage
When House Democrats asked for an independent prosecutor to investigate aid given to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war, Attorney General William Barr was outraged.
He sensed that political opponents were out to get him.
But Mr.
Barr asserted wrongly that his Justice Department was handling the case credibly.
Its prosecution is unraveling in a welter of confusion.
Mistakes of judgment were made when the Bush Administration kept trying to appease Saddam Hussein long after Iraq's war with Iran had ended.
But crimes also were committed as the United States favored Iraq with loan guarantees ostensibly to pay for food.
The money was diverted to military purposes and Government records were doctored to disguise the transactions.


General Electric's Earnings Rose 6.7% in Third Quarter
The General Electric Company said yesterday that its profits increased 6.7 percent in the third quarter in part because of improved productivity and gains from its financial, medical and aerospace divisions.
The results were tarnished, however, by restructuring charges and losses at its NBC television network because of the 1992 Olympics.
Earnings rose to $1.11 billion, or $1.30 a share, from $1.04 billion, or $1.20 a share, in the third quarter of 1991.
Revenues were $15.5 billion for the quarter, which ended Sept. 30, up 6.2 percent from $14.6 billion.


MBIA Completes Equity Offering
MBIA Inc., the leading insurer of municipal bonds through its wholly owned subsidiary, the MBIA Corporation, announced yesterday that it had completed an equity offering of 1.8 million common shares at a price of $54.875 a share through underwriters led by the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation.
Proceeds from the offering will bring the company $75.2 million, in addition to the proceeds derived from the sale on Oct. 1 of $100 million of 30-year debentures, also through Donaldson, Lufkin.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: James Stockdale; Reluctant Politician Tempers Professional Edge
His hands shook with nerves.
He stammered.
He paused in the middle of his opening statement to put on his reading glasses.
His snow-white forelock kept falling in his eye.
He missed one question because his hearing aid was off.
"Who am I?" James B. Stockdale asked at the beginning of last night's debate.
"Why am I here? I'm not a politician."


Study Ties Genes to Drinking In Women as Much as in Men
WOMEN have as strong an inherited susceptibility to alcoholism as men, according to a report appearing today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
In recent years several studies have shown that in men genetics accounts for 50 to 60 percent of the factors that determine a person's vulnerability to a severe drinking problem.
The new study shows that the same magnitude holds for women, said Dr.
Kenneth Kendler, a psychiatrist at the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, who led the study.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Surrounding Scene; Did Not, Did So: Debate Offers Proof Young Are Better Seen Than Heard
As Epictetus, the Greek Stoic philosopher cherished by Admiral James B. Stockdale, once noted: "There are some faults which men readily admit, but others not so readily."
And so it was that the craggy, white-haired hero of the Vietnam War made debate history tonight with a startling admission on stage.


Braves Use Old Knuckleballer for Aid in Facing a Young One
The thought was shocking.
Phil Niekro, one of the granddaddies of all knuckleballers, said he could tell the Atlanta Braves something that could help them in their meeting tonight with Tim Wakefield of the Pittsburgh Pirates, the newest knuckleballer on the major league scene.
Sure, Niekro pitched for the Braves for 20 years, in Milwaukee as well as Atlanta, and he was even a coach with them and a manager in their minor league system.
But conspiring against a descendant, a member in good standing of the knuckleballers' fraternity?


Keene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dieting and Risk of Osteoporosis
A NORTH DAKOTA physiologist has found an unexpected reason why American women are unusually prone to osteoporosis, the bone disease: when they lose weight they also lose bone, even if they exercise regularly and consume adequate amounts of calcium while dieting.
In a five-month study of 14 overweight women from 20 to 40 years old, Dr.
Henry C. Lukaski found that the women, who lost an average of 18 pounds, also lost 2 to 3 percent of their bone mass.


Sports of The Times; Pittsburgh Still Seeks The Big Fish
THERE is no time anymore to talk of dynasties.
The unequal economics of baseball will see to that.
But there is one last chance for the Pittsburgh Pirates to win a pennant before Barry Bonds moves on.
The Pirates gave themselves that chance by crushing the Braves, 13-4, last night, throttling all those war whoops.
The Braves imported their retired knuckleballing icon, Phil Niekro, to pitch batting practice, but Tim Wakefield baffled them anyway, setting up a seventh game tonight, the game that will decide if the Pirates lived up to their potential.


Dinkins's Deputy Mayor To Leave Administration
Mayor David N. Dinkins's chief political adviser, Bill Lynch, will not return to the administration after he finishes his stint as the deputy director of Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign in New York, city officials said yesterday.
Instead, he will begin work as the director of the Mayor's re-election effort.
To take over part of Mr.
Lynch's duties, Mr.
Dinkins is considering appointing a political consultant, Randy Daniels, said City Hall officials who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Daniels, a former television correspondent, would be made a deputy mayor with a single mission: to burnish Mr.
Dinkins's image and promote the administration's programs in the last year of his term.


Pentair Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chipcom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SHUNNING 'GREATER SERBIA'
The euphoria many Serbs felt when a swath of territory was carved out in their name in Croatia has evaporated.
As lawlessness and hardships deepen, thousands of Serbs are leaving Serbian-controlled Croatia.
A1  COMBAT PLANES TO U.N.
FIELDS
Responding to a United Nations ban on combat flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnian Serbs agreed to send their military jets to airfields under U.N. supervision.
A10
Washington is said to oppose a plan to shelter Bosnian refugees.
A10  QUAKE TOLL RISES IN CAIRO
Salvage workers shouted orders and families camped in cars as Cairo began to dig its way out from an earthquake.
Egyptian officials estimated that 450 people had been killed and 4,000 hurt.
A14
Half the 450 who died seem to have been panicked children.
A14  INDIA'S HARRIED RIGHTS GROUP
As reports of abuses by India's army and police spill forth, the Government is stepping up pressure on the South Asia Human Rights Documentation Center.
Recently it told the group it wanted to review all its financial records.
A3  U.N.
AGAIN WARNS KHMER ROUGE
The United Nations Security Council threatened to press ahead with elections in Cambodia without the Khmer Rouge unless their fighters cooperate with a peace plan they have accepted.
A6  ROMANIAN TO BRAKE REFORM
Ion Iliescu, the former Communist who was re-elected President of Romania, pledged to keep the country's economic reform on course -- but at a reduced pace.
A6  U.N.
SEEKS TO CALM ANGOLA
Alarmed by hints that Angola's main opposition group may renew the civil war, a United Nations delegation warned that the world would condemn any fighting.
A8  POLITICS FOLLOWS THE POPE
Care has been taken to keep the Pope from wading into the quagmire surrounding the celebration of Columbus's landing.
But on almost every step of his visit to the Dominican Republic, politics follows him.
A15  ITALIANS PROTEST AUSTERITY PLAN
Millions of workers marched in cities throughout Italy to protest a Government austerity plan that includes spending cuts, tax increases and abolition of wage indexing.
A5
Rome Journal: Itinerants with Eastern European accents.
A4  Court rules Gorbachev can leave Russia for Brandt's funeral.
A7  Kuwait's Emir defiantly reappoints his heir as Prime Minister.
A12  National A16-23  THE UNDERSTUDIES CLASH
Vice President Quayle, Senator Gore and James Stockdale engaged in their only debate, which frequently turned fiery.
A1  QUAYLE ON THE OFFENSIVE
News analysis: Vice President Quayle stated the Republican case at the debate more succinctly than President Bush did on Sunday.
A1
Excerpts from the debate.  A20-21
The scene around the debate at Georgia Tech.  A19
Four crucial issues divided the candidates.  A19  BUSH RENEWS HIS ATTACK
Making an unscheduled appearance on the "Today" program, the President again assailed Bill Clinton's antiwar activities during the Vietnam era.
A22
Perot is preparing a new TV advertising blitz.  A22
The phantom campaign of a Kentucky Congressman.  A22  INQUIRY ON F.B.I. CHIEF GROWS
The Justice Department's ethics review of the F.B.I.
Director's travel practices has escalated into a preliminary criminal inquiry, Administration officials said.
The timing of that inquiry led the Senate Intelligence chairman to wonder if "an attempt is being made to pressure him not to conduct an independent investigation" into whether the Justice Department or the C.I.A. misled a Federal judge about how much the Government knew of a multibillion-dollar fraud involving Iraq.
A1  NO SPECIAL INSLAW PROSECUTOR
The Attorney General turned down the House Judiciary Committee's request that he appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate whether Justice Department officials stole a computer company's software program to benefit their friends.
A23  SCIENCE AND JUSTICE
Opening the door to a far-reaching debate over the role of science in the courtroom, the Supreme Court agreed to decide how widely accepted a scientific process or theory must be for it to be admissible as evidence in Federal trials.
A16
The Court declined to take up the flag-desecration issue again.
A16  The recipient of a pig's liver died at a Los Angeles hospital.
A16  Denied full payment, a funeral home dumped a corpse's body.A16  A pregnant homecoming candidate is denied a crown.
A17  Education Page B9  Why do Hispanic students drop out at a higher rate than other groups?
In Pennsylvania, state budget cuts hurt 11 health-related colleges.
Campus Journal: Students learn they are not shielded from AIDS.
Metro Digest B1  CANDIDATES STILL SLINGING
Robert Abrams said that when he called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato a "fascist," he had really meant to call him a "right-wing extremist." In either case, he did not back down.
He responded as if he might have found a way, after nearly a month in which his opponent controlled the campaign with attacks, to make Mr.
D'Amato's tactics an issue.
A1  LIBERTY VS.
CURING TB
As tuberculosis returns to a prominence unseen in the United States for decades, public health officials, politicians, ethicists and advocates for the poor find themselves revisiting a problem some find as disturbing as the medical facts of the disease itself: protecting healthy members of society from those who are not.
A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-12  Mapping out ethnic foods, freeway by freeway.
C1  At work with Donny Deutsch: Portrait of adman on a hot streak.
C1  U.S. approves chicken treatment to cut salmonella.
C1  Health Page C14  Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Pirates force a seventh game.
B11  Football: Giants rely on rookies.
B11  Hockey: Lindros faces off in Quebec.
B11  Obituaries B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  A war of slogans.
No excuse for Mr.
Barr's outrage.
The woolly bear weathermen.
Topics: Mr.
Abrams gets surly.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Oh say, can you say?
Henry M. Rowan: Left holding the bag in Iraq.
Robert S. McNamara: One minute to doomsday.


Theater in Review
Fortinbras  Kampo Cultural Center 31 Bond Street Lower East Side  Through Nov. 1 By Lee Blessing; directed by Jeanne Blake; set design, David Birn and Judy Gailen; costumes, Teresa Snider-Stein; assistant costumer, Jonathan Green; lighting, Jeffrey S. Koger; production stage manager, Dean Gray.
Presented by Signature Theater Company, James Houghton, artistic director.
WITH: William Cain, Kevin Elden, Steven Guevera, Celia Howard, Albert Macklin, Archer Martin, Samantha Mathis, William Metzo, Keith Reddin, Don Reilly, Anthony Michael Ruivivar, Josh Sebers, Kim Walsh and Timothy Wheeler.
Hamlet and Laertes are dead.
The stage is littered with bodies.
The rest is "Fortinbras," Lee Blessing's demented lampoon in which the Norwegian prince tries to rewrite Shakespeare to suit his self-important purpose.
Quicker than one can say "Alas, poor Hamlet," a fool rules at Elsinore.


L.A. Gear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cognex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


South Korean to Run
The New York City Marathon has added a standout South Korean to its lineup for the Nov. 1 race.
The runner, KIM WAN KI, has the seventh-fastest marathon time in the world this year (2 hours 9 minutes 31 seconds).


THEATER IN REVIEW
Empty Boxes  Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday  By William Badgett; directed by Kent Alexander; music by Harry Mann; lighting, Lenore Doxsee; stage manager, Ben Voorhies.
Presented by Downtown Art Company, Ryan Gilliam, artistic director; Cliff Scott, producing director.
WITH: The Talking Band.
With "Empty Boxes" William Badgett has written a nearly perfect dramatization, and a most entertaining one, of pure thought: a subtle and strenuous meditation on personal identity.


Bonds Unchanged in Uncertainty
The bond market bounced around yesterday but ended little changed amid uncertainty over the election and the intentions of the Federal Reserve.
On the one hand, the economy still appears to be very weak, which could mean another cut in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve.


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Octel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Subway Electronics Lead to Fare Cards
To the Editor:
In "Acoustics Isn't the Problem in New York Subways' P.A. System" (letter, Oct. 1), Douglas Hopkins states the New York City subway public address systems are not adversely affected by bad acoustics.
To believe Mr.
Hopkins's reasoning one would also have to believe that the 408-foot-deep centerfield fence at Yankee Stadium is not an impediment to hitting homers.
Of course, acoustics is part of the problem in delivering to our customers better announcements, and that's why we have taken steps to have a professional acoustical consultant examine what reasonable steps can be taken to improve the situation.


TB Carriers See Clash of Liberty and Health
The 25-year-old Manhattan woman has been in and out of city hospitals at least five times with tuberculosis since 1990.
She has been in jail, disappeared, surfaced in Georgia, given birth to a daughter and returned to New York.
But there is at least one thing this woman -- a crack addict -- has never willingly done, according to city health officials, and that's take her medicine.
Physicians and social workers have begged her, fed her, attempted to pay her.
They have called on the phone, visited her apartment dozens of times, written letters, even deposited packages of her favorite Oreo cookies on her doorstep.


MILLIONS IN ITALY MARCH IN PROTEST
Italy's big trade union federations called millions of workers into the streets of cities across the country today to protest the Government's economic austerity plan, which includes spending cuts, tax increases and the abolition of a decades-old system of linking wage increases to the rise in inflation.
Banner-waving workers marched through the streets of numerous cities, and the unions estimated that about 10 million workers took part.
Bruno Trentin, the leader of the formerly Communist trade union federation, with 5.5 million members Italy's largest, described it as the biggest labor demonstration in 20 years.


Poe &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; Oh Say, Can You Say?
Ten questions for the second Presidential debate, based upon an exhaustive study of the first:
1.
Mr.
Perot, you were the only candidate who did not find it necessary to invoke the name of his wife during Sunday's debate.
Do you think this is why so many people reacted favorably to your performance?


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A U.N. TEAM SEEKS TO DEFUSE ANGOLA
In the face of growing evidence that Angola's main opposition group is preparing for renewed fighting, a special delegation from the United Nations Security Council warned tonight that "any resumption of armed conflict will be met with the strongest condemnation of the international community."
After two days of talks with Angola's governing party and the leaders of the former rebel group, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola -- Unita -- delegation members said they were concerned about "the recent increase in acts of violence and the rising level of tension in the country."


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Pressure On to Stop Slide at G.M.
Pressure is mounting for executives of the General Motors Corporation to take swifter, bolder action to stop further deterioration of the giant auto maker's ailing North American operations.
With the economy stalled and some union locals fighting attempts to consolidate jobs, G.M. is facing losses of $4 billion to $5 billion in North America this year, according to analysts, after losing more than $7 billion last year.


Campus Journal; The Time and the Place For Addressing AIDS
At the Washington Monument last weekend, where the 21,000 panels of the AIDS memorial quilt lay in a dramatic sprawl, what caught the eye were the names of individuals: Alexandra Biggs.
William Rosenthal.
John Anthony Guerrero.
Dan Mason.
But sprinkled among them were also the names of institutions, and among the institutions, colleges: Swathmore.
Columbia.
Oberlin.
University of Tennessee.


IMC Fertilizer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
2.97
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.81
4.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.95
4.99
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.06
6.08
7.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.52
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
9.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.42
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Television; Cuban Exiles and U.S. Policy on Castro
The threat by the Cuban American National Foundation to sue everybody involved in the production of "Campaign for Cuba" will not seem out of character to viewers of this investigative documentary.
It can be seen at 10 tonight on Channels 13 and 49.
The Miami-based foundation, the most important Cuban emigre group, is pictured as a muscular organization with a record of cracking down on those who differ with its hard-line anti-Castro doctrine.
The program reports that through its Free Cuba Political Action Committee, the foundation has contributed to the campaigns of members of Congress who are in positions to influence American policy on Cuba.
Some also serve on committees that oversee the National Endowment for Democracy, which has given hundreds of thousands of dollars in grants to the foundation.
Representative Dante B. Fascell, a Florida Democrat and the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, receives particular attention.


Bank Yields Drop a Bit In Week
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit edged lower in the week ending today.
But the decline for yields on certificates of deposit was not as steep as the drops in money market accounts.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based publication, said this week's decline in money market accounts reflects short-term interest rates quoted in the open market, where there had been expectations of another rate cut by the Federal Reserve.


Primerica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brokerage Houses Report Strong Earnings
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and the Paine Webber Group reported strong third-quarter earnings yesterday, virtually insuring that 1992 will be a record year for profits on Wall Street.
But third-quarter net income fell by 7 percent from levels a year earlier at a smaller brokerage house, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, a unit of the Primerica Corporation.
Poorer trading results were cited as one reason.


Deprenyl Research Ltd. ) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Game 7: Smoltz, Drabek, Tension
The scoreboard had been rendered an irrelevancy after the second inning tonight.
The calculations being done throughout Atlanta and Pittsburgh had shifted to the theoretical, and they centered on one equation: John Smoltz versus Doug Drabek.
It is the National League Championship Series Game 7 matchup, and it is one neither club was going to complain about.


Riley's Dictum to Knicks: Sweat Now, Smile Later
With sweat seeping through his Knicks T-shirt, Pat Riley entered the lobby of the team's hotel this morning looking as if he had just endured one of his own practices.
Riley, a coach who practices what he preaches, had just finished a one-hour workout, and as the Knicks prepared to end their six-day training camp at the College of Charleston on Wednesday, he had accomplished what he wanted.
He had worked the Knicks to their physical limit.


Froelich Rainey, 85, A Museum Director And an Archeologist
Froelich G. Rainey, an archeologist, museum director and creator of an award-winning television program, died on Sunday at a hospital in Cornwall, England.
He was 85 years old and lived in Cornwall.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Old Cairo: Ricketiness Killed Poor
Mohammed Aref, a police officer, held a plastic bag filled with odds and ends collected from the ruins of a 14-story apartment building, one of the few that collapsed in Heliopolis, a posh suburban district of northern Cairo.
He bent down and scooped up a plastic airplane that had belonged to a child who lived here.
A few feet away, a man picked up a dirty, tattered photograph of a woman.


Weitek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Standard Set for New Radio Technology
After more than a year of fidgeting and fussing over technical standards, electronics companies may soon give the ordinary AM-FM radio some new pizzazz.
A broad group of electronics manufacturers and broadcasters tentatively endorsed a new technology today that would allow radios to display the call letters and program format, from classic to classic rock, of stations on the dial.


AT WORK WITH: Donny Deutsch; Portrait Of an Adman On a Hot Streak
THERE is a sign on a wall in the cluttered office of Donny Deutsch, the brash young adman who is among a handful of Madison Avenue professionals hired to help Gov.
Bill Clinton try to become President Bill Clinton.
At first, it is difficult to spot the sign amid Mr.
Deutsch's toys: a tabletop pinball machine, the kind of miniature jukebox usually found in a booth at a diner and a small basketball hoop like those found in a college dormitory or fraternity house.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Birmingham Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The Political Week column yesterday, about Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign in the aftermath of the Presidential debate on Sunday night, referred to a Philadephia neighborhood incorrectly in some copies.
The mostly poor, mostly black area he visited on Monday was in West Philadelphia; he also visited another neighborhood, South Philadelphia.


Microsoft Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sheriff Scolded for Acts in Teaneck Officer's Trial
Members of the Bergen County Sheriff's department improperly tried to influence the outcome of the trial of a white Teaneck police officer charged with killing a black teen-ager, state investigators said in a report released today.
Their report, released by Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo, said the officers violated court orders and state guidelines while providing security at the trial of Officer Gary Spath, who was acquitted of manslaughter on Feb. 11.
It also said the officers showed "a lack of professionalism and sensitivity to the importance of maintaining a fair and impartial atmosphere."


Union to Resume Talks With News's Suitor
Under pressure from other unions eager to cement labor agreements for a pending sale of The Daily News , the Newspaper Guild will resume talks today with the bankrupt paper's likely buyer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman , union leaders said last night.
The guild, which represents newsroom, advertising and clerical employees, remains the only union at the paper that has not reached a tentative contract settlement with Mr.
Zuckerman.
Yesterday the guild sought to stall ratification votes by other unions until it could reach its own agreement.


Springs Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 26


Brand Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS&gt;
BALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., said it had ended discussions with Eastman Kodak Co. about acquiring Kodak's image acquisition systems unit.
UJB FINANCIAL CORP., Princeton, N.J., must face an investor lawsuit charging the bank holding company with fraudulently overstating its financial health.
The United States Supreme Court yesterday rejected an appeal by UJB to scuttle the suit, which was filed after the company reported a large increase in delinquent loans and a quarterly loss in October 1990.


Figures Show Teachers In New York Underpaid
To the Editor:
A table giving salaries for teachers in New York City and surrounding communities accompanies a Sept. 13 article on the city's negotiations with the teachers union.
I live in the Farmingdale School District, one of the districts compared, and I am also a New York City teacher.
You list Farmingdale as having a starting salary of $25,646 for new teachers and a top salary of $57,970, while New York City teachers start at $26,375, and the top is $52,750.
How you and the Board of Education arrived at the Farmingdale figure is beyond my comprehension.
The base salary for teachers in Farmingdale is $27,962, and the top is $69,242.
Within two years, new teachers in Farmingdale will start at $30,536 and receive a top salary or $75,611.


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Islanders Name Killian
The Islanders announced yesterday that they have hired GINGER KILLIAN as their new public relations director.
She replaces GREG BOURIS, who was dismissed last week.
Killian is a former employe of the public relations department of the Rangers.
In the 24-team N.H.L, 6 of the public relations directors are women.


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets Finding a Crowd Trying to Make a Point
Now that Chris Morris has signed and the Nets have their full deck of players at training camp, they can return their attention to one of the dominant themes of last season, the shuffling of three point guards.
Mookie Blaylock would appear to remain as the starter, leaving Kenny Anderson as a $3 million backup and Tate George looking for minutes wherever he can find them.
The situation is not close to ideal -- Blaylock agrees there is too much "congestion" -- but that doesn't mean it's going to get ugly, the way it did last season under Bill Fitch.


No Headline
Who am I?
Why am I here? -- JAMES B. STOCKDALE, Ross Perot's running mate, at beginning of the debate last night.  [ A1:6. ]


Eating Well
NO one, of course, will talk for the record.
But the Food and Drug Administration and the United States Department of Agriculture are in one of their nastier cat fights over who best represents consumer interests.
And off the record, they are happy to tell you why the other fellow is being stupid, stubborn, even venal.
This latest interagency warfare is not just an arcane Government matter that only those who live in Washington care about.
It concerns nutrition labels on food products and what should appear on them.
Who wins this battle will determine what consumers will be told about the food they buy for years to come.


Backups for Hostetler Are Untested Rookies
Quarterback has become the fragile Giants position: suddenly one of a pair of untested rookies is a hard hit away from taking over.
So today, Dave Brown and Kent Graham, who have never gotten their uniforms dirty in a regular-season game, start practicing as the backup quarterback to Jeff Hostetler.


Station Has Seen Last Train but Not Last Chance
Soaring 271 feet above the wood-frame houses and church steeples of Buffalo's East Side, Central Terminal was once an Art Deco beacon visible for 15 miles.
Today it is a dark and crumbling monument to better times.
The last passenger train departed 13 years ago this month.
Since then the building has deteriorated despite plans to transform it into apartments, stores or even a giant wedding hall.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Defeats Prpic  Boris Becker of Germany, seeded third, had 13 aces yesterday to overpower Goran Prpic of Croatia, 6-4, 7-5, to advance to the third round of the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Becker, ranked sixth in the world, broke Prpic's service in the ninth game of the first set and the 11th game of the second.
Serving for the match, he won the final game at love, his fourth love game in the match on the artificial court of the Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium.
The Americans Patrick McEnroe, Jonathan Stark, Jim Grabb and Richey Reneberg recorded first-round victories.
McEnroe beat Christo Van Rensburg of South Africa, 6-3, 6-2.
Stark defeated Grant Connell of Canada, 6-3, 6-4.
Grabb edged Kenneth Carlsen of Denmark, 5-7, 7-6 (7-1), 6-2, and Reneberg beat Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2.  (AP)


South Carolina Squad Returns to Practice
A day after voting to ask Coach SPARKY WOODS to resign, all the members of the South Carolina football team returned for a morning meeting yesterday and said they planned to continue the season.
"Everybody was here," Woods said. "We're happy they all came back. Nobody's quit.


COMPANY NEWS: Employee Benefits; G.M. Executive Becomes Card-Carrying Celebrity
As a tool for motivating an employee, imagine the effectiveness of this approach: Hire someone to develop an important new product, spend more than $50 million to promote it and display the employee's name in large type in every piece of advertising.
Sounds effective?
Just ask Ronald N. Zebeck, who joined the General Motors Corporation last year from the Advanta Corporation to develop the auto maker's Mastercard, which was introduced in early September and has already attracted one million new accounts.
"They've attached my skin to it," he said.


Justice Dept. Criminal Unit Is Investigating F.B.I. Chief
An inquiry into the management and travel practices of William S. Sessions, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has escalated from an in-house ethics review to a preliminary criminal inquiry, Administration officials said today.
The inquiry has led to a confluence of two potentially explosive investigations.
The investigation of Mr.
Sessions comes as Attorney General William P. Barr has asked for his help in an unrelated inquiry into whether the Justice Department or the Central Intelligence Agency misled a Federal judge in Atlanta about how much the Government knew of a multibillion-dollar bank-fraud case involving Iraq.


Hughes Rudd, 71, TV Correspondent For Two Networks
Hughes Rudd, a former television correspondent for CBS News and ABC News noted for his deft, sardonic touch, died yesterday in a hospital in Toulouse, France.
He was 71 years old.
Mr.
Rudd died of complications from an aneurysm of the aorta he suffered in August, said Tom Goodman, a spokesman for CBS News.
Mr.
Rudd had lived in Valence d'Albigeois, a village near Toulouse, since his retirement in 1986.


Pirates Throw Glavine a Curve in 8-Run Inning
Ken Saybel, who never pitched beyond Parsons College in Fairfield, Iowa, did a better job tonight than Phil Niekro, who pitched in the majors for 24 years.
Saybel, the Pirates' left-handed batting practice pitcher, who prepared Pittsburgh's hitters for left-handed Tom Glavine, was far more beneficial to Pittsburgh than Niekro's imitation of knuckleballer Tim Wakefield in the Braves' batting practice was to Atlanta.


60-Minute Gourmet
ALONG with the term Provencal, the designation nicoise is prominent in the vocabulary of contemporary chefs.
While both cooking styles are in vogue, they are certainly not new.
In the 1940's and 1950's, when I was cooking at Le Pavillon in New York, many of the kitchen's creations fell into those categories.
We did not serve them because they were healthful and fat free, but because they were traditional dishes of southern France.
Cholesterol was not even in our vocabulary back then.


Market Place; Confusion About A Day in Court
IF a lawsuit filed by a public company is worth crowing about when it is filed, one might think it would be equally of note when it is withdrawn or amended.
But that is not, apparently, the modus operandi of executives at Alco International Group Inc., a San Diego cargo-hauling and medical-products company that has been in a nasty tiff with short-sellers.
Alco, traded over the counter, caught short-sellers' attention on Sept. 11, when it disclosed that it had filed a slander suit seeking $5.1 billion of damages against several short-sellers of its stock and a reporter at Bloomberg Business News.
News of the suit breathed life into Alco shares, which closed at $2.85 on Sept. 10, the day it was filed.
By Sept. 17, as short-sellers began to cover their positions, and presumably as some investors decided the company could gain by the lawsuit, the stock had risen to $5.
Yesterday, it closed at $4.935.


A War of Slogans
The environment, abortion rights, America's cities -- issues that didn't even emerge in Sunday's Presidential debate -- finally surfaced in last night's free-for-all among the three Vice-Presidential candidates.
But the disorderly proceedings defied deliberative discussion while encouraging diversionary tactics.
The result was a war of slogans in which Dan Quayle emerged as the most artful and forceful of the sloganeers.
Sadly, Ross Perot's Vice-Presidential candidate, a decent and admirable retired Vice Admiral named James Stockdale, seemed lost between the two political pros.
His opening statement, beginning with "Who am I? Why am I here?" was prophetic.
His efforts, however brave, could not have served the renewed Perot boomlet.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  LOCKING UP TB PATIENTS
Not more than 300 TB patients in the United States have been forcibly detained for medical treatment in recent years.
But as tuberculosis returns to a prominence unseen for decades, public health officials, politicians, ethicists, and advocates for the poor find themselves revisiting a problem some find as disturbing as the disease: How to protect healthy members of society from those who are not?
A1.
MORE DISCOURSE FROM SENATE CANDIDATES
The level of debate in the campaign for the United States Senate descended to this yesterday: Robert Abrams said that when he called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato a "fascist," on Sunday night, he had really meant to call him a "right-wing extremist." In either case, he stood by his assertion that the Senator was using the "big lie techniques" of Nazi propagandists.
Mr.
D'Amato responded by suggesting Mr.
Abrams "lacked a degree of stability." A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Microwave Cooking
THE microwave oven is virtually without rival in cooking vegetables.
The texture of the cooked vegetables is better, there is more flavor, the colors are more brilliant and, as a Cornell University study has shown, the vegetables keep more of their vitamins.
In fall, a meal built around vegetables and fruit is quick and easy to make.
Such a meal may not be totally vegetarian.
For example, this recipe for carrot and ginger terrine contains both chicken broth and gelatin.
Vegetarians can substitute agar-agar, a seaweed gel, for the gelatin and a vegetable broth for the chicken broth.
For the agar-agar, cook two tablespoons of agar-agar flakes -- without soaking them first -- in a quarter cup of water for two minutes in a high-power oven, or three minutes in a low-power one.


A Glimpse of the Future of the Subway System


Chock Full o'Nuts Account in Review
The Chock Full o'Nuts Corporation said yesterday that it had placed its account, with billings estimated to exceed $2 million, in review after seven years at TBWA Advertising in New York.
In a telephone interview, Joseph Breslin, chairman and chief executive of the New York-based coffee, food service and beverage company, confirmed reports of the review that appeared this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He said TBWA had decided to resign the account after the review was begun, partly because of a client conflict with the R. C. Bigelow tea account.
Mr.
Breslin was promoted into the chairman's job at Chock Full o'Nuts in July.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Renews His Attacks About Vietnam and Draft
President Bush used an unscheduled appearance on a live broadcast from the White House today to renew his attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton's activities during the Vietnam War years and to raise questions about his ability to serve as President because of his antiwar activities.
Mr.
Bush pressed his offensive in a moment of political theater played out on breakfast television.
He strolled, as if casually, into the Blue Room of the White House as Katie Couric, the co-host of the NBC program "Today," was interviewing Barbara Bush about White House history and furnishings.


U.S. Approves Chicken Treatment To Cut Salmonella
THE United States Department of Agriculture today approved the use of an inexpensive chemical process to drastically reduce salmonella in chickens.
Salmonella, a ubiquitous bacterium that can cause serious gastrointestinal illness, even death, is found in up to 60 percent of the fresh chickens sold in the United States.
Trisodium phosphate, a chemical used to emulsify processed cheese, has been found to be effective in destroying salmonella in more than 95 percent of the chickens that have been tested.
The cost, says Rhone-Poulenc Inc., in Cranbury, N.J., the company that invented the process, will be less than a penny a bird.
In the procedure, chickens are dipped in a solution containing trisodum phosphate after they have been chilled.


Life for Afghans After Najibullah: Warring Clans and Deprivation
Six months after the fall of the Najibullah Government, Afghanistan has degenerated into clan warfare that has terrorized and displaced hundreds of thousands of people and stripped the cities of medical care, schools and often electricity and water, relief workers in the country say.
Food and medical shortages are becoming critical as the harsh winter approaches, relief agencies and experts on the region say.
They add that politically, Afghanistan is slipping steadily toward the anarchy that plagues famine-ravaged Somalia.


The Woolly Bear Weathermen
Though appealingly fuzzy, it hardly makes a fashion statement: two bands of black and one of brown, the comfortable brown of a beloved sweater.
After a summer spent munching grass and leaves, the woolly bear caterpillar is walking now -- all over country roads, across decks and patios, around stone walls and piles of wood.
Isia Isabella, as the scientists call it, will walk until it finds a cozy place to take its winter nap.
With the spring's warmth it will wake up and pupate, spinning a cocoon out of its fuzz fortified with a few squirts of silk.


Laettner Deal Near?
The Minnesota Timberwolves are about to sign their No. 1 draft pick, CHRISTIAN LAETTNER, to a six-year deal for $20.1 million, according to a published report.
The Star Tribune of Minneapolis reported yesterday that an unidentified league source said the Timberwolves have offered the former Duke star a deal that is worth $100,000 more than the six-year contract LARRY JOHNSON signed with Charlotte last year after being the first player selected in the 1991 draft.


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court to Rule on Admissibility Of Scientific Evidence in U.S. Courts
Opening the door to a far-reaching debate over the role of science in the courtroom, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide how widely accepted a scientific process or theory must be for it to be admissible as evidence in Federal court.
Courts around the country are wrestling with this question in both criminal and civil trials, over issues that include the identification of suspects through DNA fingerprinting to the links between toxins in the workplace and occupational illnesses.


Theater in Review
The Caretaker  Jean Cocteau Repertory Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery (at Second Street) Lower East Side Through Dec. 10 By Harold Pinter; direction and lighting design by Eve Adamson; set design by John Brown; costumes, Ofra Confino; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg; stage manager, Jonathan R. Polgar.
Presented by Jean Cocteau Repertory, Scott Shattuck, managing director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Joseph Menino and Craig Smith.
It is always a lesson to return to the leaky, junk-filled room of Harold Pinter's "Caretaker," the troubling play that brought the playwright his first big success and came to define what Irving Wardle called "the comedy of menace." In a fine new revival, the Jean Cocteau Repertory puts a slightly new spin on the problem of figuring out just what the lesson is.


Wine Talk
TERESA SEVERINI LUNGAROTTI was wearing her serious business face.
She had just asked a visitor his opinion about a new wine.
"Good, very good," the visitor said.
Her expression didn't change.


Bridge
The prestigious Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship ended Monday night, after nine months of competition involving a record field of 42 teams, in a victory for Michael Camp, Barbara Haberman, Zia Mahmood, Fred Chang and Jim Rosenbloom, all of Manhattan.
They won by 84 imps against a dark-horse foursome headed by Janos Racz of Manhattan, also including David Kaufman of West Orange, N.J., Simon Erlich and Victor Melman, both of Forest Hills, Queens.
Play was at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 4 East 80th Street.
This was sweet revenge for the Camp squad.
The same teams had met a week earlier and the Racz group had won by 14.
Both teams are now looking forward to the 1992-3 event, which begins next month. (Information: Bill Rosenbaum, telephone (212) 725-2135.)


Telco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about new rules for the composition of gasoline understated the number of places that must include oxygen in fuel beginning this winter.
It is 39 metropolitan areas.


Budget Cuts Hurt Private Colleges Near Philadelphia
Eleven private colleges and universities in the Philadelphia area are struggling to adjust to operating with $76 million less than they had anticipated, as a result of the state's elimination of a century-old subsidy program.
The 11 institutions, primarily graduate schools in health fields, responded to the loss of aid by raising tuition, eliminating grant programs for Pennsylvania residents and minorities and, at the Pennsylvania College of Podiatric Medicine, reducing free health care for low-income city residents.


Children's Rights
To the Editor:
Re "Court Grants Boy's Wish to Pick His Parents" (front page, Sept. 26): I'm 44 and a victim of the New York City foster care system.
My childhood, birth through adolescence, was spent moving from institutions to inadequate and abusive foster homes.
My biological mother would never allow adoption and caused disruption in any home that displayed the human touch.
My nomadic existence stifled any possible education; the constant rejection and abuse left me feeling less than human.
It left scars and has affected my children and husband.
The Gregory Kingsley decision is long overdue.
My biological mother kept all her rights, and I lost all of mine.
JOANNE DOYLE Suffern, N.Y., Oct. 1, 1992


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; The National Pastime as Big Business
Baseball and Billions  A Probing Look Inside the Big Business of Our National Pastime  By Andrew Zimbalist  270 pages.
Basic Books. $20.
At Shea Stadium this season, an unrepentant Ebbets Field fan and his young companions helped to increase the gross national profit by making a large investment in inflationary hot dogs, fries, soft drinks and peanuts, not to mention a few dollars for the usher who tickled the dust off the seats.
Surprisingly, there was no extra charge for the mustard.
Now along comes Andrew Zimbalist, professor of economics at Smith College, with the cheerful international news that treats at the ballpark in Queens are a comparative bargain because, at the Skydome in Toronto, a special hot dog goes for $6.


Howard Jones, Rockefeller Aide For Drug Control, Is Dead at 69
Howard A. Jones, a former New York State judge who helped Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller shape the anti-drug law of 1973, died on Sunday at his home in New Rochelle.
He was 69 years old.
He died in his sleep of a heart ailment, his family reported.


Life Turns Bleak and Perilous In Serb-Held Area in Croatia
When Serbian forces carved out a swath of territory for themselves here last year, Serbs living under their protection felt euphoria and defiance.
Many dared to think that their new homeland would eventually become part of a Greater Serbia extending throughout the Balkan region.
But today those feelings and hopes have turned to bitterness as residents face lawlessness, a collapse of trade, economic isolation and the failure of the new Serbian authorities to establish firm control in the entity that they call the Serbian Krajina Republic.


INSIDE
Why Hispanic Students Quit
While school dropout rates among whites and blacks have declined, the rate for Hispanic youths has stayed at 35 percent.
Education, page B9.
Wearily, Cairo Digs Itself Out
Cairo began to dig out after the earthquake that left an estimated 450 people dead and 4,000 injured.
Page A14.
Bonn Considers Refugee Law
Germany's coalition partners agreed on a plan to curb immigration to try to halt attacks on foreigners, but its prospects are uncertain.
Page A9.
Pirates Even the Playoffs
Pittsburgh beat Atlanta, 13-4, to tie the National League playoffs at three games apiece.
Page B11.
Maiden 'Voyage'
Philip Glass's work on Columbus and the theme of exploration had its premiere at the Metropolitan Opera.
Edward Rothstein's review, page C17.


Paine Webber Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Decide to Stand Pat As Trade Deadline Passes
The National Football League trading deadline passed at 4 P.M. yesterday without the Jets making any deals or moves.
In other words, they stood pat with a team that has a 1-5 record, tied with Seattle for the second worst in the league.
Does it mean General Manager Dick Steinberg has given up on this season and his personnel?


Home Shopping Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Britain to Shut Most of Its Coal Mines
Crippled by rising imports of foreign coal and falling demand for its own product among utilities, British Coal announced today that it would close 31 of its remaining 50 mines and lay off 30,000 miners, nearly three-quarters of the industry's dwindling work force.
The loss of the jobs is the latest in a series of recent setbacks to a British economy already bleeding jobs at an estimated rate of 8,000 a week.


Teen-Ager Indicted in Attack on Officers
A Brooklyn teen-ager was charged yesterday in connection with a baseball-bat attack on two New York City correction officers earlier this month.
The indictment, filed in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, charged John Roussopoulos, 17 years old, of Borough Park with attempted murder, assault, reckless endangerment, criminal mischief and criminal possession of a weapon.


D'Amato Says He Has Plan For Arms-Plant Conversion
Saying the military spending cuts his opponent has proposed would devastate New York State's economy, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday that he was working on a plan to offer a 50 percent tax credit to military contractors to encourage them to convert their plants to peacetime production.
Later, however, Mr.
D'Amato said he had not worked out practically any details of his plan, such as who would qualify and how the plan would be financed.
He announced the plan before local television cameras in front of the Griffiss Air Force Base in Oneida County.


Vote for Bush? Not U.S. Jews Now in Israel
If the Presidential election were in the hands of Americans living in this Jewish settlement near Bethlehem, President Bush could start packing his bags right now.
It is more than a question of Mr.
Bush not having a prayer here.
He might not even have a single vote.


Ben Maddow, 83, Prolific Writer in Many Genres
Ben Maddow, a screenwriter, novelist and photography critic, died on Friday at the Queen of Angels/Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 83 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of congestive heart failure after a long illness, said his wife, Freda Flier.


Metropolitan Diary
MANY-a-True-Word Department: Kate Frank Cohen was in Brooks Brothers poised for the annual outfitting of her teen-age son.
"Where do I go if my child has outgrown the boys' department?" she asked an employee.


Personal Health
BREAST cancer is the disease women fear most.
Nearly every woman over the age of 45 is acquainted with at least one woman her age who has developed breast cancer.
And reports like the recent one that raised to a woman's lifetime risk of developing breast cancer one chance in eight do little to quell mounting fears that new cases are outpacing progress in early diagnosis and treatment of this most common life-threatening cancer in American women.
But new findings described this month in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute paint a much more optimistic picture.
First, national statistics show that the proportion of women with newly diagnosed breast cancer is clearly falling.
And second, treatment studies here and abroad have demonstrated that postoperative drug or hormone therapy can increase the chances of survival for nearly every breast cancer patient, even women over 70.
Declining Incidence
After a sharp rise in the percentage of women diagnosed with breast cancer from 1980 to 1987, in recent years there has been a notable decline in the incidence of breast cancer, especially among women 50 and over.


Young German Wine Makers Upset the Riesling Cart
CONSTERNATION reigned at the patrician estates here in the Rheingau region when Der Feinschmecker, a popular wine and food magazine, announced the winners in its contest for the 15 best dry rieslings of Germany's spectacular 1990 vintage.
There were only two winners in the Rheingau, which is an hour's drive west of Frankfurt.
Neither was an aristocratic estate.
And the wine makers at both are in their 20's -- the leading edge of a new generation in a traditionalist region.


New Nobel Laureate Takes Economics Far Afield
Gary S. Becker of the University of Chicago has been awarded the 1992 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
It was the third economics Nobel in three years for the university, whose policy-oriented economists have had an immense impact on the profession in the last half-century.
The 61-year old professor, who writes a column for Business Week along with teaching both economics and sociology, was honored by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for "having extended the domain of economic theory to aspects of human behavior which had previously been dealt with -- if at all -- by other social science disciplines such as sociology, demography and criminology." 'Not Highfaluting'
And while reactions to Mr.
Becker's use of disarmingly simple economics to analyze everything from child-bearing to binge drinking have ranged from adulation to rage, the award was widely applauded by scholars.
"This is not highfaluting, technical stuff," Daniel Hamermesh of Michigan State University said.
"But it's a way of thinking that is profoundly original."


Dinkins Urges Revisions In Taxi Plans
In formally announcing his plan to reorganize New York City's taxi industry yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins described a proposal that would make far fewer changes than he had originally planned in the hope of finally creating a consensus behind some form of change.
But the mixed response to the scaled-back proposal from representatives of various segments of the highly fragmented cab industry demonstrated just how hard it would be for Mr.
Dinkins to gain broad acceptance for any plan that would significantly change taxi service in New York.


Jays Won't Let Up After Letdown
The Toronto Blue Jays may have left an opportunity to clinch their first World Series berth on the field in Oakland yesterday.
But they also left behind something else: the unwanted baggage of their past, having emerged from three games in Oakland still in great position.
Toronto did so by winning two of three games against the Athletics in the Oakland Coliseum, no mean feat.
Still, for all the moral victories and more, the Blue Jays must go to Game 6 tomorrow and, who knows, perhaps even Game 7 on Thursday before anyone will know the 1992 American League pennant winner.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Abrams Gets Surly
Heated campaigns often bring out the worst in politicians.
This week, New York's Senate campaign revealed a careless streak in Robert Abrams.
At a political rally Sunday, the usually mild-mannered state Attorney General crossed the line of acceptable discourse by calling Senator Alfonse D'Amato "a fascist."
Mr.
Abrams later termed the remark "unfortunate," yet refused to apologize.
At a news conference yesterday he compounded his error by refusing to repudiate other offensive remarks he casually made to aides and reporters on a recent upstate tour, where he likened Mr.
D'Amato's "big lie" tactics to those of the Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels.
Nor did he help himself by saying that "right-wing extremist" was what he really meant by "fascist."


Wells Rich Greene And Hefty Part
The Mobil Chemical Company in Pittsford, N.Y., and Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York said Monday that they had mutually decided to part ways on the Hefty trash bags account after eight years, because of creative differences.
The companies declined to disclose the billings, but Adweek estimated them at $9 million.
In a telephone interview, Kenneth S. Olshan, chairman and chief executive at Wells Rich, confirmed reports of the breakup this week in Adweek.
"These things happen," he said, adding, "We just couldn't agree on the direction the advertising should take."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Dispute; Quayle and Gore Battle Devolves Into a Hand-to-Hand Fight About 4 Issues
While Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Al Gore argued across a broad spectrum of issues in the Vice-Presidential debate this evening, they conducted the verbal equivalent of hand-to-hand combat over four specific points.
The most intense confrontations came on the issues of the environment, arms control, Government programs aiding Central American development and abortion


Pfizer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avesis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Voter Rolls Climb To Highest Since '73
New York City's voter rolls topped 3.2 million when registration ended last week -- a higher total than in any year since 1973.
The Democrats claimed credit for the bulk of the 613,181 new names added since Jan. 1 by running voter-registration drives citywide.
Election officials said they had not yet broken down the total by party, but John A. Marino, the Democratic state chairman, estimated by working off preliminary totals that about 70 percent of the new names are Democrats and about 10 percent Republicans.


Review/Film: The Public Eye; A Photographer Sees A City's Dark Side, But Not His Own
In "The Public Eye," set in 1942, Joe Pesci appears as a nervy, rude freelance photographer, Leon Bernstein, who's called Bernzy or the Great Bernzini by the editors and the cops with whom he deals.
Bernzy has a way of arriving at the scene of a crime even before the police.
Armed with a Speed Graphic, the pockets of his trench coat bulging with flashbulbs and film, Bernzy roams nighttime Manhattan in search of the right subject.
His specialties: mob rub-outs, tenement fires, celebrities caught off guard, servicemen and their girlfriends necking in doorways, automobile accidents, suicides and the anonymous faces of the sidewalk lookers-on.
In his photographs these people speak.


Surprise Interview With Bush for 'Today'
The NBC program "Today" obtained an unexpected interview with President Bush yesterday in which he discussed his role in the Iran-contra affair and renewed his attacks on Gov.
Bill Clinton's activities during the Vietnam war years.
The spontaneous 19-minute session with Katie Couric, one of program's anchors, came after she toured the White House and interviewed Barbara Bush as part of a celebration of the 200th anniversary of the Executive Mansion.


Inside Isolated Iraq, Merchants Go in Dread
To the Editor:
I am writing to tell the world about the situation inside Iraq.
The only way to enter the country is through Jordan.
I took a 14-hour bus trip through the desert, three hours of which were the normal searching time for both borders, loading and unloading suitcases.
Life is miserable there, prices change by the hour, everything is expensive.
The mounting tension between Iraq and the United States during the week of July 20 resulted in a panic in Baghdad's markets.
Prices shot up by 20 percent.
There were long lines for gas and gasoline for the three days before July 26.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Be Quantitative but Creative, Ad Experts Tell Marketers
FOR decades, marketers have ruefully joked that they know half their advertising spending is wasted, but they don't know which half.
As the 83d annual meeting and business conference of the Association of National Advertisers ended here, the nation's biggest marketers were warned yesterday that the figure in the aphorism ought to be doubled unless they redouble efforts to improve the effectiveness and creativity of their sales messages.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Using a Tall Approach in Handing Down a Message


Wolohan Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diet Pills Return as Long-Term Medication, Not Just Diet Aids
AFTER years of being viewed as an unnecessary and potentially addictive crutch, diet pills are regaining legitimacy.
Doctors who have never prescribed them before are now suggesting them to some patients, in combination with calorie reduction and exercise, and more patients are requesting them.
Some of the change reflects a new attitude toward obesity.
Increasingly, doctors see it as a chronic condition, partly genetic in origin, that may require lifelong medication, much the way hypertension and diabetes do.


Software Helps Patients Make Crucial Choices
Told by his doctor that he had an enlarged prostate gland, Richard A. Dronen, a 59-year-old retailing executive in Minneapolis, thought he should have surgery.
His doctor, however, disagreed and sent Mr.
Dronen to try a high-tech method of learning more about his prospects.
Mr.
Dronen educated himself about the noncancerous condition by using an interactive videodisk system that let him enter his own personal health data.
Using the disk, he could weigh the risks of unpleasant complications after surgery versus trying drug therapy versus simply practicing "watchful waiting" with the condition, which hampers urination and can cause dangerous infections.


Rome Journal; The Other Face of Italy: Its Busy Soup Kitchens
Alongside the designer stores and restaurants, the fountains and palaces, Rome has always had its underclass of hungry and homeless, those who came and saw and usually failed to conquer anything but a slice of sidewalk for a bed, a scoop of hand-out pasta for a meal.
In older times, the city's itinerants offered a symbol of the North-South divide, of the inexorable urge that drove Africans from the north of their continent to the shores of southern Europe, propelled by hope of betterment.
These days, though, the symbolism has changed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; Quayle and Gore Exchange Sharp Attacks in Debate
In a debate marked by intensely personal exchanges, Senator Al Gore and Vice President Dan Quayle delivered some of the campaign's strongest blasts last night, each asserting that the opposing Presidential candidate did not deserve to lead the nation for the next four years.
Mr.
Quayle assailed Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential candidate, as a man who "has trouble telling the truth" and who had habitually waffled on the issues of the day.


Corrections
A picture caption on Oct. 2 about Hillary Clinton's visit to the Bank Street College in Manhattan and a correction in this space on Oct. 5 misidentified the head of the college's board.
He is John A. Shutkin.


TJ International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Damark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Magnetic Technologies reports earnings for Year to July 31


How Jazz Could Become the New Rock-and-Roll
The Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra's performance of the music of Duke Ellington tonight at Avery Fisher Hall should be, in the language of musicians, smoking.
After all, the orchestra has just come off a 25-concert cross-country tour and for the last month its repertory has been exclusively Ellington.
But more important, the 16-piece ensemble, which is ending its tour here, has become a symbol of the widening reach of jazz itself.
While jazz orchestras, those that remain anyway, might perform in a club one night, a concert hall the next and at a country-club dance the next, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra has been playing fine-arts halls and college campuses, places usually reserved for European classical concerts, filled in part by subscription series.
The orchestra has been used in an attempt to broaden the waning classical-music audience base, and it appears to be working.
Most of the shows were sold out or near capacity, and the audiences crossed generational lines.
To some, this indicates not only the depth of jazz's renaissance, but also the increasing willingness on the part of classical-music institutions to follow Lincoln Center's lead in programming jazz.


Microsoft Net Rose 45.1% in First Quarter
The Microsoft Corporation reported first-quarter revenues and earnings today that exceeded Wall Street analysts' estimates.
For the quarter, which ended Sept. 30, Microsoft had earnings of $209 million, or 70 cents a share, up 45.1 percent from $144 million, or 50 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues rose 41 percent, to $818 million, from $581 million in the first quarter of the 1992 fiscal year.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


U.N. GIVES WARNING TO KHMER ROUGE
In a fresh show of impatience with the Khmer Rouge, the Security Council threatened today to press ahead with elections in Cambodia without the guerrilla faction unless it cooperates with a peace plan it has already accepted.
The threat came in a new Council resolution reaffirming that Cambodia's first free election will take place as planned in May and demanding that the Khmer Rouge immediately carry out their obligations under the Paris Peace Agreements of 1991.
The agreements call on the Khmer Rouge to disarm their soldiers and admit United Nations officials to areas the Khmer Rouge controls so the officials can start registering voters and preparing for the election.


Chip Industry Indicator Off
Despite a slight increase in new orders, the semiconductor industry's leading indicator declined in September, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.06 for the three-month period ending in September, down from a revised figure of 1.09 in August, and from 1.08 in July.
The book-to-bill compares orders with shipments and is considered a leading indicator of the industry's performance.
A ratio of 1.06 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $106 was ordered.
A ration above 1.0 indicates that demand has continued to increase.


Lindros Finally Has Face-Off With Quebec and Angry Fans
When Eric Lindros and the Philadelphia Flyers walked off their chartered airplane Monday night, a man at the airport shouted, "We'll kill you tomorrow." His choice of verb was certainly symbolic, in that the Flyers played the hometown Nordiques tonight.
But in view of all the rancor between the Nordiques and Lindros over the last two years, it is easy to understand why Lindros traveled with a professional bodyguard for this trip and why city officials took all those security precautions at the Colisee tonight.


Lawyer Calls Billy Joel Suit 'Contrived'
Allen Grubman, one of the most powerful lawyers in the recording industry, yesterday denied charges brought two weeks ago by the singer Billy Joel in a $90 million lawsuit.
He contended Mr.
Joel's suit was libelous and contrived and called it an effort to "extort a settlement."
In a suit filed in New York State Supreme Court on Sept. 23, Mr.
Joel charged, among other allegations, that Mr.
Grubman and his firm, Grubman, Indursky, Schindler &amp; Goldstein, which represented the singer between 1981 and 1988, had breached its fiduciary responsibility by paying kickbacks to Frank Weber, who was then both Mr.
Joel's business manager and brother-in-law.
The suit also maintained that Mr.
Grubman had violated his responsibilities as a lawyer by representing both Mr.
Joel and CBS Records, with whom Mr.
Joel's lawyers were then negotiating.


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SI Handling Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


New Image Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Small Plane Hits House and Crashes Onto Highway in California


New Forum for Bush On Character Issue
President Bush used a moment of political theater on a breakfast program to renew questions about Bill Clinton's antiwar activities during the Vietnam era and whether those efforts reflected on the Governor's ability to serve as President.
The President surprised morning audiences by suddenly appearing at a White House interview that Katie Couric of the NBC News program "Today" was conducting with Barbara Bush.
And then he stayed and stayed, answering one question after another, and vigorously pressing his anti-Clinton themes, at far greater length than usual.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary headline yesterday about Joseph Toy Curtiss, a Yale University faculty member for nearly four decades, misstated his age in some copies.
He was 91.


Arms Maker Is Named Premier by Ukraine
Faced with a rapidly worsening economy and increasing pressure from his liberal opposition, President Leonid Kravchuk named an arms maker today to take over as Prime Minister, two weeks after the previous Government was forced out by Parliament.
The arms maker, Leonid Kuchma, head of Yuzhmash, which produced tactical nuclear missiles, is seen as a compromise candidate with a mandate to step up the pace of economic changes in Ukraine.
He is likely to win the approval of Parliament.


Topics of The Times; A Legal Lesson for V.M.I.
When the Justice Department sued the Virginia Military Institute for limiting its martial collegiate program to men, a Federal judge in Roanoke ruled for V.M.I.
The school is "unique in all the world," he said, for its single-sex, physically rigorous, mentally stressful and oppressive regimen for training citizen-soldiers.
Predictably, the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Richmond has reversed that ruling, finding V.M.I.'s admissions policy to be unique in another way -- almost uniquely unconstitutional.
That's because Virginia furnishes this special men-only schooling at the expense of all its taxpayers, male and female.


Jurors Consider Murder Charge Against Motorman in '91 Crash
A Manhattan jury has begun weighing the fate of Robert E. Ray, the subway motorman who is charged with murder in the deaths of five people in a massive subway crash last year.
Mr.
Ray, who prosecutors assert was drunk at the controls, was portrayed by the defense as the victim of a terrible accident.
In his closing argument yesterday in State Supreme Court, Assistant District Attorney Daniel Brownell urged the jury to convict the 39-year-old defendant of second-degree murder for "depraved indifference" in causing the "worst subway crash ever to take place in New York City" and not staying to help the injured.


METRO DIGEST
The Economy
Alan Greenspan warned that global financial transactions may be too fast and complex for bank managers to understand.
Speaking in Tokyo, he called for more governmental oversight.  [ D1. ]
Gary S. Becker was awarded the 1992 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
The University of Chicago scholar is noted for applying economic discipline to sociological phenomena.
It was the third economics Nobel in three years for the university.  [ D1. ]


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Poor Housekeeping
Responding to the furor over the mismanaged House bank, Speaker Thomas Foley gamely pushed through legislation in April to establish modern, professional management of non-legislative affairs by a new, nonpartisan House administrator.


Genicom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Food Notes
New Seafood Counter
The Captain's Table, a seafood restaurant at 860 Second Avenue (46th Street), has tucked a retail seafood counter into a corner just inside the door.
It is selling fresh and prepared seafood.
Since the market is attached to a restaurant, good turnover of the seafood is assured, guaranteeing freshness.
The seafood on display, like whole red snapper and pompano, salmon fillets, tuna and swordfish steaks and giant blue prawns, all looking excellently fresh, represent only a sampling of what's available.


Ulysses Guimaraes, 'Grandfather' Of Brazilian Democracy, Is Dead
Ulysses Guimaraes, a veteran congressman often called the "grandfather" of Brazil's democracy, drowned on Monday when a helicopter in which he was flying fell into the South Atlantic about 100 miles south of here.
He was 76 years old.
Also killed in the crash were his wife, Ida de Almeida Guimaraes; a former Cabinet minister, Severo Gomes; Mr.
Gomes's wife, Henriqueta Gomes, and the pilot, Jorge Comeratto.
The group had spent the weekend at a beach resort south of here and was flying back to Sao Paulo when a violent thunderstorm struck.


Syntellect Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Quayle on the Offensive
Vice President Dan Quayle may be no Jack Kennedy, but he was no stumblebum either in the second of the 1992 campaign debates last night.
In fact, he gave a far better-focused summary of the Republican case than his boss, President Bush, managed in his first encounter with Bill Clinton on Sunday night.
Right at the start, Mr.
Quayle asserted that Mr.
Clinton would make a bad economy worse and charged that Mr.
Clinton "does not have the strength or the character to be President." His words were as crisp as a television commercial.


Hispanic Dropout Rate Stays High, Since Children Work in Hard Times
Lydia Vera was only in the tenth grade when she dropped out of high school against the wishes of her unemployed father, who is a gardner, and her mother, a clerk in a grocery store.
She began working at a fast-food restaurant for about $100 a week to help her parents.
"They didn't want me to drop out," said Ms.
Vera, who is now 17 years and studying for her diploma in an independent study program in the Sweetwater, Calif., schools, which has started one of several recent efforts around the country to bring Hispanic dropouts back to school.
"But I felt I needed to help them. I felt like the whole world was coming down on me because we were having a lot of economic problems."


Silicon General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RIVALS FOR SENATE PERSIST IN ATTACKS
The New York campaign for the United States Senate came to this yesterday: Robert Abrams said that when he called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato a "fascist" on Sunday night, he had really meant to call him a "right-wing extremist." In either case, he stood by his assertion that the Senator was using the "big-lie techniques" of Nazi propagandists.
Mr. D'Amato responded by suggesting that Mr. Abrams "lacked a degree of stability."


Power Failure Knocks Out 911 Phone Calls in Suffolk
For about two hours this morning, the more than one million residents of Suffolk County had no 911 emergency phone service, as a power failure in the New York Telephone switching station in Central Islip disabled the system.
A back-up system in the Suffolk County police headquarters was not used because it would have taken too long to put into service, the police said.
As a result, callers who dialed 911 received a busy signal.


Jacob H. Horwitz, 100, Innovator In Fashion and Hospital Founder
Jacob H. Horwitz, a fashion innovator who helped to create "junior miss" clothing and a philanthropist who was a founder of Long Island Jewish Medical Center, died on Sunday at his home in Lawrence, L.I.
He was 100 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Howtek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cavalier Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Borland International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parents, Often in Vain, Await Their Children
Women at the Medinat al-Omal primary school in central Cairo keep a vigil outside the building.
"What happened to our children?" one mother shouted to teachers and administrators holding the group back.


Corrections
An article yesterday about New York City's Columbus Day parade misstated the name of the English statesman and writer who was canonized in 1935.
He was Sir Thomas More.


Surprise-Filled Fajitas
YOU'RE kidding.
Fajitas with lamb and yogurt and arugula?
And so many other ingredients not remotely connected with fajitas?
How can they be called fajitas?
Culinary license.
You could wrap the filling in Chinese pancakes and call it moo shoo lamb, I suppose.


Hostage Is Fatally Wounded at North Carolina Bank


A Distant Conflict Lives In One Student's Heart
AFTER what he has seen and lived through in Croatia and Bosnia in the last 15 months, it is hard for Dragan Lozancic to concentrate on the analysis and enumeration of geared linkages, the subject of his doctoral thesis in mechanical engineering at Columbia University.
"I've finished my course work, I've finished my exams and all I need is the thesis," said the 29-year-old Bayside resident.
"My parents are counting on me, my mentor at Columbia has been great and sympathetic and I know that all I need to do is work for six months or so and I should have a doctorate that would assure my future. But my mind is elsewhere. Most of me is still back there."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Bush: Trying A Subtler Approach
The Bush campaign's newest advertisement, which was first broadcast on Monday, tries to avoid the criticism leveled at some previous commercials that they unfairly attacked Bill Clinton.
ON THE SCREEN  Opens with a white-on-black phrase, "Breakfast, St. Louis. After the debate." The buzz of conversation and the clinking of plates and silverware are audible in the background.
The screen cuts to quick clips of eight people seated in booths at a restaurant.
Each voices a concise opinion of Bill Clinton or Mr.
Bush as a hand-held camera zooms in and out and rocks unsteadily.
Closes with a small disclaimer, "Paid for by Bush-Quayle '92 General Committee Inc." PRODUCER The November Company THE SCRIPT  First Man: "I saw the debate last night, and I just got one conclusion, It's all George Bush."  First Woman: "I have, I still have a lot of confidence in my President."
Louis on Monday morning, the day after the first presidential debate.
Campaign officials say none of the eight speakers are actors or paid Bush workers, but that some of the people are known Bush supporters.
SCORECARD  The commercial seeks to promote Mr.
Bush as the debate winner, and Mr.
Clinton as an untrustworthy rival, while avoiding serious problems that dogged past political attacks.
Example: Polls show many voters don't believe charges made by the Bush organization.
So this commercial lets average people make them instead.
Example: Voters are primed to be suspicious of negative political advertisements.
So the jerky camera and the absence of an announcer in this one try to convey unsophisticated believability, not political slickness.
Example: Mr.
Bush's personal attacks on Mr.
Clinton seem to generate a backlash, so Mr.
Bush is absent from this commercial.


Corrections
A theater review on Monday about "You Could Be Home Now," Ann Magnuson's one-woman show at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, misidentified the set designer.
He is Bill Clarke, not Bill Stabile.


Airlines Should Provide Safety Practice Facilities
To the Editor:
In addition to the emergency procedure demonstration given on all aircraft, the Federal Aviation Administration should require airlines to provide demonstration facilities at airports for voluntary practice.
Passengers awaiting departures would thus be able to put their spare time to good use, practicing such crucial procedures as inflating life vests, using oxygen masks and operating emergency exits.


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Relax Yet About Melting Ice Caps
To the Editor:
"Concerns on Melting of Polar Ice Are Eased" (Science Times, Sept. 22) infers from models and data published by Douglas R. MacAyeal that Antarctic ice cap melting may be so slow that we need not worry about sea-level rise.
That study is reassuring only if one takes the short-term perspective of politicians in office.
A longer point of view leads to very different conclusions.
Three questions are relevant: how quickly climate change takes place, how long it continues and its ultimate magnitude.
By focusing only on the first, you give the impression that we need not worry about the other two.
Ice melting, sea-level rise and global climate change may seem too slow to notice, but changes caused by excess greenhouse gases will take centuries to millenniums to play out because of the long time it takes ice caps to flow and deep ocean waters to warm.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; In Kentucky, a Local Legend Runs a Phantom-Like Campaign for Congress
Wispy as fog in the bottomland, there is a phantom campaign hereabouts being mastered by a quiet, punctilious Congressman who has never taken a political contribution in 39 years in the House and who drives the hilly Kentucky hustings alone, completely frustrating this year's sacrificial challenger.
"He's totally out of touch, doesn't really campaign a lick," complains Bruce Bartley, a 25-year-old college student who put in for the vacant Republican nomination to challenge the Democratic incumbent, 83-year-old Representative William H. Natcher, and now finds himself sparring with thin air.


New Rules on Pensions Are Adopted
Filling a void that had prevented many companies from offering a wide range of savings and pension plans to their workers, the Government adopted rules today protecting employers from lawsuits by employees disappointed with the return on their investment.
The long-range intent of the new regulations is to encourage workers to exert more control over their investment and pension plans.
Although many plans currently meet one or more of the new standards, private specialists said that adoption of the new rules, completing an arduous five-year process, would ultimately touch the vast majority of pension, profit-sharing and 401(k) savings plans in which employees can pick their investments.


Henderson Steals a Bit of the Credit
While Dave Stewart was being widely praised for guaranteeing that the Athletics would win Game 5 of the American League Championship Series and then backing up his boast by pitching a complete-game seven-hitter in a 6-2 victory over the Blue Jays on Monday, Rickey Henderson did not mind assuming some of the credit, too.
"I left the ball park Sunday knowing we were going to win," said Henderson, who had two hits and scored two runs off David Cone.
"Me and Stew have been around long enough together that we know what we want to do in the big occasions and the big games. We always want to take the challenge."


Glavine Is Given A Night To Forget
Tom Glavine insisted again and again before Game 6 of the National League Championship Series that he was 100 percent physically.
His fractured rib was healed, the Atlanta left-hander said, and the pitching mechanics that had come apart so wildly had been repaired.
It all, then, made the scene in the second inning tonight even dramatic and disquieting.
For Glavine, ostensibly fit, supposedly sound, walked off the mound as close to a broken man as a baseball game can produce.


Officials Deny Racial Bias in Selecting Jury for '86 Trial
A fusillade of bullets that killed one police officer and gravely wounded another 11 years ago reverberated in a Queens courtroom yesterday as prosecutors defended having kept a dozen black men and women off the jury that convicted two black militants in the shootings.
Although 3 blacks were on the 12-member jury that convicted Anthony N. LaBorde and James D. York in 1986 of murder, lawyers for the two men have long argued that more black jurors might have been seated -- and the outcome might have been different -- if prosecutors had not rejected some potential jurors for what the defense lawyers contend were "racially discriminatory" reasons.
Deny Bias in Selections
The prosecutors have denied that they rejected potential jurors for racial reasons -- a practice that the United States Supreme Court, in unrelated cases, has ruled unconstitutional.
Last May, as part of the protracted appeals in the case, a state appeals court ordered that a hearing be held in State Supreme Court in Queens at which the prosecutors could explain why they exercised their peremptory challenges -- those for which no reasons ordinarily need be given -- to exclude 12 of 15 black potential jurors from the trial.


IP Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dissent Shadows Pope on His Visit
From the very start of Pope John Paul II's visit to this country, which was planned to coincide with the 500th anniversary of Columbus's landing in the New World, the accent has been on evangelization.
Since the Pope began his six-day visit on Friday, elaborate care has been taken to keep him from wading into the political quagmire surrounding the celebration of Columbus's landing and the painful legacy of European colonialism.
But on almost every step of the visit, politics, both local and hemispheric, have followed the Pope.


Pepsico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Notes; A Lost Work by Joyce Fuels Scholarly Debate
The works of James Joyce have long been fertile ground for competing scholarly theories about the writer's intent, style and meaning.
And so it seems fitting that an Irish scholar's recent pronouncement that he had discovered "the most significant textual find of this century" -- what he says is a previously unknown work by Joyce, written between "Ulysses" and "Finnegans Wake" -- is being called a "hoax" and "attention-getting behavior" by other Joyce scholars.
Danis Rose, an independent Joyce scholar in Dublin who has been working on a critical edition of "Finnegans Wake" for 16 years, asserts that in 1923, Joyce began and abandoned a collection of short stories called "Finn's Hotel."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Signed Chris Morris, forward, to a three-year contract.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Temple-Inland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nycor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Breeders' Cup Tests Readiness Of a Horse
"Horses are like strawberries," Charlie Whittingham says.
"They don't stay fresh very long."
Whittingham knows.
He is the dean of trainers in this country, seven times the leading money winner, twice the winner of the Eclipse Award.
He has won the Santa Anita Handicap nine times.
He once saddled three horses for three owners in the Hollywood Gold Cup and they ran 1-2-3.
He will turn 80 before the next Kentucky Derby, which he has won twice.


Media Logic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Romanian Chief Vows to Slow Economic Change
Ion Iliescu, the former high-ranking Communist who was re-elected President on Sunday, pledged today to keep the country's economic reform on course but at a reduced pace in order to cushion Romanians from the kind of shocks they have felt in the last two years.
"Our concern is to improve efficiency," Mr.
Iliescu said at a news conference.
"We would have liked to have all this transitional stage over in two or three years, but it is not possible to hurry in this way because it could create economic blockages."


Rolling Home: Weary Allure of the Last-Chance Train
It was late, just out of Grand Central, the last train to New Haven.
The conductor did not seem to notice the 40-ounce beer bottle rolling at the feet of three teen-agers.
He politely coaxed the fare from a young Wall Streeter, who was beyond drunk and perhaps for the first time in his life unable to manipulate money.
"Where is your wallet?" the conductor said loudly, the way people speak to children and foreigners.
"Sir, your wallet!"


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


A Very Familiar Sound
San Franciso may not be done with the Giants quite yet.
A group of local investors showed up on the doorstep of the National League's president, BILL WHITE, on Monday with a $95 million bid to buy the Giants and keep them in San Francisco.
PETER A. MAGOWAN, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Safeway, heads the investors, who were assembled by WALTER H. SHORENSTEIN, chairman of the Shorenstein Company.
"The $95 million is our offer," Magowan said.


Candidates on Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle
TODAY: 7:09 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).
7:30 A.M., NBC, "Today Show" (Channel 4 in New York).
8:15 A.M., CBS, "CBS This Morning" (Channel 2 in New York).  James B. Stockdale
TODAY: 7:35 A.M., CBS, "CBS This Morning" (Channel 2 in New York).
8:09 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).
8:30 A.M., NBC, "Today Show" (Channel 4 in New York).
9 A.M., CNN.  Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 7:09 A.M., NBC, "Today Show" (Channel 4 in New York).
7:37 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America" (Channel 7 in New York).
8:10 A.M., CBS, "CBS This Morning" (Channel 2 in New York).


Excerpts From the Debate Among Quayle, Gore and Stockdale
Following are excerpts from the Vice-Presidential debate in Atlanta last night between Vice President Dan Quayle, Senator Al Gore and James B. Stockdale, as transcribed by The New York Times:


Monk Overcomes Jitters to Be a Leader
Art Monk said he was nervous.
Art Monk did not look nervous.
Art Monk never looks nervous.
But again, he said he was.
Monk said he had the jitters before the Washington Redskins' Monday night affair with the Denver Broncos because the pressure -- the anticipation of becoming the National Football League's career receptions leader -- had built to such a crescendo that even he, Mr.
Unflappable, was starting to squirm.


Watkins-Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Barr Rejects Request for Theft Inquiry
Attorney General William P. Barr today turned down a Congressional request to name an independent prosecutor to investigate charges that high-level Justice Department officials in the Reagan Administration stole a computer company's software program to benefit their friends.
It was the second time in recent months that the Attorney General has refused Congressional requests to name an independent counsel, saying the Justice Department could investigate accusations of criminal conduct even though they involved officials in the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
Last August he refused to name a special prosecutor to investigate charges that the Bush Administration illegally helped Iraq before the Persian Gulf war and then tried to cover it up.


Making Bedside Clipboards Obsolete
Stethoscope.
Penlight.
Palmtop computer.
Thus armed, Dr.
Scott M. Fishman is ready for his rounds at Greenwich Hospital.
Dispensing with clipboards and many of the traditional paper files for patients, Dr.
Fishman and the 20 other doctors, residents and interns at the Connecticut hospital each tote a Hewlett-Packard 95LX palmtop computer -- an 11-ounce machine small enough to fit in a lab coat pocket.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Perot Campaign Planning Flurry Of Commercials
Fresh from his strong showing in Sunday night's debate, Ross Perot is preparing a television advertising blitz that will include at least two long programs promoting his candidacy and his ideas, plus a flurry of commercials to be shown on all three major networks.
The Dallas billionaire's office said today that Mr.
Perot had purchased one and a half hours of network television time this Friday and Saturday night to lay out his ideas for eliminating the Federal budget deficit and stimulating the economy.
Mr.
Perot's aides said he had bought a 30-minute time slot on NBC for Friday at 10:30 P.M., Eastern time, and a one-hour spot on Saturday night on ABC, starting at 8 P.M.


CHRONICLE
It is time, JOAN BAEZ said yesterday, to put aside the political activism for which she has long been a national symbol and concentrate without distraction on her music.
"If there was a march on the borders of Czechoslovakia, I would drop everything and go," Ms.
Baez said from her home in Woodside, Calif., in describing her life for the last three decades.
"I never made my career, my records, concerts or my voice my first priority."


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Finesse Trumps Fists In Debut by Kovalev
No one has to force Rangers Coach Roger Neilson to play a physical hockey game.
Paul Holmgren, coach of the Hartford Whalers, amassed 1,600 penalty minutes during his 500-game Philadelphia Flyers career, so there's no need to ask how he feels about a little roughhousing on the ice.
Heck, the metal gate in the Spectrum tunnel in Philadelphia was built to curb Holmgren's penchant for engaging in off-ice fights.
So what happened Monday night at Madison Square Garden -- the Rangers' home opener included a total of 46 penalties for 207 minutes -- shouldn't have been all that unexpected.
Yes, by adding smooth-skating Aleksei Kovalev to the lineup for the first time this season, Neilson was preparing to play some finesse hockey against the Whalers.
Holmgren, though, had other ideas.


Greenspan Sees Risks Globally
In his first major speech since the currency crisis in Europe last month, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, has warned that global financial transactions may be too fast and too complex for senior bank managers to understand, and he called on governments to step up their supervision of international banks.
In the text of a speech to be delivered Wednesday in Tokyo, Mr.
Greenspan said that the transition from manual, paper-based banking systems to split-second, electronic systems "may not have been managed by those sufficiently sensitive to credit and risk exposures."


Pepsico Net Jumps 49.1% In 3d Period
Shrugging off the weak economy, Pepsico Inc. posted strong third-quarter profit gains in its soft-drink, potato chip and fast-food businesses.
The company said yesterday that its net income soared 49.1 percent, to $425.7 million, compared with $285.4 million in the corresponding period last year, and that earnings per share jumped to 53 cents from 36 cents.


Mapping Out Ethnic Foods, Freeway By Freeway
LIKE most Angelenos, Linda Burum was used to getting on the freeway and driving past every neighborhood except her own.
But seven years ago, she gave up the fast track for smaller streets with meandering turns and traffic lights, streets that frequently lack signs.
Her detours resulted in "A Guide to Ethnic Food in Los Angeles," which will be published this week by HarperPerennial.
Ms.
Burum, who appears to be as obsessed with arcane foods as she is easily confused by unfamiliar streets, was determined to map her hometown's ethnic frontiers and render its exotic tastes accessible.
But would Lewis and Clark have risked so much for a meal?


New Executive For Tropicana
Signaling plans for a major expansion of the Tropicana brand name onto other types of beverages, The Seagram Company Ltd., yesterday appointed Stephen B. Hughes, as executive vice president for the company's Tropicana Products Inc. subsidiary.
Mr.
Hughes played a key role in building Conagra Inc.'s Healthy Choice line into a supermarket powerhouse with sales approaching $1 billion this year.
As executive vice president for Healthy Choice, Mr.
Hughes is credited with shepherding the brand name onto 200 different products in 10 different product categories ranging from frozen dinners to spaghetti sauce to desserts.


Review/Opera; Philip Glass Offers More Than Memorial Just to Columbus
When the Metropolitan Opera takes the step of commissioning an opera to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the New World, it is not offering an invitation to modesty and caution.
So it should be no surprise that Philip Glass's opera "The Voyage," which received its world premiere at the Met on Monday night, can be accused of neither.
It lasts nearly three and a half hours, cost more than $2 million and has something for everybody: a mixture of comforting cliche and aggressive pretense, some bombastic insistence and some tender, lyrical music that is among Mr.
Glass's best.
The production also has enough in it to keep the eyes occupied when the mind is not.
It has a 21st-century Coke machine and a crash landing by an alien space ship 15,000 years ago.
It includes men in Victorian top hats asphyxiating in their gas masks and a mass assassination at the Statue of Liberty as a rocket blasts out of its gigantic crown.
It has a scientist, resembling Stephen Hawking, floating in a wheelchair and asking about black holes.
It is influenced by Doris Lessing's novels and by science fiction tales like "2001." It includes a New Ageish invocation of magic crystals and avant-gardish satires of Americana.
And sandwiched among all of these fantastical conceits, there is Christopher Columbus sailing to the New World.


Review/Film; Mismatched Brothers On a Godardian Road
At the center of Hal Hartley's new comedy, "Simple Men," are the two McCabe brothers, Bill (Robert Burke), in his mid-20's, and Dennis (William Sage), a few years younger.
Bill, as square-jawed as the face atop a suit in a Calvin Klein ad, is first met as he is being dumped by his girlfriend just after they have successfully completed a robbery.
Dennis, equally square of jaw, is a bookish type, home from college.
Meeting by accident, the brothers decide to search for their long-lost father, who they have reason to suspect is somewhere within the 516 area code on Long Island.
Their father, known as "the radical shortstop," is a former big-league baseball player who became notorious in the 1960's for bombing the Pentagon.
Bill hates his father.
Dennis wants to get to know him.


Honors
*
David Tridle, president of the Frankel Services division of Frankel &amp; Company, Chicago, was elected president of the Council of Sales Promotion Agencies, Stamford, Conn.


India Rights Group's Cry: Police Rape and Torture
Ravi Nair knew he was getting under the Government's skin when he returned home one night last March and found his tiny apartment ransacked.
"They didn't take anything," he said.
"Nothing, not my Walkman, not my watch. A thief would have picked all that up. But they went through every piece of paper. I filed an official complaint, but nothing happened."


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Stops Talking But Makes His Points
Gov.
Bill Clinton has escaped here both to study up for the Presidential debate on Thursday and to rest his severely strained vocal cords.
Normally voluble and chatty as he shakes hands in crowds, Mr.
Clinton barely spoke in public today, pointing to his throat and mouthing words when he ventured out after a morning jog.
But his aides said the Governor, who was on full "voice rest" on Tuesday, was speaking in practice sessions for the second debate, to be held in Richmond.


CHRONICLE
Adieu, Marc: MARC BOHAN, designer for Christian Dior for almost 30 years and one of fashion's great stars, is moving on.
"I have finished with collections, shows and all that," Mr.
Bohan, 67 years old, said yesterday from London.
"I have done it enough."
Mr.
Bohan designed the Christian Dior couture and ready-to-wear collections in Paris for almost 30 years.
Widely viewed as the savior of the House of Dior after the departure of Yves Saint Laurent, he was let go in 1989.
He subsequently joined Norman Hartnell, the British fashion house in London from which he is severing his ties.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kraft's Rich Unit Will Move Account
The Louis Rich Company in Madison, Wis., part of Kraft General Foods, said yesterday that it would move its estimated $14 million account from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York, where it had been the last seven years, to another of Kraft General Foods' six agencies.
The review is not unexpected because Advertising Age and Adweek recently reported that D'Arcy was under pressure to improve its work on its 10 Kraft General Foods accounts, which include brands like Cool Whip, Crystal Light, Entenmann's, Good Seasons and Lender's.
The remaining accounts have billings totaling an estimated $60 million to $70 million.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vance Fears a Winter Catastrophe Unless Balkan Aid Is Accelerated
A catastrophe of "untold dimensions" faces the former Yugoslav republics this winter unless the flow of relief supplies is speeded up and the United Nations quickly deploys new peacekeeping troops to supervise their distribution, the chief United Nations mediator told the Security Council today.
The official, former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, said organizations and governments had failed to provide enough food, medicine and other supplies to help needy people there, and he criticized the deployment of new troops to protect relief convoys in Bosnia and Herzegovina as being "extraordinarily slow."


Review/Dance; Small Scale, Big Ideas From Bill T. Jones
The Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company is celebrating its 10th anniversary this season.
Appropriately, therefore, the troupe opened a two-week engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night with a program that emphasized the ways people may endure and triumph in art and life.
Although Mr.
Jones has staged several large-scale theater pieces in recent years, all but one of his four works on Tuesday had no more than five dancers.
Yet each little work was choreographically rich.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oakley Gets Physical to Make His Point
Physical basketball is Charles Oakley's game, even during training camp.
So when Anthony Mason, all 250 pounds of him, came charging down the lane during an intrasquad scrimmage Tuesday, Oakley refused to step aside.
The two players collided violently, hitting the floor hard.
But Mason missed his dunk attempt.
And Oakley had made his point.
"That's what it's all about," said Coach Pat Riley, becoming animated when he recalled the play.
"I told the team that. The man took a charge on Anthony Mason. That's what it's all about.


Mississippi Hearing in Evers Slaying Pits Trial Rights Against Civil Rights
Three years ago, in an attempt to heal old wounds, officials reopened one of the most searing cases from the Civil Rights era: the 1963 assassination of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers.
On Thursday, the Mississippi Supreme Court hears arguments that could rip those wounds open again.


Stand Pat Is Now Just Jumping for Joy
The nickname seemed emblematic of the entire Blue Jays organization.
Pat Gillick, the general manager who was charged with making a difference for the Toronto Blue Jays, for years was known as Stand Pat, his conservative approach a hallmark for a staid organization that tested, but never seemed to better its American League competition.


Banco Latinoamericano reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LARGE, all-purpose bookcases can ease clutter in a house or apartment.
Described here is a bookcase measuring 4 feet wide and 8 feet high that beginners can build with only hand tools and an electric drill.
A standard-size sheet of plywood serves as the back of the bookcase; the other parts are standard-size solid lumber.
The shelves are adjustable, supported in the center by a partition so they will not sag.
Fastened across the top is a cleat, or horizontal board, that enables you to anchor the bookcase to a wall.


SunTrust Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Musicland Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


No Headline
This is going to help Canada in baseball, big-time, especially on TV.
American teams have gotten all of the attention before.
This shows them that Canada has the best! -- JIMMY IANNACI of Mississauga, Ontario, on the Blue Jays' pennant.  [ B18:3. ]


In Algeria Now, No Appeal in Terrorist Cases
In another move by Algeria's military-backed Government to eliminate legal recourse for its opponents, the country's head of state has signed a measure into law allowing sentences ranging from five years in prison to death without right of appeal for people accused of terrorism.
The new law appears to have been drafted for use in a campaign of "iron cleansing" that Government officials have vowed to put into force in the next few weeks with the aid of special security forces.
The campaign may go as far as imposing curfews in the capital and in the rebellious province of Blida as well as the provinces of Tipasa, Boumerdas and Bouira.


Gerber Shares Drop 5% On Weakened Outlook
Shares of the Gerber Products Company fell more than 5 percent yesterday, after the company warned that profits would fall below Wall Street expectations because of slowing baby food sales and a costly marketing war.
Disappointing sales at the Buster Brown clothing unit will also hurt profits for the second quarter ended Sept. 30 and the year ending March 31, the company said.


Dietrich Had a Fit (in Fact 3 Fits) in Screen Test
In her solo stage act, Marlene Dietrich liked to introduce a song that, as she put it, "brought me into pictures." Then, for English-speaking audiences, she would sing "You're the Cream in My Coffee." In Germany, it was "Wer Wird Denn Weinen" ("Why Cry?").
It turns out that Dietrich, who was notorious for rewriting her early biography, was not being misleading.
In her screen test for "The Blue Angel," recently discovered in a film archive in Vienna, she sings both songs for the film's director, Josef von Sternberg, and throws in three temper tantrums just for show.
The Film Society of Lincoln Center will give the four-minute screen test its first public screening tonight at the Walter Reade Theater, along with two early silent films starring Dietrich, "Manon Lescaut" and "I Kiss Your Hand, Madame." The films will be shown at 6:30 and 9.
Tickets are $7 for the public and $5 for film society members.


Stryker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Turnaround, CBS Posts $42.7 Million Quarterly Profit
CBS Inc. reported a third-quarter profit yesterday, rebounding from a loss in the 1991 quarter resulting from its professional sports contracts.
The company said it posted third-quarter net income of $42.7 million, or $2.76 a share, compared with a loss of $169.1 million for a year earlier.
The loss in the previous year included a $195.5 million after-tax provision related to write-downs for losses on CBS's broadcasts of professional baseball and football games.
Increased Revenue
CBS said its revenue for the period rose to $672.8 million, a 7.5 percent increase from $625.6 million in the comparable period last year.


Houghton Mifflin Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ames Sues Its Advisers on Zayre Bid
Ames Department Stores Inc., which filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in April 1990, said yesterday that it had sued its investment bankers for breach of fiduciary duty and professional malpractice in connection with the retailer's 1988 purchase of the Zayre Corporation.
Ames's acquisition of Zayre, a rival discount chain, for a total of $1.3 billion in cash and various forms of debt, is widely seen as the principal cause of its descent into bankruptcy.


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Security reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Arrested in Bronx In Painting of Swastikas
A 20-year-old Bronx man was arrested yesterday and charged with painting swastikas last week on a Riverdale clothing store and in a hut that had been constructed nearby to commemorate a Jewish festival, the police said.
The arrest came as the authorities recorded the 16th anti-Semitic incident in New York City since the Jewish New Year began on Sept. 28, Mayor David N. Dinkins said.
The most recent incident, which occurred about 10 A.M. yesterday, involved four teen-agers who were seen painting swastikas on bulletin boards at a Brooklyn synagogue, the police said.


Colonial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It Was Vintage Drabek But It Withered to Soon
Doug Drabek, who had hung on and hung on to the baseball and with it pulled the Pirates to the verge of the breakthrough moment they had sought for three seasons, at last had to let go.
The bases were loaded in the ninth, Manager Jim Leyland was with him on the mound, and the exchange of mixed emotions and the transfer of the baseball took place.
Drabek left without a fight, having expended himself completely and having given the Pirates 129 pitches of everything he had.


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Official With N.Y.U. Is Arrested
A retired financial-aid administrator was arrested yesterday on charges of stealing $4.1 million from New York University by falsifying more than a thousand tuition- refund checks between 1982 and her retirement in May, Federal law-enforcement officials said.
The retired aid official, Dora Malfrici, 53 years old, was taken into custody in Fort Myers, Fla., where she moved last summer after 35 years on the N.Y.U. staff.


CBS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John T. McNutt; Journalist, 78
John T. McNutt, who retired in 1979 as manager and associate editor of The New York Times News Service, died at his home in Monroe, Wash., on Oct. 2.
He was 78 years old.
The cause of death was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


East Timor Alumni
To the Editor:
We would add a clarification to your much-appreciated "Cemetery Called East Timor" (editorial, Sept. 25): True, two Indonesian generals have been removed from their posts as a result of the killings last Nov. 12 in Dili, East Timor, but one should not infer that they have been punished.


Supreme Court Debates Senate Trial Procedure
In a lively hour that resembled a high-level seminar in civics and political theory, the Supreme Court heard arguments today on whether the Senate's use of a special committee to handle impeachment cases is an unconstitutional shortcut of its duty to "try all impeachments."
The case is an appeal by a former Federal district judge, Walter L. Nixon Jr., one of three judges in the last few years to be impeached by the House and then convicted and removed from office by the Senate under a procedure intended to avoid tying up the entire Senate in a long trial.


New Cup Format  Organizers of the 1995 America's Cup have agreed to scrap the made-for-TV course used in the 1992 regatta and expand the finals to a five-of-nine-race series.   The defending San Diego Yacht Club and the challenger of record, Yacht Club de France-Sete, agreed on several important items in a weekend meeting at St. Tropez, France.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


CCA Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Four Men Are Fatally Wounded In Two Shootings in New Haven
In one of the bloodiest days in this city's recent history, four men were shot to death early this morning in two separate incidents.
In the first shooting, gunfire was reported around 2:15 A.M. at the intersection of Chapel and Beers Streets.
The police found Edward Harp, 24 years old, of New Haven, slumped in his car with a gunshot wound to the head.
He died at 8:50 A.M. at the Hospital of St.
Raphael.


Service for Max Lerner
A memorial service for Max Lerner, the educator and journalist, will be held on Tuesday at 4 P.M. in the auditorium at the New School for Social Research at 66 West 12th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Lerner died on June 5 at age 89.


Learning Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alco International Files Suit
Alco International Group, a San Diego cargo-hauling and medical-products company, filed an amended lawsuit on Oct. 6 against short-sellers and a Bloomberg Business News reporter who had written an article about the company.
The new suit names the reporter, David Kleinbard; Chelsea Street Securities, and 250 John Does as additional defendants.


Clinton's Embassy Files Searched By High-Level State Dept. Order
The State Department confirmed today that senior officials personally took charge of a routine request for Gov.
Bill Clinton's consular records and ordered a sweeping search for information from the 1960's about his travels in Europe.
The department said the search, conducted here and in London, was fruitless.
It also said the search was a routine response to requests from news organizations.
But an official of the American Embassy in London said officials there dealt with the search urgently because of its political overtones.
Staff Meetings Planned
The staffs of foreign affairs subcommittees in the House and Senate planned to meet Thursday with State Department officials as part of an effort to determine whether the department violated its own regulations in taking unusually high-level and speedy action on a few of more than 4,000 information requests it received this year.


U.S.-RUSSIA ACCORD ON ARMS HITS SNAG
Hopes for an early signing of a far-reaching nuclear arms reduction agreement between the United States and Russia have faded because of technical reservations being raised by Moscow, Bush Administration officials said today.
On June 16 in Washington, President Bush and the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, initialled an arms control agreement that would, among other things, eliminate all of Russia's most powerful SS-18 multiple warhead missiles.
A week later, then Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d testified to Congress that the accord would likely be translated into a treaty in three to five weeks, but at the latest by Sept. 1.
Now, most officials say, it won't be finished until sometime after the election at the earliest.


Thinking Machines
The Thinking Machines Corporation, a maker of so-called massively parallel supercomputers, today introduced a new model of its Connection Machine, its first computer priced at less than $1 million.
The new CM-5 Scale 3 system, which can use up to 32 high-speed microprocessors running simultaneously, has a starting price of $750,000.
The system gives Thinking Machines a product for the increasingly competitive low end of the supercomputer market, a niche in which Masspar Inc. is currently a leader.


Valero Natural Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Jude Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's Harvesttime in the Garden. Help!
IT'S been a good year in the garden.
Though how I'm supposed to harvest this grain amaranth I don't know.
"What are you doing now?" my friend Betty asked, as she dropped by last week to find me stomping on the deep burgundy plumes with my tennis shoes.


AIR NIPPON WILL BUY UP TO 15 BOEING JETLINERS
Air Nippon of Japan said yesterday that it had agreed to buy as many as 15 Boeing 737-500 jetliners with a total value of $667 million.
The first of the new planes will be delivered by 1995, according to Seiji Hirota of Air Nippon, a subsidiary of All Nippon Airways.
Air Nippon, a local carrier, will place firm orders for seven jetliners and secure options for eight more planes, Mr.
Hirota said.


Where Grandma Once Lived
THE title of the show, "Heritage on the Heights: The Architectural Legacy of Manhattanville, Morningside, Hamilton and Washington Heights" is a mouthful.
Four hundred vintage and contemporary photographs have been hung in the majestic lobby of the Surrogate's Court building, at 31 Chambers Street.


Gun Control Is Crucial Issue In Challenge to Congressman
Two years ago, the political hold that William J. Hughes exercised in the Second Congressional District in South Jersey was so formidable that the Republicans did not even bother to field a candidate against him.
This year, things are different.
Buoyed by anti-incumbent feeling across the nation and opposition to Gov.
Jim Florio that swept Republicans into control of both houses of the Legislature last year for the first time in two decades, Assemblyman Frank LoBiondo is mounting an aggressive and energetic campaign that has Mr.
Hughes in his toughest fight in years.


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Behind You! A Dinosaur!
WHEN Jim Elkind, the owner of Lost City Arts, a SoHo emporium that he said deals with "the unique and bizarre," was unloading large topiary forms from his car a couple of weeks ago, he noticed that children passing by the store started screaming and jumping up and down and adults took out their cameras.
They must have recognized the animal forms from the set of the movie "Edward Scissorhands," Mr.
Elkind surmised.
No kidding, they are.


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essay; Humans Confront Android
"Like a deer caught in the headlights": that savage simile, used by late-night comics to ridicule Dan Quayle for the past four years, was slyly set forth at the outset of the Vice-Presidential debate in the deep, resonant, terribly earnest voice of Al Gore.
Senator Gore is not, as has been charged, a robot.
That is a libel.
Call-me-Al is a sentient being, capable of genuine feelings of political ambition, whose perfect looks, organized presentation and eerily unflappable demeanor combine to suggest that we are in the presence of an android.


Long Road to a Treatment
It took 13 years, beginning in 1908, for two French researchers, Albert Calmette and Camille Guerin, to develop the anti-tuberculosis vaccine now known as bacillus Calmette-Guerin, or BCG.
The tubercle bacillus that Dr.
Robert Koch discovered in Germany in 1882 grows very slowly in a laboratory, taking three weeks per generation.
At the Pasteur Institute in Lille, France, Calmette and Guerin sought to develop a weakened strain of the bacillus that would confer immunity but not the disease.
Working with a strain of bovine tuberculosis, they grew a new generation every three weeks, until, on the 39th, they noted a strain that was no longer virulent in laboratory animals.
It took years to prove that the weakened strain did not revert to a virulent form.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Big Re-election Fight, Glenn Tests Hero Image
For 16 years, Senator John Glenn, space man and movie hero, was the untouchable icon of Ohio politics.
But then came the Keating Five scandal, a souring public mood against Congress and now a blistering political advertising campaign characterizing him as another Senate hack.
As a result, Mr.
Glenn is facing the first serious re-election challenge of his career.
His Republican opponent, Lieut.
Gov.
Michael DeWine, is well financed, articulate and aggressive.


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Call It Good or Bad, but Not Ugly
CLINT EASTWOOD, actor, director and onscreen embodiment of the rugged, enigmatic cowboy-hero, has yet another role: innkeeper and purveyor of furniture.
In 1986, he bought Mission Ranch, a farm of more than 40 acres in Carmel, Calif.
It is adjacent to the San Carlos Borromeo Mission, which was founded in 1770 by Junipero Serra, the Franciscan missionary.
The ranch once provided food for the mission.
Mr.
Eastwood donated 11 acres to Carmel, to be used as a nature preserve.


Pioneer Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intercontinental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Reprieve For Spassky: Game Drawn
Bobby Fischer bungled his game with Boris Spassky yesterday, and saw an ending that was all but won degenerate into a draw.
The score in the exhibition match with Spassky remains a hefty 7-3 in Fischer's favor, but without the flaws in his endgame technique, it could have been 8-3.
Now he still needs three more victories to gain the $3.35 million winner's share of the $5 million prize.
Draws don't count, except to prolong the match.


Southwestern Public Service reports earnings for Year Aug 31


Neworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; The Miracle Of a Blue Jay Seat Belt
ON Tuesday afternoon, Devon White, the Toronto Blue Jays center fielder, was in the back seat and his wife, Colleen, was in the passenger seat of a $130,000 white Mercedes-Benz 500SEL that a saleswoman was test-driving for them.
Somehow the car spun out of control. lt skidded more than 400 feet along Bayview Avenue, the rear end crumpling against a concrete pole.
"It's a real miracle no one was hurt," said Police Constable Corie Dilts.


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Onbancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Community Health Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Winfield Saves His Last Laugh for Best
Dave Winfield's smile said it all. The second time around is definitely better.
For only the second time in his 20-year career and for the first time since 1981, Winfield is on his way to the World Series.


U.S. Oil Production Down 5% in September
Domestic oil production was 5 percent lower in September than in the corresponding month a year earlier, at just under seven million barrels a day, the American Petroleum Institute said yesterday.
This continued a string of reports that show increasing United States reliance on oil produced overseas.
The petroleum institute, the industry's main trade association, attributed part of the drop to Hurricane Andrew, which disrupted operations in the Gulf of Mexico and Louisiana, but noted that production for the first nine months was down 3.6 percent from the previous year.


Trion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hertz Ends 'Drop Charges' on One-Way Rentals
The Hertz Corporation said yesterday that it would sharply cut the cost of one-way car rentals for nonbusiness travelers, in an attempt to stimulate new trips and attract customers from other rent-a-car companies, the airlines, bus companies and Amtrak.
Hertz said that it would immediately eliminate its "drop charges" on intermediate and large cars nationwide in the 800 Hertz locations it owns and that it planned to do the same next month at 700 franchise locations.


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sales of U.S.-Built Vehicles Rise by 6.1%
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 6.1 percent in early October, although automotive demand remained weighted down by uncertainty over the economy and the Presidential election.
In results reported today, car sales dropped 5.7 percent, to 151,224, but sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and pickups, rose 29.7 percent, to 103,271, from a year ago.
Over all, vehicle sales totaled 254,495, compared with 239,894 last year.


Health Management Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


James Marshall, 50, an Illustrator And an Author for Children, Dies
James Marshall, an illustrator and author of popular children's books, died on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Mansfield Hollow, Conn.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


Rise and Fall: Saga of a Tokyo Kingmaker
1958 Shin Kanemaru is first elected to Parliament from Yamanashi prefecture.
Over the next 25 years he holds a series of key Cabinet posts.
1985 Backing his longtime ally, Noboru Takeshita, he creates a new political faction within the governing Liberal Democratic Party.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Arto Lindsay
CBGB  315 Bowery (at Bleecker Street)  Through today
Arto Lindsay has carried on one of the most idiosyncratic careers in New York rock.
Scrabbling away on an untuned guitar, he was with the groundbreaking no-wave, noise-rock band DNA in the 1970's, and he often performs with downtown improvisers.
He has also produced albums for the Brazilian superstar Caetano Veloso and other Brazilian singers.
And during the 1980's he was the co-leader of Ambitious Lovers, a band that made albums named after mortal sins and that juxtaposed funk, ballads (sung in English or Portuguese), Brazilian rhythms and noise.
On Tuesday night, Mr.
Lindsay introduced a new band, Arto, which toughens the kinds of music the Ambitious Lovers played.
Riffs on bass (Melvin Gibbs) and guitar (Marc Ribot) are more prominent; soothing keyboards have been exchanged for Bernie Worrell's wayward lines on Hammond organ.
With Dougie Bowne socking the drums, the band sets up murky but propulsive funk vamps, textured with Cyro Baptista's percussion, and Mr.
Lindsay chants or sputters lyrics like "at my least prepared/at my most exhausted/you want it all."


Judge Bars Military From Recruiting on Law School Campus
A state judge today barred military recruiters from conducting interviews on the campus of the University of Connecticut Law School because the armed forces discriminate against homosexuals.
The judge said Connecticut's one-year-old gay rights law specifically prohibits state agencies or institutions from helping any employer that discriminates against gay people and that therefore even such courtesies as giving a recruiter a cup of coffee and a chair to sit in is illegal.


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 7
The weekend begins early with an apparent mismatch tonight between the 4-1 Vikings and the 1-4 Lions, but the records are misleading.
The Vikings' only loss came at the hands of the Lions in Week 2.
The weekend's real mismatch comes on Sunday when the league's only team without a victory, the Patriots (0-5), goes to Miami to take on the league's only team without a loss, the Dolphins (5-0), in a hurricane-postponed game the Dolphins should have won six weeks ago.
As a result of Hurricane Andrew, the New England-Miami game, which was originally scheduled for Week 1, was rescheduled for what was to have been an open date for both teams.
As a further result, the Bills and the Jets are the only teams with byes this weekend.


Hallwood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


U.S. Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Micro Bio-Medics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abrams Pays Tax of $35,036 On Earnings of $208,118 in '91
Robert Abrams, the Democratic candidate for Senator, and his wife, Diane, earned more than $200,000 last year from his salary as Attorney General, his wife's family holdings and six oil and gas partnerships.
The income has allowed Mr.
Abrams, son of a candy-store owner in the Bronx, to build a style of life that includes a cooperative apartment off Fifth Avenue and a 51-acre country home in Dutchess County.


Standing Toe to Toe and Slugging It Out on the Air
Lots of people who tuned in to watch Tuesday night's debate probably went to bed disappointed -- those hoping to hear a clear discussion of the candidates' differences on issues, for example, or those simply looking forward to some new and uproarious gaffe by the Vice President.
But for those who like to watch politics in its purest form -- as a kind of psychological gang warfare -- the Vice Presidential debate was one of the best shows the campaign has offered so far.
From the very beginning, when Senator Al Gore reminded Vice President Dan Quayle of his performance four years ago against Senator Lloyd Bentsen, through the bitter end, when Mr.
Quayle asked, "Do you, do you trust Bill Clinton to be your President?" Tuesday night's encounter represented a public exchange of nightmares between the Clinton and the Bush campaigns.


Oregon Metallurgical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Paris, escaping is in fashion


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE PLAYOFFS: International Pastime for Braves and Jays; Toronto Shakes the Athletics And Its Reputation for Folding
The October ghosts that spooked the Toronto Blue Jays were vanquished today, the lump that had lodged in their throat three times before vanished and the frustrating post-season tales of the past were replaced by one refreshing story from the present.
The Blue Jays are finally going to the World Series.
In a robust display of power hitting by their lineup and power pitching by Juan Guzman, the Blue Jays became the first Canadian team to advance to the World Series, which opens Saturday night in Atlanta.
The Blue Jays did it by bashing the Oakland Athletics, 9-2, and winning the American League pennant in six games.


Tuesday Debate Tops '88 Ratings
The Vice-Presidential debate on Tuesday night attracted more viewers than the 1988 Vice-Presidential debate, though fewer than the Presidential debate on Sunday night.
The national rating for the debate, issued yesterday by the A. C. Nielsen Company, was 34.9 for the three broadcast networks, CBS, ABC and NBC, all of which carried the event live. (Figures for other channels, including PBS, CNN and C-Span, will not be available until later in the week.)


CHRONICLE
RICHARD D. PARSONS, chairman and chief executive of the Dime Savings Bank of New York, is changing his plans for lunch tomorrow.
That is the day on which 230 people were to board the Queen Elizabeth 2 for a benefit luncheon for the New York Landmarks Conservancy and to see Mr.
Parsons receive the organization's 1992 Chairman's Award.
The honor is for the bank's role in promoting affordable housing in partnership with government and nonprofit housing organizations.


Roger's Rangers Subdue the Devils
In the wake of a 6-1 trouncing by the Rangers of the Devils last night, this is Coach Roger Neilson's dilemma: So much talent, so little time.
Take Darren Turcotte.
He has a goal and two assists so far this season, but gets all his action off power plays and penalty kills with only the odd regular shift.
Aleksei Kovalev?
Neilson didn't squeeze him into the lineup until last Monday, and Kovalev was confined to limited ice time last night.


The Problem With 'Read My Lips'
With President Bush's popularity rating still frozen under 40 percent, dismayed Republicans are already straining, should he fail to win re-election, for explanations.
High on their list is that he broke his famous six-word pledge to the 1988 Republican Convention -- "Read my lips: No new taxes." If only he had held firm during negotiations with Congress in 1990, he'd be riding high today.
It's a furious but fanciful charge, which ignores reality.
The problem with the "read my lips" pledge is not that Mr.
Bush broke it; he had no choice.
The problem is that he made it in the first place.


Kuwait City Journal; With a Bang! Bang! Bang! War Cleanup Goes On
The Persian Gulf war has not ended in the dunes and flatlands that surround Kuwait City.
Explosions still rock the desert, sending up fireballs and clouds of acrid black smoke.
Men still die.
And the detritus of battle still lies strewn about in rusting heaps.


Foreign Affairs; No Longer for Bush
Foreign leaders, seeing American economic troubles and sensing the passage of their comfortable second-fiddle days, are beginning to think of the U.S. and themselves in new and revolutionary ways.
The trends are unmistakable in the comments of leaders and diplomats moving in and out of the U.N. and Washington in recent weeks.
Many, except mainly Arabs, are setting aside their generation-old preference for Republican realism in foreign affairs.
Their top priority now is a U.S.
President who can restore America's economic dynamism -- and thus help jolt their own economies.
And like Americans, they are losing faith that George Bush can do the job.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The S.E.C. plans to require full disclosure of executive compensation under new rules to be approved today.  [ Page A1. ]
Clark Clifford's lawyers will seek dismissal of criminal charges against the 85-year-old Washington lawyer in a New York case involving B.C.C.I., citing his frail heart.  [ D1. ]
Auto makers reported a 6.1 percent sales rise for domestically produced vehicles in early October, paced by light trucks.  [ D6. ]
Retail sales edged three-tenths of 1 percent higher in September, and the Producer Price Index for finished goods also climbed three-tenths of 1 percent.  [ D7. ]
Stock exchange floors are known for pranks, but the Pacific Exchange has decided to stop the horseplay with fines.  [ D1. ]
Domestic oil output fell 5 percent in September from September 1991, to just under seven million barrels a day, the A.P.I. said, showing increasing reliance on imported oil.  [ D12. ] International
Japan's trade surplus surged to a record in September, despite Government pledges to tame the beast.  [ D1. ]
Fed chairman Alan Greenspan offered sobering comments on slow growth after meeting with Japan's economic officials.  [ D2. ] Companies
Hertz plans to cut its charges for one-way car rentals for nonbusiness travelers, to stimulate new trips and lure customers both from other car rental companies and other transport.  [ D1. ]
Earnings of large banking companies are surging, with interest rates low and their problems with delinquent loans having abated.
Gains include, Bank of New York, 66 percent; Wachovia, 21 percent, and First Fidelity, 49 percent.  [ D5. ]
Coke reported hot sales despite cold weather with an 18.5 percent profit rise.  [ D5. ]
CBS posted third-quarter net of $42.7 million in contrast to a $169.1 million loss a year earlier resulting from sports contracts.  [ D23. ]  Gannett had a 34.5 percent rise to $80 million.  [ D23. ]
Ames Department Stores sued its investment banker Wertheim Schroder, alleging breach of fiduciary duty in connection with the bankrupt retailer's 1988 purchase of rival Zayre.  [ D6. ]
Gerber shares slumped $2 to $35, after the baby food maker warned that profits would trail Wall Street expectations.  [ D5. ]
Thinking Machines has thought of a bargain -- a massively parallel supercomputer priced below $1 million.  [ D5. ]
Brian Garraway will head Lloyd's of London's new regulatory board.
He is deputy chairman of B.A.T.
Industires.  [ D6. ] Markets
I.B.M. shares fell 3/4 to 78, dragging down the market, ahead of its earnings report.
The Dow industrials lost 5.94 points.  [ D12. ]
The municipal bond market managed to digest a $1.3 billion California offering won by a group led by Merrill Lynch.
Treasuries rallied.  [ D19. ]  Money market fund yields fell.  [ D11. ]
Natural gas futures prices surged on forecasts of cold Midwestern weather.  [ D20. ]  The dollar settled mostly lower.  [ D20. ] Today's Columns
The next President will face pressure to apply a fiscal lever to the flat economy.
Economists suggest grants to states and localities, investment tax credits, employment subsidies and a first-time home buyer's credit.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Analysts expect significant domestic steel price increases as a result of trade litigation.
Market Place.  [ D12. ]
The leading brewing companies are increasingly focusing their commercials on the taste of their beer, rather than on less tangible imagery.
Advertising.  [ D23. ]


Sentencing Ends a Suffering Family's Long Wait
A year to the week that his two daughters, aged 12 and 17, were raped and left tied up during a push-in robbery inside their upper Manhattan apartment, the man shuffled wearily to the courtroom bench yesterday and spoke haltingly to the sentencing judge.
The judge had already heard the prosecutor, Keith Fitzgerald, chillingly describe a two-month "reign of terror" in which, he said, seven women were raped in five robberies by the man, Jose Luis Javier, and two accomplices.
One victim was raped within earshot of her husband, who heard her screams but stood frozen, with a 9-millimeter gun pointed to his head.


Japan's Top Politician Quits Posts Over Mob Scandal
Japan's most influential political leader, Shin Kanemaru, resigned from Parliament today amid rising public criticism of his central role in a corruption scandal and revelations of links between the ruling party and organized crime.
Mr.
Kanemaru's departure, after a week of unusual street protests and rare criticism in the media over his admission that he received illegal payments from a trucking company with links to the Japanese mob, shook the foundations of the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Some politicians predicted an upheaval in Japan's power structure, and indeed there were signs that the huge faction in the Liberal Democratic Party that Mr.
Kanemaru heads is on the verge of splitting.


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CITICORP INCREASES PREFERRED STOCK OFFERING
Strong investor demand has led Citicorp to sharply increase the size of a convertible preferred stock offering to about $1 billion from the $650 million it had originally planned.
Underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company are expected to offer 62 million shares today at a price of $14.75, with a dividend yield of 8.25 percent, or about $1.22 annually.
Citicorp may convert the convertible securities into common stock at a price of $20.28, or about 37.5 percent higher than yesterday's closing price of $14.75, down 50 cents.


A Clean, Well-Lighted, Altruistic Place
IT'S simply one of the best examples around of the power of interior design to lift one's mood and make one feel really at home.
The place is a 4,500-square-foot loft at 594 Broadway (at Houston Street) housing Friends in Deed, a nonprofit organization that provides emotional and spiritual support for people and their families who are dealing with life-threatening diseases, primarily AIDS.
The soothing beige and white decor is the work of Bob Patino (left), a New York designer on the group's board."The idea," said Cynthia O'Neal, a staff member (far left), "was to have a very clean and serviceable place that would convey warmth and hospitality."


SENATOR DEMANDS BANK-CASE INQUIRY
In an extraordinarily blunt letter to Attorney General William P. Barr, Senator David L. Boren, the Intelligence Committee chairman, asserted today that the Justice Department and the Central Intelligence Agency had misled prosecutors, a Federal judge and the American people in the case of a multibillion-dollar bank fraud involving Iraq.
The Senator's letter, laying out the reasons for his concern, called for Mr.
Barr to immediately reverse his decision rejecting the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the two agencies' handling of the case.


Strife at Justice Dept.
The F.B.I.
Director will be questioned by Federal prosecutors today about whether he tried to evade income taxes and billed the Government for personal long-distance telephone calls.
The prosecutors are relying on the Director's own agents to carry out the investigation of him.
Article, page B13.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Erosion Control
Q.
To combat erosion behind my house, I am looking for fragrant sumac.
Do you know where I can find it? -- Jeanne Swartele-Wood, Mahwah, N.J.
A.
The fragrant sumac (Rhus aromatica) is a delightful garden addition, unlike some of its noxious cousins in the 200-plus-member cashew family (namely poison sumac and poison ivy).


SIEMENS UNIT WINS CONTRACT FOR POWER PLANT
The Siemens Power Corporation said yesterday that it had won an order valued at more than $67 million for a 286-megawatt power plant at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
The contract, awarded by the York Research Corporation, is for a plant that will burn natural gas to power a gas turbine, with the waste heat used to make steam for more power generation and for industrial use.
Commercial operation is expected in late 1994.


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F&amp;M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At Chez Pushcart, the Cuisine Is Sublime
Where do some of Manhattan's finest chefs lunch?
Tony's pushcart.
At first glance, Tony's looks like any other hot-dog stand.
Oniony smoke puffs from its grill, its blue and yellow Sabrett umbrella flaps in the breeze, cans of Yoo-Hoo and 7-Up glisten on its aluminum shelves.


S.E.C. WILL REQUIRE FULLER DISCLOSURE OF EXECUTIVE PAY
Under pressure from lawmakers and shareholders who have criticized large executive salaries, the Securities and Exchange Commission will approve rules Thursday that will require publicly traded companies to disclose in full how much top executives earn and will make it easier for shareholders to challenge incumbent directors.
The regulations fall short of more ambitious corporate-democracy proposals made by stockholders, lawmakers and others over the years.
Chief among these were plans to give stockholders a greater say in setting pay scales.


Schult Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 9
Oct. 2
Oct. 11
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
208.9
210.3
213.1
Distillate stocks
132.4
131.5
137.3
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.2
5.8
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.0
1.7
Crude stocks
324.9
324.8
339.9
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
88.5
90.4
85.6
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  A Victory for Whalers  Geoff Sanderson scored two third-period goals as the Hartford Whalers avoided matching their worst start by beating the Ottawa Senators, 4-1, last night in Hartford, Conn.
Only 7,628 fans, the fourth-lowest Hartford crowd, were on hand as the Whalers won their first game to end a four-game losing streak.
Andrew Cassels and Robert Petrovicky also scored and Randy Cunneyworth had two assists as the Whalers scored more than two goals for the first time this season.
Sylvain Turgeon scored his third goal for Ottawa. (AP) TENNIS  Bloom Defeats Connors  Gilad Bloom, who isn't even the local favorite, beat Jimmy Connors, the drawing card for the $155,000 Riklis Israel Tennis Center Classic, in Tel Aviv, yesterday in a grueling second-round match.
Bloom, who is unseeded and is the second-ranked Israeli in the field behind No. 3 Amos Mansdorf, beat the 40-year-old Connors, 6-4, 4-6, 7-5, in a match that lasted 3 hours 20 minutes.
Connors, seeded seventh, was denied a repeat of a point awarded to Bloom when the ball exploded.
Connors protested the denial by tossing the deflated ball at the referee. (AP)


Transit Officer Kills Homeless Man in a Subway Station
A homeless man who was said to have menaced passengers in a subway station in Brooklyn for a week was shot and killed by a transit police officer yesterday in a fight at the foot of a subway escalator, the transit police said.
Investigators did not say what had caused the deadly struggle in the Borough Hall station at 7:11 A.M., the beginning of the morning rush.
A subway rider on his way to work told the police that he had seen the homeless man kicking the officer in the head moments before the shooting, a spokesman for the transit police, Albert W. O'Leary, said.
The police did not release the name of the witness.


Barr Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Krystal Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Florida; In Formerly Safe Florida, It's Nip and Tuck for Bush
It has come to this for George Bush with less than three weeks left until Election Day: He could quite conceivably lose Florida, the nation's fourth largest state, which he carried by almost a million votes four years ago and which has been the safest of all the megastates for the Republicans in recent Presidential elections.
The President trails Bill Clinton by a substantial margin in places where they were supposed to be slugging it out at this stage, like Pennsylvania and Illinois and New Jersey.
But the race for this state's 25 electoral votes remains very close, if private polls for the two major parties are to be believed, so Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Clinton keep returning to Florida.
In mid-October 1988, Michael S. Dukakis pulled his campaign staff from the state, conceding it to Mr.
Bush, who did not visit these parts at all after Labor Day.


Jury Chosen in Glen Ridge Assault Trial
After more than three and a half years of investigation and legal maneuvering, the trial of four former Glen Ridge, N.J., football teammates accused of sexually assaulting a mentally handicapped schoolmate began here today with selection of a jury of 10 women and six men.
In opening arguments scheduled for Thursday morning, New Jersey prosecutors and defense lawyers are expected to outline sharply conflicting versions of the sexual activities that occurred on March 1, 1989, in the basement of the home of two of the defendants.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Clinton, Fending Off Assaults, Retains Sizable Lead, Poll Finds
President Bush heads into tonight's second Presidential debate with a still daunting challenge: the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that Gov.
Bill Clinton retains an undiminished lead and is actually viewed more favorably by the voters despite the Republican pounding of the past 10 days.
The survey, conducted Monday and Tuesday, shows that Ross Perot made some gains in the voters' esteem after the first Presidential debate on Sunday night.
But he still lags far behind the two major-party candidates heading into the second confrontation tonight at 9 in Richmond.


Feminists Offer Praise For Abrams
Robert Abrams gathered some of New York's most prominent feminists to his side yesterday, seeking to heal wounds left by his bitter primary fight with Geraldine A. Ferraro, and to stress his differences with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a longtime abortion opponent.
The Democratic Senate candidate used the City Hall rally to emphasize his broad commitment to women's rights and his stand on such issues as family leave, the Head Start program and national health insurance.
But his earlier depiction of Mr.
D'Amato as a "fascist" continued to draw angry comments yesterday from Mr.
D'Amato and other politicians as well as some Italian-Americans who perceived the comment as an ethnic slur.


RB&amp;W Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


In the End, the Braves Have the Horses
Sid Bream never got up at the plate.
He was on his back, stuck for the forseeable future by disbelief and ecstasy and a dozen or so Braves.
Greg Olson, crutches under his arms and his broken right leg swinging absurdly in the air, flailed his way to the mound, where there were more Braves and more bedlam.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
3.75
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.88
4.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.95
5.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
6.06
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.53
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.58
8.65
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.42
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Peoples Bancorp Worcester reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reynolds Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police and Those Policed Must Heal Wounds
To the Editor:
The civil disturbance at New York's City Hall by off-duty police officers, and its aftermath, has heightened the concern of many about the escalation of racial tension in New York City and the ability of the police to perform their law enforcement duties fairly.


Rebels in Mozambique Try Hand at Politics
Laurencio Macome sat poolside at a fashionable sports club in this tropical capital, wearing a crisp white shirt, an appointment book on the table.
The 33-year-old former secondary school teacher, far removed from the ugly bush war that has wrecked this southern African nation, is the acceptable face of the Mozambique National Resistance Movement, or Renamo, considered one of the world's more brutal guerrilla groups.


Calendar: Harvest Festival, Antiques
Fall in the Bronx  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
A harvest festival, including horticultural demonstrations, gardening advice, entertainment, pumpkin carvings and sales by 50 crafts artists, will be held on Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
There will also be events for children.
Suggested admission: $3; $2 for students, children 6 to 16 years old and people 62 and older; no charge on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to noon.


Frisch's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 20


The Most Dangerous Days
It was a narrow squeak, narrower perhaps than a scared world guessed.
Just 30 years ago, a U-2 spy plane returned with photographic evidence that the Soviet Union had secretly deployed two dozen nuclear missiles in Cuba.
A week later President Kennedy exposed the Soviet stealth, circled warships around Cuba and made a televised ultimatum demanding removal of the missiles.
The next days had the smell of Armageddon.
In Argentina the Rev.
Billy Graham preached on "The End of the World." In Washington, high officials were issued coded ID passes to a bomb-proof hideaway.
The renowned nuclear scientist Leo Szilard, certain of catastrophe, fled to Switzerland.


One Sure Bet for Traders: Price of Mischief Is Rising
Mischief and bad manners on the floors of the nation's stock exchanges are becoming expensive ventures.
The Pacific Stock Exchange in Los Angeles posted a memorandum on Friday telling members to cease and desist with antics that include rubber band snapping and sniping with spitballs.
Persistent offenders can suffer fines of as much as $5,000, the exchange warned.


Abrams: TV Spots to Mark Remaining Days of Campaign
After modest use of television advertising, this 30-second ad is the first in a series of commercials the Abrams campaign intends to use in major markets throughout the state in the remaining days before the election.
It began airing last night.
PRODUCER Struble-Totten of Washington.


Why We Have the Painted Dog
ONE could say that William Secord has found his niche in life.
He was founding director of the Dog Museum of America, now in St.
Louis, he has a gallery in New York devoted to dog paintings, and he is the author of the recently published "Dog Painting 1840-1940: A Social History of the Dog in Art" (The Antique Collectors' Club, $79.50).
The hefty tome that chronicles the history of purebred dogs and the people who owned them has been Mr.
Secord's pet project, so to speak, for five years.
Mr.
Secord offers three reasons for the proliferation of canine portraits: the sporting aspect, the late 19th-century development of dog shows and the fact that "people loved their pets," he said.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Sept. 25 referred imprecisely to the pledge by the Bank of New York to make housing loans in low- and moderate-income areas.
The agreement did not settle a challenge filed by two community groups that objected to the bank's bid to buy 64 branches of Barclays Bank.


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush: Letting the People Attack Clinton
The Bush campaign began broadcasting a new 30-second commercial yesterday that campaign aides said was based on actual person-in-the-street interviews at a union hall in New Jersey.
The campaign would not reveal where or how often the advertisement would appear.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with words on a black screen: "October, 1992." Cuts to people in a crowd offering brief assessments of Gov.
Bill Clinton.
The ad makes it seem as if the viewer is actually mingling in the crowd, and a hand-held camera gives it an unpolished air of spontaneity.
At one point, these words appear: "Where will Bill Clinton get the money for his big promises?" Ends with the printed words, apparently intended to get people to look for forthcoming spots, "To be continued tomorrow. . ." The campaign also released a nearly identical ad that differs only in that it shows a man who silently tests the wind with his finger.
PRODUCER The November Company.
The citizens seem more authentic in their criticism than would a narrator.
The ad seeks to seize on a fear that some Republicans, including Vice President Dan Quayle in the debate Tuesday, say people have about Mr.
Clinton: that he is a traditional tax and spend Democrat who cannot be trusted.


Not Just Any Wallpaper
BLOCK-PRINTED in the mid-18th century, wallpaper was the wallcovering of choice for the homes of the nobles and well-to-do.
By the mid 1900's, well-known artists were being commissioned to design wallpaper, and decorating houses stocked wallpapers.
A few years ago, Carolle Thibaut-Pomerantz, a dealer in 19th-century decorative objects, wandered into an auction house in Paris and became intrigued with the antique wallpapers.
Soon she had an enviable stock.


'I Worked as a Slave Laborer on the V-2'
To the Editor:
"Germans Plan, Then Cancel, Celebration of a Nazi Missile" (front page, Sept. 29) evoked traumatic memories of nearly 50 years ago, when I worked as a slave laborer on the V-2 missile project in a Nazi concentration camp.


Nashua Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Andover Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keystone Consolidated Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Signet Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russian Files Show Stalin Ordered Massacre of 20,000 Poles in 1940
The Russian Government today for the first time made public secret documents revealing that Stalin's Politburo in March 1940 had specifically ordered the execution of more than 20,000 Poles, including nearly 5,000 senior Polish Army officers, whose bodies were dumped in a mass grave in the forests of Katyn.
The documents, handed over by Russia's chief archivist to President Lech Walesa in Warsaw, appear to end a grisly mystery that has long haunted Russian-Polish relations, even after Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in April 1990, first admitted Soviet guilt in the Katyn massacre.
Sharp Attack on Gorbachev
Today, a spokesman for President Boris N. Yeltsin sharply attacked Mr.
Gorbachev for concealing the direct involvement of Stalin and other Communist leaders in the massacre.


Talk About Perennials: A Symposium Returns
JUST as sweet william, the New York aster and the lemon day lily do, the symposium "Landscaping With Perennials" returns to the New York Botanical Garden every year.
Next Thursday's symposium on perennials, the 10th annual, is designed for gardening professionals and the serious amateur.
That this symposium is the longest running at the garden reflects the popularity of these plants.
"Perennials have become mainstream garden plants for the public and the landscaping industry," said Daniel Hinkley, a speaker at this year's event who has a three-acre garden with several thousand herbaceous and woody plants.


Producer Prices Join Retail Sales in 0.3% Rise
In continued evidence of meager economic growth, retail sales edged three-tenths of 1 percent higher in September amid subdued inflation, the Government said today.
Still, the rise in sales in September, aided to some extent by rebuilding in Florida and Louisiana after Hurricane Andrew, combined with an upward revision in the August sales figure to dampen hopes of an imminent cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve.


A Quiet Candidate in a Noisy Race; Abrams, Often an Upset Winner, Is in His Toughest Fight
Moving carefully from his roots in the Bronx up the fragile rungs of New York power, Bob Abrams has tended to face daunting odds and fierce enemies with a certain equanimity.
Perhaps because he usually wins.
In 12 races in a 26-year career in public office, Mr.
Abrams has lost only once.
The blow came in 1974, when he made his first bid to replace Louis J. Lefkowitz, an institution as Attorney General.
In that election, Mr.
Abrams ran a close second.
Four years later, when Mr.
Lefkowitz did not seek re-election, Mr.
Abrams won.
He has been winning ever since.


A Yonkers Street: Whites, Blacks and Silence
On one side of Clark Street, black families were raking leaves, playing catch, decorating their identical new homes for Halloween.
On the other side of the narrow street, their white neighbors sat outside on the stoops, in the fading sunlight of a recent afternoon, and stared openly at the newcomers across the way.
It has been four months since 24 low-income families moved here, on the former site of a parking lot near the Yonkers Raceway, and began planting flowers outside the colonial-style town houses that a Federal judge ordered the city to build after decades of intentional segregation.
But residents on both sides of the block, who knew virtually everyone on their own side of the street, said they had yet to exchange a single word with any of their new neighbors.


Intermagnetics General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Don R. Davis; Insurance Executive, 68
Don R. Davis, a retired insurance executive, died on Monday at his home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 68 years old.
Mr. Davis died of prostate cancer, said a son, Timothy J. Davis, of Fairfield.


SERBS LETTING GAS FLOW TO SARAJEVO
Serbian nationalist forces reopened a natural gas pipeline to Sarajevo today, bringing central heating to at least some parts of the city just as autumn chills were driving thousands of people to the city's parks and graveyards and river banks in a desperate rush to cut trees for winter fuel.
The pipeline that feeds Siberian natural gas to Sarajevo was cut off eight days ago, somewhere in the arc of Serb-held Bosnia that lies between this besieged city and the border of Serbia, about 100 miles east.
The cutoff followed Serbian attacks three weeks ago that cut the last of the electricity and running water reaching the 400,000 people estimated to be living inside the Serbian siege lines.


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Body Drama Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Gerald Newman, 61, McDonald's Executive
Gerald Newman, the chief accountant for the McDonald's Corporation of Oak Brook, Ill., died Saturday on his way to a fund-raising event in Cleveland for the Ronald McDonald Children's Charities.
He was 61 years old and lived in Highland Park, Ill.
He died of a heart attack, the company said.


Police and Those Policed Must Heal Wounds; Episode in Village
To the Editor:
When I was in elementary school I was taught that the police were my friends.
I believed it.
In the late 1960's, when I was a college student, it was fashionable to call the police "pigs," but I never joined in that chant.
I was white, middle class, and had not had any dealings with the police, positive or negative.


Bear Stearns Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Peoples Heritage Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police and Those Policed Must Heal Wounds; Neutrals for Board
To the Editor:
The composition of New York City's police civilian review board is at an impasse.
I do not see why Mayor David N. Dinkins and the disputing parties failed to consider the system of dispute settlement used under the Railway Labor Act: equal representation of the parties (two from labor and two from management) and the selection of a third-party neutral.


Chemical Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Simms Goes on Injured List
The Giants did the expected today, placing quarterback Phil Simms on injured reserve and activating Kent Graham, a rookie, from injured reserve.
Simms, who underwent surgery Monday to remove bone chips from his right elbow, must sit out at least four weeks.
Coach Ray Handley said that Simms thought he could be back within four weeks and that he expected Simms to play again this year, though not necessarily start.
Simms has indicated in interviews that he expects to return from injured reserve before the season ends.


New York Building Inspectors Found Guilty of Conspiracy
Six New York City building inspectors were each found guilty of one count of conspiracy yesterday in what Federal prosecutors had called a major bribery scheme, but the inspectors were acquitted of racketeering and other crimes.
Two other inspectors were acquitted of all charges in what the prosecutors, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the city's Department of Investigation had described as the culmination of an extensive investigation into widespread corruption that preyed upon the building industry.


Sports of The Times; His Name Is Francisco Cabrera
HE has never spent an entire season in the major leagues.
Francisco Cabrera is just expendable enough that every summer the Braves shuffle him off to the farm.
Maybe even next season he will be back in Richmond, but Francisco Cabrera has a permanent place in Atlanta now.
Maybe not a statue outside the Capitol building, but something just as durable, a civic memory of the night he swung a bat and the city went wild.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oh, Canada! First Pennant For Toronto
The Toronto Blue Jays won bragging rights for all of Canada today by beating the Oakland Athletics and capturing the team's first American League pennant.
Toronto thus became the first non-American-based franchise to reach the World Series.
It did so in stunning fashion, crushing the Oakland Athletics, 9-2.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Baker to Wyoming? What Does It Mean?
Here's a straw in the political wind:
Edward Rollins, sometime Republican insider, sometime Republican outsider, was in New York yesterday, giving a conference of businessmen the election lowdown from Washington.
How did he see the 1992 race shaping up?


Biotime Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Snap-On Tools reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; White House Interprets Bush's Comments on Iran
The White House worked today to extricate President Bush from a remark made during a television interview on Tuesday that implied he knew more about the 1986 arms-for-hostages deal with Iran than he had admitted.
A White House spokesman, Walter Kansteiner, said Mr.
Bush had misunderstood two questions about the Iran affair that were directed to him on the NBC program "Today."


United Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In Crown Heights Murder Trial, Witness Says Hasid Started Fight
In an account that differed sharply from previous testimony about the moments leading up to the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum, a man from Crown Heights testified yesterday that he had seen the Hasidic student step out of a car, argue with several young men and kick them before they pummeled him.
The man, John Anderson, 24 years old, an unemployed clerk, was a surprise witness on the first day of the defense case in the murder trial of Lemrick Nelson Jr.
Prosecutors contend that Mr.
Nelson, who is charged with second-degree murder, emerged from a group assaulting Mr.
Rosenbaum and stabbed him to death during the racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in August 1991.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ADOLESCENCE can be an especially difficult time for adopted children.
Their normal teen-age striving to become less involved with the family and to establish themselves as individuals can bring forth surprising and sometimes overwhelming feelings.
It can also make adoptive families face aspects of their history and relationship that they have avoided.
Issues of separation, sexuality and identity permeate the normal course of adolescence.
For adopted children, those issues often have potentially frightening implications.


Executive Changes
ARCTURUS PHARMACEUTICAL CORP., Woburn, Mass., named Rex Bright president and chief executive.
AUGAT INC., Mansfield, Mass., a manufacturer of connection products for the automotive, communications and computer markets, appointed Ellen B. Richstone vice president and chief financial officer.


Gaston Picks Up a Title and Makes History
When Cito Gaston's Toronto Blue Jays advanced to the World Series today, he became the first black manager to reach that pinnacle.
No one was happier for him than Frank Robinson, who was the first black manager in the major leagues, with Cleveland in 1975.
"I'm happy for Cito; it was just a matter of time," Robinson, now an assistant general manager for the Orioles, said by telephone from his office in Baltimore.
"He's going to reach the big show. That's all every manager looks forward to."


Yields Are Down on Money Market Funds
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds fell in the latest weekly survey of 862 funds by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
The decline was more apparent in tax-exempt funds, where yields had recently reached levels that made them competitive with taxable funds and had prompted cash inflows into the tax-exempt funds over the last few weeks.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Superior Industries International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Panel Backs Indigenous Peoples' Rights
In an effort to end centuries of neglect and abuse, a United Nations team is drafting a declaration of rights of indigenous peoples, which will include the right to self-determination.
Describing indigenous people as "the poorest, most discriminated against and disadvantaged groups of society," Erica-Irene A. Daes, chairwoman of the United Nations' working group on indigenous populations, said the document would set international standards for the protection of the rights of indigenous people to their land, resources, culture and to self-government.
The document is called the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.


Review/Dance; Silent Howls and Sobs In Memory of John Cage
Deborah Hay is a compelling performer who is willing to take considerable theatrical risks.
To a great degree she adheres to the anti-theatricality established as an essential ingredient in dance by the avant-garde Judson movement to which Ms.
Hay belonged in the 1960's.
There is an inherent drama in her grimaces and stillnesses.
She is also an original and as such is worthy of attention.
But that claim was strained in "Lamb at the Altar," presented last Thursday night at the Warren Street Performance Loft.
Ms.
Hay has described the full-evening solo, danced to a score by Ellen Fullman, as the story of a previous longer group dance.
Dressed in white pants and a shirt sewn with gold braid and wearing an odd molded white headdress, Ms.
Hay looked implike and sometimes was, disappearing behind side panels then darting out after blackouts to what sounded like the crash of pots and pans.
For the most part, the solo was a very long series of bursts of deft, dreaming activity that lay somewhere between polished dance and everyday movement shaped with a sophisticated but willfully hermetic skill.


Everett Hopes to Reverse a Downswing
Another year, another set of expectations.
This is Jim Everett's fate with the Los Angeles Rams, no matter how long he plays, how often he wins, how many touchdown passes he throws.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  THE AGONY OF A FATHER
A year to the week that his two daughters, ages 12 and 17, were raped and left tied up during a push-in robbery inside their upper Manhattan apartment, a father shuffled wearily to a courtroom bench and haltingly told the sentencing judge of his and his family's agony.
"Your Honor," he said, "our family has been basically destroyed." B3.
OFFICER KILLS HOMELESS MAN
A homeless man who had menaced passengers in a Brooklyn subway station last week was shot and killed by a transit police officer during a fight at the foot of a subway escalator, the transit police said.
B3.


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.B.I. ETHICS CASE ON COLLISION PATH
Internecine strife gripped the Bush Administration today as the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation agreed to be questioned by Federal prosecutors on Thursday about whether he had tried to evade income taxes and had billed the Government for personal long distance telephone calls.
The ethics case potentially puts the Director, William S. Sessions, on a collision course with his colleagues and superiors in the Justice Department, which is conducting the preliminary criminal inquiry.
Moreover, it is relying on agents of Mr.
Sessions's bureau to carry out the investigation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; A Few Tense Moments In the TV Control Room
For a few tense moments in the control room where producers made snap judgments about precisely what images more than 50 million television viewers saw in the Vice-Presidential debate, it looked like the spectacle was headed for disaster.
The problem halfway through the debate was not the sound quality, the lighting or a glitch in transmission.
It was James B. Stockdale and his inability to stand still after delivering a line.


Hartmarx reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday, about Joan Baez's two planned performances at the Bitter End in New York to mark the release of her new album, "Play Me Backwards," misstated the date of the concerts.
It is next Thursday, not today.


Solo Voyage Begins
ANITA PAGE, a 41-year-old yachtswoman who operates a sailing school in Destin, Fla., set out yesterday from the North Cove Yacht Harbor in New York City in an attempt to become the first American woman to complete a nonstop solo voyage around the world.
She is sailing a 35-foot sloop, Sparrow, in the 27,000-mile circumnavigation.
"This is the fulfillment of a dream I've had for a long time, and I'm selling the farm to do it," Page said recently.
Her proposed route will take Page south of Africa, New Zealand and South America.
She plans to return to New York by next spring.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Beer Companies Shift Their Focus to, of All Things, Taste
"BEER Is Back" proclaims the Coors advertising campaign for its Extra Gold.
That may be overstating things a bit, in light of the fact that beer has been with us since medieval times.
But the sentiment points up a noteworthy shift among the leading brewers to focus increasingly on their products' taste, rather than on less tangible imagery.


School Choice, by Charter
Everyone seems to favor some kind of choice in education these days.
President Bush wants to use taxpayer dollars to allow students to attend private and parochial schools.
Gov.
Bill Clinton wants to encourage more choice among public schools.
And now Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has endorsed a new kind of public school -- charter schools -- to provide parents yet a broader choice.
Charter schools would be authorized, perhaps by a county or state board of education, to function as self-governing units outside the control of the local school district.
They would be supported by public funds distributed by the state legislature.


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blue Jays to Meet the Braves in the World Series


Angolan Parties Begin Indirect Talks on Election
Angola's Government and the main opposition group have begun indirect talks in an effort to avert a return to civil war over the disputed elections held last month.
But the two sides appeared to be far apart.
The talks are being mediated by Roelof F. Botha, the South African Foreign Minister, who has been trying to steer the two main antagonists, President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Jonas Savimbi of the opposition National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, into face-to-face negotiations.


Smith (A.O.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Televising the Recession: Job Fair on L.I. Is Broadcast Live
It is perhaps a sign of the times that Barry Zimbler, already a few months behind on his mortgage and desperate to take almost any job, went on television tonight wearing a crisp white shirt, staring glumly at the camera and talking about his experience in a "multifaceted position" with a small Manhattan jewelry manufacturer.
"I was there approximately 13 years," he said in a monotone, as his name, his job title, director of computer operations and identification number, 103, flashed across the screen.
"I was recently let go and I have been seeking employment ever since. Thank you very much." One in 10 Jobs Gone
As the recession continues to take its toll, wiping out nearly one out of 10 jobs in the New York metropolitan area, Mr.
Zimbler, out of work for more than 18 months, turned to the airwaves tonight, in a rare television campaign to reach out to the casualties of the economy.


Fed Chief Says Economy Is Resisting Remedies
After three days of consultations with Japan's top economic officials, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, offered a sobering thought today: he emphasized repeatedly at a news conference that one of the most troubling aspects of these difficult times is that the tried and true methods of economic analysis and the old monetary tools just do not seem to be working.
"No models can explain the types of patterns we are having," Mr.
Greenspan said, referring to the sluggish economic growth in the United States and elsewhere despite the fact that interest rates have been cut sharply in most countries.
"This is really a quite extraordinarily difficult type of environment."


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japan's Trade Surplus Hits New High
After slowly building for nearly two years, Japan's trade surplus with the United States and the rest of the world soared to an all-time high in September, in spite of numerous Japanese Government pledges to take measures to bring its trade into balance.
The surplus is having a particularly pronounced effect now because the Japanese and American economies are both weak, and the Governments are struggling to stimulate growth.
The growing surplus is providing a major lift to the Japanese, while proving a drain on the American economy.
Worldwide Surplus Up 25 Percent
Some business leaders and economists said that the prospects of further growth in Japan's surplus was thus setting the stage for more serious clashes between Tokyo and Washington when attention turns from the Presidential election to the nuts and bolts of America's economic problems.


Health Care Property Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the trial of a subway motorman charged with murder in the deaths of five people in a subway crash at Union Square last year misstated the date of the crash.
It was Aug. 28, 1991.


MedChem Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


3 Big Banks Post Sharp Income Gain
Large banking companies are reporting sharp increases in earnings, their problems with delinquent loans having abated at the same time that low interest rates have padded their profit margins.
Three of the nation's 25 largest banking companies reported sharp third-quarter gains yesterday -- the Bank of New York Company, up 66.1 percent; the Wachovia Corporation, up 21.3 percent, and the First Fidelity Bankcorporation, up 48.8 percent -- indicating that 1992 will be a record year.
These companies were not among the hardest hit by loan defaults the last few years, but like the rest of the industry, they are recovering from a sharp increase in bad loans that they suffered in 1990.


Bic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gone Fishin'


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Released Irving Thomas, forward, and Kelsey Weems, guard.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Signed Christian Laettner, forward-center, to a six-year contract.
Released Joe Wylie, forward, and Johnny Pittman, center.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Eddie Lee Wilkins, center.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded John Mokosak, defenseman, to the Los Angeles Kings for future considerations.


Bush Camp Using Tax Office To Attack Clinton Proposals
Over the years, the Treasury Department's Office of Tax Analysis has operated like the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, sources of reliable data with no overtones of partisan politics.
But this year, the Bush Administration has used the tax office's staff and computers to generate questionable assessments of Gov.
Bill Clinton's tax proposals.


Company Briefs
A.
B.
ELECTROLUX, Stockholm, announced plans for a new floor care company, the White-Westinghouse Floor Care Co., that will focus on household vacuum cleaners.
ENRON CORP., Houston, said it would increase the quarterly dividend on its common stock to 35 cents a share from 32.5 cents.
The increase is payable Dec. 21 to stockholders of record as of Dec. 1.
IDEC PHARMACEUTICALS CORP., and SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. have entered into a product development and marketing agreement valued at $30 million.
KAMAN AEROSPACE CORP., Bloomfield, Conn., said it had been awarded a $21 million contract by Boeing Defense and Space Group to provide flaps and slats for the A-6 replacement wing program.
PREFERRED HOMECARE OF AMERICA INC., Miami Lakes, Fla., announced that a majority of shareholders had approved the acquisition of the company's assets by Home Intensive Care Inc.
AIRBUS INDUSTRIE, Toulouse, France, yesterday displayed its new A-330 passenger jet.
The wide-bodied twin-jet plane, designed to carry 335 passengers, will make its first flight early next month.


Science Nobels Given for Work on Nature of Matter
The 1992 Nobel Prizes in Physics and in Chemistry, each worth $1.2 million, were awarded yesterday to the French inventor of a particle detector used in many discoveries about the ultimate nature of matter and to an American who found a way to predict certain interactions between molecules in solution.
The winner of the physics prize was Dr.
George Charpak, a 68-year-old citizen of France who was born in Poland and has worked since 1959 at Europe's pre-eminent accelerator complex, CERN, which straddles the border of France and Switzerland.
His inventions play leading roles in most high-energy research.


National Health Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Tekelec, a developer of telecommunications diagnostic systems and switching equipment in Calabasas, Calif., to Poppe Tyson/Los Angeles.
The account had been handled in- house.
Poppe Tyson was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $1 million, without a review.


Tina Brown Accused Of Misusing New Yorker
Trans-Atlantic faxes have been flying at The New Yorker in a literary furor involving the British novelist John le Carre, the British author William Shawcross, the British editor Harold Evans and Tina Brown, the new British editor of this very American magazine.
Calling an article in The New Yorker of Oct. 12 "one of the ugliest pieces of partisan journalism that I have witnessed in a long life of writing," Mr. le Carre has accused Ms.
Brown of using her pages to fight her husband's battles.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about negotiations to sell The Daily News included an incorrect reference to members of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers Union.
They are drivers, not mailers.


Plea to Bar Clifford's Trial Due
Lawyers for Clark M. Clifford said today that they would ask a New York judge to dismiss criminal charges against him, contending that the 85-year-old Washington lawyer and former adviser to Presidents is so ill that he is likely to suffer a fatal heart attack if forced to go to trial.
The motion, which is expected to be approved, almost certainly means Mr.
Clifford will never go to trial on charges related to his role in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Those who take part are unanimous in maintaining that the annual member-expert game at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, is the most enjoyable event in the New York bridge calendar.
A social drink is followed by an excellent dinner and a duplicate game in an ideal setting.
Calls for the director are very rare, although it did happen Tuesday night when both defenders revoked on the same deal, perhaps a unique parlay.
The evening served to rebut the contention that husband-and-wife combinations are not effective at the bridge table.
David and Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., were the expert winners, Sidney and Bobby Stayman of Mamaroneck, N.Y., were the member winners and Michael and Judy Becker of Teaneck, N.J., provided one of the best-played deals.


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooklyn Coup: To Be Both In and Far Out
Last night, as limousines circled the neo-Renaissance 1908 Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Lafayette Avenue, a first-night audience attended a party celebrating the 10th anniversary of the Next Wave Festival, which has become the most prominent avant-garde showcase in New York City.
The evening was also the 25th anniversary of the stewardship of the academy by its president and executive producer and tireless promoter, Harvey Lichtenstein.
Not since Joseph Papp made the New York Shakespeare Festival in his own image has the identity of a performing arts institution been as closely tied to the vision of a single individual.


Haemonetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Simms Goes on Injured List
The Giants did the expected today, placing quarterback Phil Simms on injured reserve and activating Kent Graham, a rookie, from injured reserve.
Simms, who underwent surgery Monday to remove bone chips from his right elbow, must sit out at least four weeks.
Coach Ray Handley said that Simms thought he could be back within four weeks and that he expected Simms to play again this year, though not necessarily start.
Simms has indicated in interviews that he expects to return from injured reserve before the season ends.


RUSSIA TURNS OVER KAL FLIGHT DATA
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today handed over documents about the shooting down in 1983 of a South Korean airliner to the American and Korean Governments and to relatives of the passengers, all of whom were killed.
The file released today contains the transcript of recordings from a cockpit recorder on Korean Air Lines Flight 007, as well as copies of reports to Yuri V. Andropov, then the Soviet leader; photographs of parts of the downed plane, and other documents.


Economic Scene; The Right Jolt: A Fiscal Menu
UNLESS unemployment falls very fast, very soon -- a prospect only slightly more likely than a Nobel Peace Prize for Pat Buchanan -- the next President will be under enormous pressure to give the economy a fiscal lift.
But how?
That old favorite, public works spending, conjures images of gents in sharkskin suits swapping Cadillacs for contracts to build highways to nowhere.
Even if these images of waste and corruption are dated, the economists' critique of creating jobs by pouring concrete still stands: "It just takes too long to turn them on," said George Perry of the Brookings Institution.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Writing About Writing That's About Writing
Double Agent
The Critic and Society
By Morris Dickstein
220 pages. Oxford University Press. $23.
By the title of his thoughtful new study of writing about books, "Double Agent: The Critic and Society," Morris Dickstein means the role Matthew Arnold played: "by day a mild-mannered school inspector, on weekends the scourge of barbarians and philistines -- the engaged critic as double agent trying to balance art and social concern."


Dexleigh Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


First of America Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Board Head Assails News Release
In the latest display of the divisions on the New York City Board of Education, the board president lashed out at the Bronx representative yesterday evening, saying that she was out of line to propose a new commission on high school reform by issuing a news release to reporters first.
The public admonishment underscored the increase in fights among board members, who battled most recently over the introduction of AIDS education in the city's schools.
The persistent bickering, some members say, has slowed efforts to take action on almost any issue.


Headache? You Skipped Your Coffee
People who consume average amounts of coffee, one to three cups a day, often experience debilitating symptoms of caffeine withdrawal when they are unable to get their brew, a new study has shown.
The most common symptoms are headaches, drowsiness and fatigue, and the researchers found that these can be so severe that sufferers miss work and even seek medical attention.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Abbey Lincoln
Singer  Fat Tuesday's  190 Third Avenue (at 17th Street)  Gramercy Park  Through Saturday
To describe the veteran jazz singer Abbey Lincoln as a force of nature is more than just to reiterate a cliche.
For nature and life's primal relationships constitute the core and substance of her music.


BBDO's Marchese Takes Wieden Post
John Marchese has been named managing director at the Philadelphia office of Wieden &amp; Kennedy, succeeding David Luhr, who returns to the agency's headquarters in Portland, Ore., after helping open the office last year.
Mr.
Marchese had been a senior vice president and account director at BBDO New York.
Mr.
Luhr, a partner and director of account services, will assume responsibilities for account operations for all three Wieden &amp; Kennedy offices, the third being Amsterdam.


Lloyd's Names a Head For Regulatory Board
Brian P. Garraway has been named as the first chairman of the new regulatory board for Lloyd's of London, effective next January.
He will become deputy chairman of Lloyd's and a member of the council of Lloyd's, the sovereign body that governs the insurer.
Lloyd's of London has been reorganizing in the wake of heavy losses in its catastrophic insurance coverage in recent years.


Thompson Gains in Giants' Shuffle
The Giants' starting left cornerback against the Los Angeles Rams on Sunday will probably be Reyna Thompson.
It will not be Mark Collins unless he makes a miraculous recovery.
It will not be Phillippi Sparks because the rookie is not ready, and it will not be Everson Walls because he seems to be in the doghouse.
When Collins sprained his left ankle during Sunday's 31-21 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals, Thompson replaced him.
Thompson and Walls played as usual in the nickel defense (five defensive backs), and Sparks joined those five in the dime defense (six defensive backs).


Silicosis Remains Among Us, Deadly and Preventable as Ever
To the Editor:
"Dying Former Sailor Battles Navy in Search for Afflicted Shipmates" (front page, Sept. 27), your report on the experience of Jerry Cochran, a sailor exposed to silica during the 1970's, is part of a tragic legacy of more than half a century of official and professional neglect of the industrial origins of silicosis.
Since the Great Depression, when thousands of American foundry workers, steel workers, sandblasters, metal miners and quarrymen sued insurance companies and industries to gain compensation for silicosis, those potentially liable for workers' suffering have denied information about this illness and set up requirements that make it virtually impossible to establish culpability.
The true dimensions of the silicosis hazard have been obscured by physicians, workers' compensation officials, standards-setting agencies and professionals, who have structured a compensation system that punishes the victims, while denying the true extent of danger from industrial dust.


Moscow's Statement on Katyn
Following is a report yesterday by Itar-Tass, the Russian news agency, on the Russian Government's statement about the Katyn massacre:
"The extermination of the best Polish officers in the Katyn Forest in the spring of 1940 was directly organized by the leaders of the Bolshevik Party," Russian presidential spokesman Vyacheslav Kostikov told Russian and foreign correspondents at a briefing in the Kremlin today.
Kostikov showed journalists two folders of top-secret papers from the Communist Party Central Committee's archives that fully expose the role played by the party's Politburo in the tragedy.


Review/Dance; Graham's Company In Choreography Of Her Stark Period
Martha Graham was concerned first and foremost with the verities of human existence.
But she couched her meditations in unimaginable ways and in an idiom unlike any other.
This is presumably why she was able consistently to attract the loyalty of actors as well as dancers: they had to make do with words while she could express through genius the essence of the unstated.


Events: Tours of Houses, Breweries, Historic Sites
Manhattan Homes  United Cerebral Palsy of New York City, 105 Madison Avenue (East 30th Street); (212) 683-6700.
The New Yorker League for Cerebral Palsy will sponsor its annual house tour on Oct. 27 from 12:30 to 4:30 P.M.
Residences to be visited include an 1880's three-story town house on the Upper West Side, a Central Park duplex and a Park Avenue prewar apartment.
Tickets, in advance only, are $60.


Owner of Nordiques Has His Say -- Plus
Marcel Aubut is full of ideas, full of opinions, full of optimism, full of himself.
He was holding court in the Colisee, a big man at a big table in a big office in a big building, chatting with a few hockey reporters from the United States who had been summoned into his presence.
They were here to watch Eric Lindros and the Philadelphia Flyers play Tuesday night against the Quebec Nordiques, the team that Aubut operates.
Last summer, Aubut's reputation and his league's image took a beating when he traded Lindros to both the Flyers and the Rangers.
An arbitrator had to clean up the mess, although questions about the deal still linger.
So Aubut wanted to clear the air.


COMPANY NEWS: Somnambulant PC's; Desktop Catnaps May Become a Trend
For years, bosses have thought of automation as a way to replace dozing workers with machines that never sleep on the job.
But the Intel Corporation, the dominant producer of microprocessors for desktop computers, said yesterday that its next generation of chips would be designed to let computers snooze when no one was watching.
Joining Intel in the announcement was the Environmental Protection Agency, which has negotiated agreements with leading manufacturers of disk drives, monitors and other computer components to make those parts accept "sleep mode" commands from the microprocessor.
The machines would be in a standby state, drawing a much lower level of power.
Some components would go into this resting mode after 10 minutes.
But others, nodding off even faster than Dagwood Bumstead, could "sleep" in the time between keystrokes.


Critic's Notebook; Trying for a Debate Worthy of the Name
The lone moderator in tonight's meeting of Presidential candidates, Carole Simpson of ABC, is faced with the job of turning it into something resembling a debate.
If she succeeds, the result should prove more rewarding to viewers than Sunday night's set of assertions and animadversions or Tuesday night's Vice-Presidential slanging match.
Sunday's meeting was not the worst such show the nation has endured.
But as in other years, the reporters, who outnumbered the candidates, were hemmed in by rules imposed by the political parties to keep the pressure down: a question; a two-minute answer; two one-minute rebuttals, which rarely rebutted; next question.
By this time in the long campaign, the two major candidates are like walking commercials.
Their personas have been packaged and repackaged, and on the big night they showed off their labels:
Experience
from George Bush;
Change
from Bill Clinton.
Even the here-today-gone-yesterday Ross Perot, who won compliments for his pithy cracks, relied on
Trust Me.
It was like watching humanoids spring full-blown from focus groups.


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Novelists and the City
Four novelists are to talk about how their writing relates to the American city on Monday night at 7:30 P.M.
The panel for the discussion, called "Visions of the City in Fiction" and sponsored by the PEN American Center, includes Richard Price, whose latest novel, "Clockers," is about drug dealers; Doris Jean Austin, the author of "After the Garden," about black family life in the Jersey City of the 1940's and 50's; Maureen Howard, the author of "Natural History," which is set in Bridgeport, Conn., and Jonathan Franzen, whose "Twenty-Seventh City" imagines a St.
Louis under siege.
The program, to be moderated by LuAnn Walther, the executive editor of Vintage Books, is to take place at Tishman Auditorium, New York University Law School, 40 Washington Square South, in Greenwich Village.
Admission is free.


Coca-Cola Earnings Up 18.5% in Quarter
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that third-quarter profits increased 18.5 percent, despite cold weather that hurt the soft drink industry's sales and weak economies in important markets.
Earnings were $540.6 million, or 41 cents a share, compared with $456.3 million, or 34 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues climbed 11 percent, to $3.51 billion from $3.17 billion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  RUSSIA DISCLOSES KATYN DATA  The Russian Government made public secret documents that revealed that Stalin's Politburo in March 1940 had specifically ordered the execution of more than 20,000 Poles, including nearly 5,000 senior Polish Army officers, whose bodies were dumped in a mass grave in the forests of Katyn.
A1  RUSSIAN SERIAL MURDERER GUILTY  A former teacher and Communist Party member was convicted in Russia of 52 counts of murder.
The convicted man, Andrei Chikatilo, was led in and out of the courtroom by armed police officers because of his outbursts and wild protests of innocence.
A9


Japan Eases 57 Varieties Marketing
Suntory Ltd., one of Japan's beverage giants, wants no thirst unquenched.
It sells about 100 soft drinks, including a combination of celery and orange juice, another of the Caribbean acerola berry and lemon, a plum drink, a yogurt-flavored soda and a yogurt-flavored water, 11 types of canned tea including peach, and 10 different blends of canned coffee.
But that style of doing business is changing.
Hurt by stagnant sales and the rising costs of capital, some Japanese companies are giving second thoughts to the longstanding notion that market share gains are the key to business success, and that product variations and rapid-fire product introductions are the best ways to get them.
Variety has been a key competitive strategy for Japanese industries ranging from food products to electronics and automobiles.


Market Place; Steel Mills Hope For Higher Prices
THE flood of trade litigation undertaken by the nation's largest steelmakers against foreign steel producers is certain to have a profound impact on the American companies, besides keeping their lawyers busy for months.
Analysts say the complaints, when resolved, will significantly help steel companies in the United States gain price increases.
In a battery of complaints, the nation's biggest steel companies have charged that foreign companies are selling steel in the United States at unfairly low prices.
The Government, analysts contend, is likely to side with the American producers and begin assessing duties on steel brought into the United States from countries that are found to be judged as dumping subsidized steel.


First Alabama reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Doctors Call Clinton Healthy; Campaign Offers New Details
Gov.
Bill Clinton is in excellent health but suffers from allergies and a chronic voice problem, has a mild hearing loss and needs to lose weight, his doctors said yesterday.
Four of Mr.
Clinton's doctors in Little Rock, Ark., wrote letters made public by his campaign staff, and three of them spoke in interviews yesterday with Mr.
Clinton's approval.


THE PLAYOFFS: International Pastime for Braves and Jays; Atlanta Rips Pennant From the Pirates' Grasp
The Pittsburgh Pirates climaxed a three-year period of unfulfilled promise tonight by suffering their cruelest fate yet.
Three outs from completing a comeback from a three-games-to-one deficit, the Pirates handed the National League pennant to the Atlanta Braves.
The Braves trailed, 2-0, entering the last half of the ninth inning of the seventh game.
But they rallied for three runs with the help of two walks and an error, winning by 3-2 on a two-out, two-run single by pinch-hitter Francisco Cabrera to become the first team since the 1977-78 Los Angeles Dodgers to repeat as National League pennant winners.


INSIDE
Caffeine-Dependency Study
Researchers found that people who had consumed only one to three cups of coffee a day could experience severe caffeine withdrawal.
Page A18.
A Top Leader Quits in Japan
Japan's most influential political leader resigned from Parliament amid growing criticism of his role in a corruption scandal.
Page A3.
A Price Cut for Rental Cars
Hertz will cut one-way auto-rental charges and eliminate drop-off charges on many cars.
Page D1.
A former financial-aid official was charged with embezzling $4.1 million from New York University.
Page B1.


Stymied by Resurgence of TB, Doctors Reconsider a Decades-Old Vaccine
As Federal health officials struggle to combat a resurgence of tuberculosis, in many cases now resistant to standard drugs, they are looking again at an old prevention -- a venerable but somewhat dubious vaccine.
Known as BCG, it is the most widely used vaccine in the world but has long been disdained in the United States.
American doctors are now wrestling with their well-founded objections to see if the renewed threat of tuberculosis makes the case for BCG any more compelling.


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stationery With an Artist's Touch
"WE have a look," said Maria Thomas, whose 15-year-old company, Pendragon, Ink, specializes in personalized stationery, from wedding invitations and birth announcements to place cards and menus.
The look is ornate and vaguely Victorian; colorful hand-painted flowers garnish a message lettered in elaborate calligraphy and embellished with lots of curlicues.
Ms.
Thomas, whose studio is in Whitinsville, Mass., is one of a number of artists who design and create cards, announcements, invitations, envelopes and other personalized documents.
Some started their businesses because they were bored with mass-market cards and invitations sold in stores.
Others liked the idea of offering snippets of functional -- and affordable -- artwork, no matter how ephemeral.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Brew and a Juke Box Make Debate Easier to Swallow at One Cleveland Bar
The backroad comforts of the Mama Mia lounge in this Cleveland suburb included draft beer to go with the live debate.
There was a young couple spooning obliviously under the TV screen, and a man at the bar talking about "the illusion of the first time."
He was speaking of the art of debating, not spooning, and he talked back to the TV debaters, demonstrating how they might better mask all their nervous civics preparation and make memorization sound natural.
"The boy stood on the burning deck, eating apples by the peck," intoned Richard N. Meadows, a speech and theater professor from across the road at Cuyahoga Community College.
He made the classroom sound bite evoke Ronald Reagan speaking from his baritoned heart, right to the hideaway voters at Mama Mia's.


Simpson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Municipals Survive California Sale
The municipal bond market survived a head-on collision with California yesterday, bouncing back from early declines, even in the face of the state's record $1.3 billion sale of general obligation bonds.
"The municipal market is in much better shape than many had thought, including myself," said one New York municipal bond trader.


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Home Video
Here Comes Batman
On Wednesday, Warner will release "Batman Returns" at $24.98.
Dealers say Tim Burton's film, which has taken in $160 million at the box office, should quickly become the latest of this season's video double-headers.
The term describes hits that are priced low to sell in high volume and also go to the top of best-renter lists.
This fall there are many.
"Hook," for example, has been on both best-seller and best-renter lists for three months.
"Wayne's World" has been at or near the top in both categories for two months.
"Beethoven," in stores for about two weeks, is also doing well in sales and rentals, as should "Sister Act" when it is released on Nov. 10.


Police and Those Policed Must Heal Wounds; Lesson of Los Angeles
To the Editor:
The folly of those police officers who behaved badly at their Sept. 16 protest is regretted, apparently, by everyone -- certainly by me.
But I am more concerned about Mayor David N. Dinkins's wish to appoint every member of the police review board.


General Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; In Paris, Escapism Is in Fashion for the 90's
After a journey back to hippieland in Milan and a brief stopover in an unfocused London, the fashion caravan is setting up camp in Paris for the last word on spring 1993, Eurostyle.
The French shows got off to a slow but intriguing start with offerings by younger designers who are not yet set in their ways but still searching for a personal mode of expression.


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT HOME WITH: Ann Magnuson; In a Downtown Lair, Thoughts of Home
SHE could be home now.
And she is: why, here's Ann Magnuson herself, receiving a visitor with Southern courtesy in what she calls her bachelorette pad on Avenue A. That would be the two-and-a-half rooms near Tompkins Square Park in Manhattan, with the charming kitchen view of the airshaft, the festive-but-yet-so-functional green fire escape, and the spectacular "Honeymooners" brick wall a mere pigeon-swoop away.
It's not at all what you expected and yet it's just what you expected, this lair of the performance artist, actress and writer, a downtown diva with out-of-town capability.
She won a new extra-club audience of millions for her role as an obsessive magazine editor on the late but lamented "Anything but Love," an ABC sitcom.
Now, Ms.
Magnuson's astringent one-woman show, "You Could Be Home Now," has opened at the Joseph Papp Public Theater and will run at least through Nov. 1.
A disorienting evening of monologues, songs, dances and character studies, it is an edgy investigation of a fundamental question: "What is home?"


Mizner/1st United Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reconsidering a TB Vaccine
Federal health officials are looking again at an old prevention for tuberculosis - venerable but somewhat dubious vaccine known as BCG.
Article, page B4.


Editorial Notebook; Looming Discord in Asia
As America draws down its armed forces in East Asia, many strategists worry that the Pacific won't remain pacific for long.
They fear that the resulting power vacuum could set off a scramble for security.
But that need not happen, not if America's diplomatic engagement intensifies as its military presence is reduced.
The countries of the region are a diverse, disputatious lot whose trade rivalries and territorial conflicts are now breaking out of their cold war confines.


Designers Show Off, But Not Too Much
ONE is a show house on a shoestring; the other is a not-too-showy show house.
As these things go, both seem to be contradictions in terms.


Traditional Art With Modern Images
A TOY-SIZE helicopter made in South Africa of beads, cloth and wire, and a miniature bus made in Haiti from cans of tomato paste and shaving cream, are among the more than 60 objects in "Woven Trains and Beaded Planes: Technology Meets Tradition," a show at the Newark Museum.
The exhibit features toys, textiles and crafts made in Africa, Asia and North and South America, items made in response to the introduction of technology into traditional cultures.
Airplanes, telephones and sewing machines are the predominant images shown.
"Technology -- communication and transportation -- is what has made the planet shrink," said Anne Spencer, the museum's curator of ethnology.
The show captures those moments when people first encounter a new technology.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  WORDS FROM DOOMED AIRLINER
Sounds of panic broke out aboard Korean Air Lines flight 007 immediately after it was hit by a Soviet air-to-air missile near Sakhalin Island on Sept. 1, 1983, according to transcripts from the cockpit recorder that were published in the Russian newspaper Izvestia.
A1  ROUND 2 IN ANGOLA EXPECTED
The former guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi said he had been told by the United Nations that the President of Angola fell short of an outright victory, so they will meet in a runoff election.
A3


J. P. Morgan Profit Up 7% in Quarter
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, the premier banker to the nation's largest corporations and a leading trader of foreign exchange and securities, said yesterday that third-quarter profits rose 7 percent, to $400 million.
Among other large banking companies, the First Chicago Corporation, parent of the First National Bank of Chicago, reported a loss of $365.1 million, resulting from its plans to sell $2 billion of commercial real estate loans.
NBD Bancorp, owner of the National Bank of Detroit, earned $81.9 million, up 5.2 percent from a year ago, as it benefited from very low loan losses and an increase in the amount of loans on its books.


People
*
Kerry M. Rubie was named chairman of Leo Burnett International, Chicago, filling a position vacant since Henry J. (Hank) Feeley became a vice chairman at Burnett in January.
Mr.
Rubie, 52, had been chairman and regional managing director of Burnett's Europe and Middle East network in London; succeeding him there is Richard Zobel, 46, previously managing director at Leo Burnett-Kyodo, Tokyo.
William S. Smith, 51, who had been client service director in Tokyo, will succeed Mr.
Zobel.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Gore Attacks President on Iran Arms and Iraq Loans
Senator Al Gore escalated his attacks on President Bush today for his involvement in the Iran-contra affair and his dealings with Saddam Hussein in the months leading to the war with Iraq, comparing the gravity of both issues to Watergate.
In a speech before the National Conference of Editorial Writers here, Mr.
Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, sought to take the trust issue from the Republicans by creating doubts about the President's truthfulness and at the same time to chisel away at the Bush Administration's principal strength, foreign policy.


How to Slow the Slaughter
While Americans focus increasingly on who will win on Nov. 3, embattled Bosnians worry about a simpler question: Will they live that long?
Serbia's planes continue to pound Bosnia's towns.
Brutal ethnic cleansing accelerates in northern Bosnia after Croatia's forces, nominally allied to Bosnia, faithlessly abandoned the area to Serb control.
Short of fuel as winter approaches, panicky residents of Sarajevo chop down the city's trees.
Cyrus Vance, the United Nations mediator, warns of a catastrophe of "untold dimensions" unless the world acts soon.


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pirates And Braves Cope With Day After
Bobby Cox knows what it feels like to lose the seventh game of a post-season series.
"When we got beat in Minnesota last year," the Atlanta manager recalled, "I thought there should be a game played somewhere the next day. You don't prepare for that."
The Braves didn't play a game today, but they will play on Saturday night, opening the World Series here against the Toronto Blue Jays.
The Pittsburgh Pirates are the team that was left with no more games to play anywhere this year.
And for them, the feeling has to be more crushing, more excruciatingly painful than anything Cox and the Braves experienced a year ago, when the Twins beat them in the seventh game of the World Series.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cyprus Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grow Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Stumbles, While Apple Sets Records; Laptop Sales Spur Strong Earnings
Apple Computer Inc. today reported a 20 percent increase in fourth-quarter income and record revenues and earnings for the fiscal year, buoyed by sales of its Powerbook notebook computers.
With more than $1 billion in sales during the year, the Powerbook is the most successful new personal computer since the original I.B.M.
PC.
Certainly, a good portion of those sales reflect pent-up demand because of Apple's delay in introducing a reasonably portable computer.
Nonetheless, the Powerbook's sales have been superb, making it the leading notebook on the market.


WPP Group Forms Health-Care Unit
WPP Group P.L.C. said yesterday that it would combine seven units to form a worldwide network called Common Health, specializing in health-care marketing and communications.
The network pulls together advertising agencies with health-care expertise like the Ferguson Communications Group in Parsippany, N.J., and health-care advertising divisions of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide and the J. Walter Thompson Company.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mentor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baldor Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Executive Changes
AMNEX INC., Stamford, Conn., a provider of long-distance information and operator service, appointed Peter M. Izzo Jr. president and chief operating officer.
ARIZONA INSTRUMENT CORP., Tempe, Ariz., which manufactures precision instruments, appointed Scott Carter vice president and chief financial officer.


He's Deion. He's Outta Control. He's Outta Control.
Wobbled by news media criticism?
Seeking to avoid the nosy-body reporters surrounding your locker?
Don't clam up, stuff a reporter in a locker or send dead rats to your favorite reporter.
Get your own unfiltered, unfettered word out.
Buy time on national TV!
Star in your own infomercial.
Find a shoe company to sponsor it.
Wear a nice cardigan.
Sit by a fireplace.
Say your piece.


Sealright Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Europeans Seek to Restore Unity
The one-day summit meeting of European Community leaders here on Friday, called to salvage some semblance of political unity among the 12 nations, will also highlight the deep economic divisions plaguing them.
The community will face considerable difficulty reaching accord on the two main economic issues facing its members: their approach to negotiations with the United States over agricultural trade and their efforts to put the European monetary system, which fractured during last month's currency crisis, back together.


Sandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 21


Unwinding In a Winding River Valley
About two hours northeast of the Bronx, New York City begins to loosen its iron grip, and the Middle Atlantic gives way to New England.
The transformation is obscured by the endless procession of suburbs and exurbs that pull southern Connecticut into the city's giant maw.
But the influence gradually weakens, and then dies, just about the time that the Connecticut River comes into view.
In days of yore, the stretch of river that runs from Middletown south to Long Island Sound was home to 50 shipyards.
Essex, near the mouth of the river, supported nine shipyards, and in 1775 built the first warship of the Revolutionary War, the Oliver Cromwell.
The neat clapboard houses in towns and villages along the river's banks belonged to sea captains who made their living from the West Indies trade, and took the clipper ships to China.
In the 19th century, 12,000 tons of elephant tusks found their way every month from Zanzibar to Deep River, where they were turned into piano keys, a local industry that gave its name to Ivoryton, near Essex.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  CARDINAL FALLS ILL AT CHARITY DINNER
John Cardinal O'Connor, complaining of nausea and lightheadedness, was taken by ambulance last night from the archdiocese's annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria to St.
Vincent's Hospital.
The Cardinal, who never lost consciousness, was alert and listed in stable condition, but the cause of his condition was not immediately known, said Joseph Zwilling, a spokesman for the archdiocese.
B3. 4 OFFICERS DISCIPLINED
Four New York City police officers have been placed on modified duty and are expected to be charged with violating departmental regulations by failing to volunteer what they knew about the killing of two men -- one of them an off-duty Housing Authority police officer -- in Bayville, Queens, high-ranking police officials said yesterday.
B3.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend "AN EVENING WITH ANNE AND MARGARET," the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
Performances by Anne Francine, Margaret Whiting and Jack Wrangler.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow at 9 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $30.
Information: (212) 244-3005.
"TRANSEARTH," La Mama E.T.C., 74A East Fourth Street, East Village.
The Butoh dancer Poppo and company.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today through Sunday, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 475-7710.
Closing Next Weekend "DANCING AT LUGHNASA," Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street.
Brian Friel's drama about about five unmarried sisters and their missionary brother, set in Ireland in the 1930's.
Through Oct. 25.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $35 to $40.
Information: 239-6200.
"JAKE'S WOMEN," Neil Simon Theater, 250 West 52d Street.
Neil Simon's play about a writer and the six most important women in his life; starring Alan Alda and Brenda Vaccaro; directed by Gene Saks.
Through Oct. 25.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"A MOON FOR THE MISBEGOTTEN," Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
Eugene O'Neill's drama, starring Joanne Camp, Paul O'Brien and Frank Lowe; directed by Allan Carlsen.
Through Oct. 24.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 5 and 9 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $14 weekdays, $16 weekends.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
"FRIDA," Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A musical theater piece about the artist Frida Kahlo, written and directed by Hilary Blecher, with lyrics and monologues by Migdalia Cruz; starring Helen Schneider.
Through Oct. 25.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10, $20 and $30.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
BILL T. JONES/ARNIE ZANE DANCE COMPANY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Oct. 25.
Performances: tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.; Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Oct. 24 at 2 and 8 P.M.; Oct. 25 at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
MAUREEN MCGOVERN, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor.
Through Oct. 24.
Performances: Tuesday through Saturday at 9 and 11:15 P.M. $35 cover charge.
Information: (212) 632-5100.
"HOMECOMING: WILLIAM H. JOHNSON AND AFRO-AMERICA, 1938-46," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Eighty paintings.
Also, "Parallel Visions: Selections from the Permanent Collection, 1938-46," 27 works by artists from the same era as Johnson, including Thomas Hart Benton, Arthur Dove, Edward Hopper, Jacob Lawrence and Grant Wood.
Through Oct. 25.
Hours: Wednesday, and Friday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Health Insurance Cuts
The Bush Administration has decided to urge the Supreme Court to rule that employers may cut health insurance coverage of workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS, Government lawyers said.
The move is expected in the next few days.
Article, page A18.


HealthSouth Rehabilitation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SEARS CUTS RATE FOR SOME DISCOVER CARD CLIENTS
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would cut the interest rate on its Discover Card for some customers from 19.8 percent, to 15.9 percent or 17.9 percent, depending on how much they charge.
Discover, the most widely held general purpose credit card in the country, said customers whose annual purchases with the card exceeded $1,000 would be eligible for the 15.9 percent rate beginning next year.
Those who purchased more than $500 would be set at 17.9 percent.
A spokesman for Sears's Discover operation said purchases averaged about $1,000 per card, but the company did not know how many of its 41 million accounts would be eligible for the lower rates.
The lower rate will help Discover compete with banks and other companies, like A.T.&amp; T., that have been lifting their shares of the credit card market by issuing Visa and Mastercard with lower interest rates.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; ISSUES, NOT ATTACKS, DOMINATE AS AUDIENCE GUIDES 2D DEBATE
The three Presidential candidates engaged in an earnest town-meeting exchange last night that became a forum for airing the nation's domestic woes during President Bush's Administration.
Mr.
Bush defended his record and his sensitivity to the suffering of the recession.
"Of course, you feel it when you're President of the United States," he said.


Art in Review
Milton Resnick Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through tomorrow
After a long, impressive career as an abstract painter, Milton Resnick's recent shift to the figure is surprising, though not, in the event, always surprising enough.
Much of the work in his current show is notable primarily for its air of cautious compromise.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., 60 percent owned by Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. and 40 percent owned by Chemical Banking Corp., is offering $100 million of daily floating-rate medium-term notes due Nov. 1, 1993, at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The initial rate was set at the prime rate, currently at 6 percent, less 255 basis points, with interest paid quarterly.
Noncallable for life, the notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $300 million of debt securities.


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Speeding Costs
Indy-car racer GARY BETTENHAUSEN pleaded no contest through his attorney to a charge of speeding in Amnicon, Wis., and was fined $69.


International Business Machines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Group Show Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street SteinGladstone Gallery 99 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 31
Butterflies, flowers, the doors of restaurant kitchens, clippings from the British tabloids, a Laundromat washing machine -- these are some of the things that figure into the art in this intriguing, if uneven, double-gallery group show.
The dozen artists represented are young and English, and have been stirring up the London art scene for the last few years.


American Air May Lay Off Up to 1,000 Managers
American Airlines said yesterday that it might lay off as many as 1,000 managers next year to cut its payroll by 10 percent to lower operating costs and reduce losses.
The step is the latest in a series that American and other major carriers have taken in the last two years to cope with lower traffic, fare wars and, at times, higher fuel prices. 'Dismal Condition' Blamed
Carriers including American, United, Delta and Northwest have stretched out the delivery of new aircraft, cut capital spending and reduced staff.


Daly Prepares Himself For Pistons Encounter
Chuck Daly will not readily admit that he is going to a homecoming tonight when he coaches the New Jersey Nets in an exhibition against the Detroit Pistons.
For one thing, the game is in Ann Arbor, on the campus of the University of Michigan, not at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
For another, he expects no outburst of emotions from himself or his former players.
It's not Daly's style to get sentimental, and certainly not the way of the Pistons.
Besides, with the exception of Dennis Rodman, the Pistons did not actively campaign for Daly to stay.
Most of them, Daly admitted earlier this week, were happy to see his nine-year reign as the Detroit coach end.


Decker vs. Budd, Part 2
MARY DECKER-SLANEY of the United States and ZOLA BUDD-PIETERSE of South Africa are scheduled to compete today in a mile road race in Sydney, Australia.
It will be their first rematch since their collision in the 3,000-meter final in the 1984 Los Angeles Games.
When the two bumped then, Decker-Slaney fell to the track injured and in tears.
Budd-Pieterse, running barefoot, finished seventh and was jeered by the crowd.


Social Security Benefits to Increase 3% in January
Social Security recipients will get a 3 percent increase in their monthly checks starting in January, the Government announced today.
That is the smallest cost-of-living adjustment in six years.
The increase, made automatically to keep pace with consumer prices, will benefit 40 million Americans on Social Security, as well as four million who receive welfare payments under the Supplemental Security Income program for the aged, blind and disabled.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Social Consciousness in Prints by Kathe Kollwitz
It's valuable to be reminded what a good artist Kathe Kollwitz was.
The achievement of this German printmaker (1867-1945), the subject of a large exhibition at Galerie St.
Etienne, often gets lost in the extreme popularity of her best-known work: the harrowing yet sentimental images of suffering mothers and children, rendered in broad, somewhat expressionistic strokes, which she began producing in the 1920's.
And as with female artists like Georgia O'Keeffe and Frida Kahlo, judgment is further confused by the fascination of Kollwitz's life story, a confusion increased by the close resemblance between the stoic broad-cheeked faces of the artist's late style and her own appearance.
Like those of many of her subjects, Kollwitz's life encompassed a high quotient of suffering, courage and almost saintlike goodness.
She lost one of two sons in World War I, and a grandson in World War II.
The grim social conditions chronicled in her art got her into trouble with the government of Kaiser Wilhelm II; during the Nazi era, she lost her teaching position and was banned from exhibiting her work.


New Home for A.T.&amp; T. 'Golden Boy'
"Golden Boy," A.T.&amp;T.'s 10-ton corporate mascot, slipped quietly out of Manhattan last weekend, arriving here Sunday in crates to begin a new life at the age of 76.
It left behind the two former headquarters buildings it once graced and a third it couldn't fit into or on top of.
Now, looking temporarily like a Brobdingnagian hood ornament, the 24-foot cast bronze sculpture of a winged male nude clutching bolts of electricity in one hand and cables in the other is being reassembled on a concrete pedestal outside the company's main building here.


Officers Disciplined After a Photo Session
Four New York City police officers were placed on modified assignment yesterday after one of them was said to have posed on Wednesday night on a Greenwich Village street with two topless models being photographed by a man who said he worked for Playboy magazine, the Police Department's Chief of Inspectional Services said.
The three other officers -- two men and a woman -- did not join the fourth officer -- a man -- in the photo shoot, but they were disciplined because they "were there and allowed it to happen," said the Chief, Robert J. Beatty.


Troubled Oakland Tribune Is Sold Again
The nation's only major black-owned daily newspaper, The Oakland Tribune, was sold today to the Alameda Newspaper Group, which owns four small dailies in the East Bay area.
The sale may end years of uncertainty at the unprofitable and debt-ridden newspaper, which its publisher, Robert C. Maynard, acquired from the Gannett Company in 1983.


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Science-Fiction Horrors In a Housing Project
Too many tales of the supernatural allow occult goings-on to take a garden-variety turn.
But the imagination of Clive Barker is authentically strange.
In "Candyman," adapted by Bernard Rose from the Barker novel "The Forbidden," the horror unfolds inside a housing project and plays out provocatively against a backdrop of racial injustice.
For those who find this approach too unconventional, the Candyman of the title also has a reassuringly familiar hook where his hand ought to be.
Using this, he slashes victims with suitable abandon.
After a perfunctory prologue involving careless, sexy teen-agers (any horror-film stalker's favorite prey), "Candyman" settles upon a Chicago academic named Helen Lyle (Virgina Madsen) as its heroine of choice.
A doctoral candidate whose studies lead her to the Candyman legend, Helen begins her own hands-on research into the story of this mysterious killer.
She learns that Candyman (Tony Todd), a black man in a fashionably long coat who can be summoned by repeating his name five times into a mirror, was once the victim of a terrible crime and has been seeking his own form of justice ever since.
His ashes are scattered at Cabrini Green, the Chicago housing project where much of the action takes place.


License in Jeopardy but Home Still Gets Referrals
The State of New York has continued to refer patients to a problem-plagued group home for the mentally ill in Queens, even though state officials have begun proceedings to revoke the home's license for misappropriating $4 million in public money.
In a report issued in June, authorities said the managers of the home, Hi-Li Manor in Far Rockaway, had spent the $4 million on furs, jewelry, cars and interest-free loans for themselves and relatives.
At the same time, they said, residents of the 120-bed home had been poorly fed and forced to live in unsafe and unsanitary conditions.


Clinton Recognizes Trade Pact's Flaws
To the Editor:
"Free Trade but With Time Bombs" (editorial, Oct. 6), on Gov.
Bill Clinton's statement about the North American Free Trade Agreement, perpetuates the myth that this is merely a trade pact.
It is an agreement that affects the Mexican investment climate.
Mr.
Clinton recognized that the enforcement of worker rights in Mexico is an integral part of that investment climate and at the heart of the agreement.


Transcript of 2d TV Debate Between Bush, Clinton and Perot
Following is a transcript of the Presidential debate in Richmond last night between President Bush, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot, as transcribed by The New York Times: Fair Trade
Q: Tonight's program is unlike any other Presidential debate in history -- we're making history now and it's pretty exciting.
An independent polling firm has selected an audience of 209 uncommitted voters from this area.
The candidates will be asked questions by these voters on a topic of their choosing -- anything they want to ask about.
My job as moderator is to, you know, take care of the questioning, ask questions myself if I think there needs to be continuity and balance, and sometimes I might ask the candidates to respond to what another candidate may have said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; A No-Nonsense Sort of Talk Show
The format of the second Presidential debate last night may have resembled the sort of daytime talk shows where guests wax confessional and personal on all human idiosyncrasies.
But when George Bush tried to press the character attack that his advisers see as his best hope to beat Bill Clinton, the audience swiftly cut him off.
They wanted a sober, serious discussion of issues: infrastructure, keeping jobs in the United States, crime, gun control, health care and deficit reduction.
They did not ask about foreign policy in the first 65 minutes of the debate.
They did not want to know about Mr.
Clinton's draft record, marital problems, travel schedule in Moscow or antiwar activities in Europe.


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Architecture; Designs for Putting Parks to Work
New York's congested neighborhoods gasp for open space.
And the city often faces drought.
But there's no scarcity of resources to alleviate these conditions.
Space and water are plentiful in New York.
The problem is how to use them.
"The Productive Park," a show of 33 designs for neighborhood parks on view at the Urban Center, shows how design can help supply meet demand.
It's also a superb display of another ample but underutilized local resource: architectural talent.
Co-sponsored by two private civic groups, the Architectural League and the Parks Council, along with the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, "The Productive Park" is a tantalizing glimpse of what could be accomplished if city agencies would dip into this talent pool.
Albert F. Appleton, Commissioner of Environmental Protection, seems poised to take the plunge.
He got this project under way with a plan to supplement the city's overburdened water supply by tapping into aquifers that lie beneath Brooklyn and Queens; a rudimentary method of water treatment would extract the water from these underground sources, purify it and pump it into the city's system.


Maradona, Part 8: The Color of Money
The MARADONA saga will not end.
The Italian club Naples said yesterday that it had asked FIFA, soccer's governing body, to void the Argentine star's transfer to Seville in Spain.
The 31-year-old Maradona refused to honor the final year of his contract with Naples after completing a 15-month worldwide suspension after testing positive for cocaine.
He moved to the Spanish club in a $7.5 million transfer deal last month in which FIFA had to mediate.


The Art Market
A Disney Attack
The incident may seem a little Mickey Mouse.
But it's Donald Duck, too.
And bets are that when Goofy gets wind of it, he'll be growling mad.


Gander Mountain Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. reported a $2.8 billion quarterly loss, shocking Wall Street and sending its shares skidding $5.125 to $72.875 -- their lowest level in a decade.
It had a huge charge for 20,000 workers who retired early, and lower results otherwise.  [ Page D1. ]
Apple, empowered by its Powerbook notebook computers, reported a 20 percent rise in quarterly earnings.  [ D1. ]


Conference in England Weighs European Unity
European Community leaders began gathering in this central English city today for a daylong summit meeting on Friday intended to explore differences over the future of European political and monetary union, including proposals to limit the power of community bureaucrats in Brussels.
But senior British officials are dampening expectations of any kind of breakthrough regarding coordination of currencies, trade or political union at the meeting, which Prime Minister John Major summoned last month.


Protesters Charge Lack of Action on Sexual Harassment


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: Attacking Bush's Record
The Clinton campaign began broadcasting this 30-second commercials yesterday.
Officials said it would be used for about a week in 20 markets, but they would not say where.
ON THE SCREEN -- Opens with "1988" on a white background.
Images of President Bush at assorted public appearances four years ago, including the 1988 Republican convention.


F.B.I. Chief Cancels Talks As Agencies' Strife Grows
Officials of the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation clashed today with raw ferocity brought into the open by the investigation of William S. Sessions, the bureau's Director.
The hostilities broke out after Mr.
Sessions canceled a meeting today with ethics investigators, and his lawyer assailed the Justice Department for disclosing the details of accusations against Mr.
Sessions to the press.


Washington Backs Secret Latin Courts
To the Editor:
"Peru's Invisible Judges: A Faceless Tyranny?" (news article, Sept. 27) describes fears that stripping defendants of their rights in secret courts with anonymous judges will set back justice and catch both innocent and guilty.
You fail to say that the United States "war on drugs" has pushed use of "faceless judges" in Peru, Colombia and Bolivia.


U.S. Indicts 3 In Skadden Insider Case
The Government filed criminal and civil charges yesterday against three men who it said had engaged in an insider-trading scheme notable for the number of companies involved.
The United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York and the Securities and Exchange Commission simultaneously filed charges against Christopher Garvey, who is 26 years old, a former paralegal at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, Wall Street's leading merger and acquisition law firm during the 1980's; Darrin Gleeman, 26, and his father, Seymour Gleeman, 59, a former senior marketing executive at the International Business Machines Corporation.


The Surrounding Scene; It Seemed Like Donahue. But With Bush, Clinton and Perot, It Sure Wasn't.
It turns out there is a reason Phil Donahue likes to talk to cannibalistic transsexuals in love with their mothers.
A channel-roaming viewer, looking for "Cheers" and tricked by the familiar sight of middle-aged men on bar stools, might have thought for a moment that he had stumbled onto Mr.
Donahue's talk show.


New York City and Environs Land Goodwill Games for '98
It was a sporting upset in the fine tradition of New York.
Only this time it was the city itself, and the metropolitan area, that managed the surprise.
New York City, New Jersey and Long Island were awarded the 1998 Goodwill Games last night, an intriguing but risky choice by the Games' selection committee.
Six years from now, the area will be called upon to play host to thousands of international athletes and fans who have every right to expect upgraded athletic facilities and a convenient ride to the arena.


Trial Opens In Glen Ridge Abuse Case
The jury in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault case today heard sharply conflicting descriptions of sexual activities that took place on March 1, 1989, and of the young woman involved.
One defense lawyer argued that if an assault occurred, the woman assaulted herself.
In his opening statement, New Jersey's chief prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, said that the woman, now 21 years old, had suffered from an "organic brain disorder" from infancy and as a teen-ager was unable to sew, follow a recipe, keep a bank account, make change, understand prices on a menu or take a train or a bus.
She was "easily deceived" and "thirsted for friends," Mr.
Goldberg told the jury of 10 women and 6 men.


Art in Review
Ralph Eugene Meatyard 292 Gallery 120 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 24
When Ralph Eugene Meatyard died in 1972, he had just begun to achieve renown for his enigmatic, emotionally charged photographs.
This new gallery's first exhibition is a small selection of Meatyard's black-and-white prints, from the delicate out-of-focus calligraphic forms of his "Zen Twigs" series to photographs of children in abandoned buildings.


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


This Time for the Giants, It's Battle of the Backups
For Phil Simms, this will be his first Sunday on injured reserve after arthroscopic elbow surgery.
For Jeff Hostetler, who will start for Simms again, it will be a chance to help cement the quarterback job he once held.
For Dave Brown or Kent Graham or perhaps both, it may be a step toward becoming the Giants' quarterback of the future.
For the offensive linemen, it will be another day of blocking no matter who the quarterback is.
On Sunday, when the Giants play the Los Angeles Rams in Anaheim, Calif., Hostetler will probably be a willing scrambler again.
If he is knocked out of the game, his replacement will be a rookie: Brown or Graham.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gunman Kills 4 Who Collected Child Payments
A truck driver who claimed that child-support payments had ruined his life walked into a county office building today and fatally shot four women whose jobs were to track down and collect support money.
Icily calm when trapped by law-enforcement officers, he fatally shot himself in the head with a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol.
He had, he said, "hurt everyone I came here to hurt."


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonds Lose Early Gains, and More
The bond market got a shot of adrenalin yesterday morning from some sour economic news out of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
But the booster shot was not enough to keep a rally going.
And the market gave up all of its gains and then some some in an afternoon of tumbling prices.
Traders said there was no specific economic news in the afternoon to touch off the slide and suggested that the market was just caught in a trading range ahead of the Presidential election.


Jolie's Halo Is Meadowlands Favorite
The road to the Breeders' Cup will cut through New Jersey tonight when Jolie's Halo races 10 rivals in the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup, the last major test for older horses before the $10 million "World Series of racing" two weeks later.
Jolie's Halo, one of the warriors of the handicap class last year, has been installed as the 7-5 favorite for the mile-and-one-eighth race.
He is also considered the only horse in the field likely to go on to the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic on Oct. 31 at Gulfstream Park in Florida.
He has been ranked as one of the top half-dozen candidates for the Classic, along with Pleasant Tap, Strike the Gold, A.P.
Indy and Sultry Song, the top four finishers in that order in the Jockey Club Gold Cup last Saturday, and the European stars St.
Jovite and possibly Arazi.


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Warns Iraqis to Cooperate With New Arms Inspection Team
The United Nations Security Council warned President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today that it expects him to cooperate fully with the arms inspectors sent to hunt down his weapons of mass destruction when they reach Baghdad on Friday.
The Council issued the warning after President Hussein called the United Nations arms inspectors "stray dogs eating the flesh of the nation" in a speech broadcast on Oct. 6 and accused them of trying to "strip Iraq of industrial capability" it needs for reconstruction.


Digital Reassigns Head of U.S. Sales Force
Making good on his pledge to shake things up, Robert B. Palmer, the new president and chief executive of the beleaguered Digital Equipment Corporation, removed Donald P. Zereski yesterday from his post as head of United States sales, service and support.
John F. Smith, Digital's chief operating officer, will take over the post on an interim basis, according to a Digital spokesman, Jeff Gibson, who said Mr.
Palmer was still evaluating both internal and external candidates for the position.
Mr.
Palmer hinted in his inaugural presentation on Oct. 1 that he would be seeking outside talent to help the sales organization.


Sounds Around Town
Mike Renzi's Jazz
Mike Renzi Trio, Tavern on the Green (Chestnut Room), Central Park West at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
When Mike Renzi arrived in New York in 1979, he got a booking at Carnegie Tavern playing jazz piano.
But within a few weeks Sylvia Syms hired him to be her accompanist and shortly afterward Mel Torme hired him for a Carnegie Hall performance and an engagement at Marty's.
That was the beginning of his work as a constantly in demand accompanist for discriminating singers.
Tomorrow night, however, Mr.
Renzi will return to his early jazz inclinations at the Tavern on the Green, leading a trio in which he will be joined by the bassist Chip Jackson and the drummer Terry Clarke.
There is a music charge of $10, but no minimum, for sets at 9 and 10:30 P.M., and midnight.
Dick Katz on Piano
Dick Katz Quintet, Chartwell Booksellers, Park Avenue Plaza, 55 East 52d Street, (212) 308-0643.
The second in this autumn's season of monthly Saturday afternoon tea dances in the lobby of Park Avenue Plaza, sponsored by Chartwell Booksellers and the New York Swing Dance Society, will bring the pianist Dick Katz to this series for the first time.
Mr.
Katz, who is a pianist with the American Jazz Orchestra and has also played in the Buck Clayton Orchestra for the last two years, is to be leading a quintet tomorrow from 3 to 6 P.M. with two colleagues from the American Jazz Orchestra -- the trumpeter John Eckert and the alto saxophonist Jon Gordon -- along with the bassist Todd Coolman and the drummer Eddie Locke.
Their program will include pop standards and compositions by Oscar Pettiford along with arrangements of Thelonious Monk compositions, written by Mr.
Katz for a group that included the alto saxophonist Lee Konitz when it played regularly at the West End Cafe eight years ago.
Admission is free.
Not Famous . . .
Yet
"New Faces in Jazz," Sazerac House, 533 Hudson Street, at Charles Street, West Village, (212) 989-0313.
For those who like to discover young jazz musicians before they become too famous, the Sazerac House is inaugurating a series of three night showcases featuring students enrolled in the New School Jazz Program.
This program has already produced such new stars as the trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Rebecca Franklin and the saxophonists Vincent Herring, Jesse Davis and Virginia Mayhew.
The performers are selected by the jazz author Stuart Troup, who is a consultant to the series, and Barry Cullen, the owner of the Sazerac House, one of the oldest buildings in the West Village.
Each student group will be introduced at the start of its two-week engagement by an established jazz star, like the saxophonist Lew Tabackin, who was the guest host last night.
Future Thursday night guests are to include the pianists Junior Mance and Norman Simmons and the saxophonist Ken Peplowski.
Sets tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30 and 11 and 12:30 A.M.
There is no cover charge, no minimum charge and no music charge.


Cullen/Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"We have been struggling for years to know what happened to our loved ones. Now we face the agonizing recognition that their death was neither painless nor instant." -- HANS EPHRAIMSON-ABT, whose daughter was killed on Korean Air Lines Flight 007.  [ A6:5. ]


Enron Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rossin Greenberg Wins Fayva Account
Fayva, the retail footwear chain owned by Morse Shoe Inc. in Canton, Mass., yesterday named Rossin Greenberg Seronick in Boston to handle its account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $10 million, after seven years at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York.
A new radio and television campaign is expected to begin in mid-November.


Reviews/Film; Meeting the Neighbors Is a Very Big Mistake
In "Consenting Adults," Richard and Priscilla Parker (Kevin Kline and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio) live in a brand-new house with a second-floor study that directly overlooks the neighbors' Jacuzzi.
This becomes an important point once Eddy and Kay Otis (Kevin Spacey and Rebecca Miller) move in next door.
Eddy, who makes his entrance roaring out of a moving van on his motorcycle, is clearly the showier of the two.
But it is Kay who gets Richard's attention.
It's also Kay who likes the Jacuzzi and Kay, no doubt, who is careless about the window shades.


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:


Goodrich (B.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cleaner Japan, Easier Ally
According to stereotype, public opinion doesn't count for much in Japanese politics.
But public outrage over big-money politics is driving Tokyo's most important power broker, Shin Kanemaru, from his remaining political posts.
If the public can sustain its righteous anger, it might transform Japan's one-party system and develop more representative political institutions.
Americans have a stake in this struggle.
A Japan less beholden to farm voters and faction bosses could be a less frustrating ally.


Investigation of D'Amato Is Transferred to Washington
A Justice Department unit in Washington has taken over an investigation by a Federal prosecutor in Brooklyn into allegations that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato tried to influence grand-jury testimony of a former Federal housing official concerning Mr.
D'Amato's role in the awarding of Federal housing contracts.
Senator D'Amato, locked in a tight re-election race, yesterday strongly denied any wrongdoing.
He said that although he had met with the official, Joseph Monticciolo, a former New York regional director of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, he dismissed as "absolutely untrue" and "totally preposterous" the allegations, which were made by Arnold I. Biegen, a former fund-raiser for Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Mr.
Biegen recently pleaded guilty to fraud, embezzlement and tax evasion.
H.U.D.
Contracts
In an unusual turn, the investigation, which was being led by an assistant United States attorney in Brooklyn who has been investigating Senator D'Amato and his brother in connection with H.U.D. contracts, was transferred recently to another Justice Department unit in Washington, reportedly because the Brooklyn prosecutor was thought to be overworked.


Motorman Found Guilty


Excerpts: Radio Debate, Abrams's Apology, D'Amato's Response
Following are excerpts from the New York senatorial debate yesterday on the "Imus in the Morning" radio program on WFAN-AM, as transcribed by The New York Times.
IMUS So let me start just to get this thing going with you, Bob.
Have you had any second thoughts about calling Senator D'Amato a fascist and comparing his behavior to Josef Goebbels?


Accounts
*
Tops Appliance City, Edison, N.J., to Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners, Parsippany, N.J., as the first agency to handle the retail chain's television advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Why We Need Genetic Privacy
To the Editor:
Your report on a Harris poll commissioned by the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation raises troubling questions about public perceptions of the right to genetic privacy and the promise of gene therapy (Science Times, Sept. 29).


Crown Crafts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Motorman Is Convicted In '91 Crash
Rejecting charges of murder, a Manhattan jury yesterday convicted a motorman of manslaughter in last year's Union Square subway crash.
Five passengers died when a speeding Lexington Avenue express jumped the tracks after the motorman, who had been drinking, fell asleep at the controls.
The prosecution had argued that the 39-year-old defendant, Robert E. Ray, should be convicted of second-degree murder because he showed "depraved indifference" by operating the train, as he told detectives, after drinking about 20 ounces of whiskey.
Witnesses described a harrowing ride through the Bronx and Manhattan in which Mr.
Ray overshot station platforms and sped wildly before derailing just north of the 14th Street station shortly after midnight on Aug. 28, 1991.


Wilmington Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Janzen Takes Lead  Lee Janzen opened with an eagle yesterday and went on to shoot a career-best, 10-under 62 for a two-stroke lead after the first round of the $1 million Disney Golf Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
The score matched the best this season on the men's tour and was one off the record for the Magnolia Course.
Mark O'Meara, Payne Stewart and Andrew Magee were two shots back after eight-under 64's. (AP) U.S.
Wins First Match  Fred Couples, Davis Love 3d and Tom Kite mastered cold, windswept St.
Andrews yesterday as the United States swept aside New Zealand, 3-0, in its opening Dunhill Cup match in St.
Andrews, Scotland. (AP) TENNIS  Becker Is Overmatched  Third-seeded Boris Becker was eliminated from the $1.1 million Seiko Super tournament yesterday in Tokyo, a 6-1, 6-2 victim of 14th-seeded Henrik Holm and the Swede's lightning serves.
The top-seeded player and defending champion, Stefan Edberg, gained the quarterfinals by defeating Patrick McEnroe, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3).
Second-seeded Michael Chang defeated a fellow American, Jonathan Stark, 6-0, 6-7 (5-7), 6-0. (AP) BOXING  Knockout for Carbajal  The International Boxing Federation junior flyweight champion, Michael Carbajal, improved to 26-0 with an eighth-round technical knockout of Jose Diaz of Mexico on Wednesday night in Rosemont, Ill.
Diaz dropped to 26-21. (AP) SOCCER  Victory for Saudis  Saudi Arabia scored three second-half goals yesterday and beat the United States, 3-0, in the opening round of the Intercontinental Championship for the King Fahd Cup in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
The United States will play the loser of today's Ivory Coast-Argentina match on Monday for third place.


CIT Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State Dept. Admits Clinton File Error
Dropping its contention that an urgent search for consular records on Gov.
Bill Clinton was properly handled, the State Department said today that the effort had violated its own regulations.
On Wednesday the department defended the urgency of the search because of the Presidential election.
But today it acknowledged that its policies bar special handling of such cases when the reason for haste is an imminent election.


Bombay Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Alfa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Misses Chances In Currency Scuffles
To the Editor:
Your excellent explanation of the British pound, the German mark and why a currency crisis erupted (front page, Sept. 17) spells out the technical reasons, but does not dwell on the economic philosophical reasons or matters of perception, which are all important in an unregulated market.
Two crucial points are unaddressed:


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Fructose Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Long and Short of It as Islanders End Slide
There were plenty of fluke goals tonight, and the Islanders got more of them.
There were plenty of foolish penalties, and the Flyers took more of them.
As a result, the Islanders ended two streaks with a 5-4 victory at the Spectrum.
The short streak was three games without a victory at the start of the season.
They are now 1-2-1 as they head back to Long Island for the home opener against the Rangers on Saturday night.
The long streak was 15 games without a victory, since 1987, at the Spectrum.
Maybe this really is a "New Ice Age," as the Islanders' marketing slogan proclaims.


For Children
'Charlotte's Web'  Heights Players  26 Willow Place  Brooklyn Heights  (718) 237-2752  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Through Oct. 25
Because of how much E. B. White knew about children, his story "Charlotte's Web" travels through generations without losing any luster.
This rendition uses puppets and children and adult actors along with mesmerizing lighting; its Charlotte is a tender-speaking spider who has royal-blue hair and purple appendages.
She reaches the audience's hearts in her effort to help Wilbur (a boy with a pig's nose) avoid the frying pan.


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Return Specialist Struggles to Come Back
The Wednesday before the third Saturday in October, the day Alabama will meet Tennessee, was like every other Wednesday has been for David Palmer this fall.
When Gene Stallings, football coach of the Crimson Tide, had his weekly visit with his best player, their discussion involved things far more significant than the sport that had brought them together.
"His counseling," Stallings said, describing the agenda.
"What he's doing on weekends. What's happening at night. Whom he's associating with."


Knicks Start Exhibition Play
When the Knicks begin preseason play on Friday night, Pat Riley would like to see two things: a solid effort, and a victory.
"I just think winning creates a positive environment," said Riley, as the Knicks prepared for a game in Albany against the San Antonio Spurs.
"And if you can win while you're experimenting, you should feel even better about yourselves."


Lindsay Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for 12mo to Aug 31


Review/Music; Venerating Frida Kahlo
There is a type of religious play, common to many cultures, that goes something like this:
Take the life of a revered saint or seer.
Select highlights from that life, episodes of suffering, martyrdom, trial and triumph.
Enact them in sequence, accompanied by music drawn from the folk culture.
Fill the drama with icons and symbols, costumes and display.


Review/Television; Why Things Are Looking Up for the Democrats
After years of exile amid the fleshpots of Republican Administrations, Ben J. Wattenberg seems to be going home to the Democratic Party.
Or, as he prefers to characterize the situation, it has come home to him and other disaffected Democrats.
"The Democrats, 1960 to 1992" -- the first of two programs called "America's Political Parties: Power and Principle" -- is his account of the ups and downs and, as he sees it, this year's up of Democratic fortunes.
Mr.
Wattenberg, a newspaper columnist and television commentator who served in the Administrations of Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter, identifies with the traditional Democratic coalition that was shattered by what he calls "the cause groups" that gave Senator George S. McGovern the Presidential nomination and, in Mr.
Wattenberg's opinion, the resounding defeat of 1972.
He says that to the blue-collar workers and others who had been the party's mainstay, the new Democrats seemed "too soft, too liberal, too permissive, too squishy."


Al Brackman, 80; A Music Publisher
Al Brackman, a music publisher and board member of the National Music Publishers' Association, died Oct. 9 at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 80 years old and lived in Plandome, L.I., and San Diego.
He died of heart failure, a spokeswoman for the music publishers' association said.


As Shrieks Fill Court, Killer In Russia Is Sentenced to Die
While the manacled defendant bellowed from his metal cage and spectators cheered, a Rostov court today sentenced Andrei Chikatilo to death for a 12-year career of unusually sadistic sex murders of 52 boys, girls and young women.
"Irrespective of any mitigating circumstances, taking into account the extraordinary cruelty of the crimes, the court cannot but give him the only punishment he deserves, the supreme measure of punishment, and sentences him to death!" the chief justice, Leonid B. Akubzhanov, shouted into his microphones over the din.


A Welcome Home on the Bench
Maybe tomorrow afternoon Coach Jerry Moore will fire a finger at Richie Diaz and send the 16-year-old father plunging onto the field against Irvington in his first varsity appearance.
Richie wants to play so badly that he can barely talk about it, and 15-year-old Chris Diaz wants to be next and 9-year-old Joey Diaz knows that once his brothers make it he will become even more famous in the insulated world of Elizabeth High School football.
Only their mother, Miriam Montoya, will have mixed feelings.


Nuggets' Cook Is Out
Denver Nuggets forward ANTHONY COOK will miss the entire 1992-93 season after undergoing surgery yesterday to repair a ruptured patella tendon in his right knee.
The 6-foot-9-inch Cook was injured during the team's Blue-White scrimmage on Wednesday night in Colorado Springs.
He played in only 80 games his first two National Basketball Association seasons because of knee and shoulder injuries.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.C.A.A. Nominees
JOSEPH N. CROWLEY, president of the University of Nevada-Reno, has been nominated to serve as the next president of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Crowley, who would be just the second university president to serve as N.C.A.A. president, was recommended for the two-year term by the N.C.A.A.
Nominating Committee yesterday.
The only other university president to serve as an N.C.A.A. president was JAMES FRANK of Lincoln University in Missouri in 1981-82.


Cleveland L. Dennard, 63, Ally Of Dr. King and Ex-College Chief
Cleveland L. Dennard, a management officer of the Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta and a former college president, died on Saturday in Atlanta.
He was 63 years old and lived in Atlanta.
Dr.
Dennard died of pancreatic cancer at Southwest Hospital and Medical Center, said Denise McFall, a spokeswoman for the King Center.


A Drama Plays Out In One Classic Inning
Begin at the beginning.
The mind, though, rebels.
There is too much wonder, too great an appreciation of hurt, too many tangled themes of strategy and coincidence and heartbreak.
It was an inning for the ages.
The Braves, trailing by 2-0, scored three runs in the bottom of the ninth inning Wednesday night to defeat the Pirates in Game 7 of the National League Championship Series.
So much for the facts.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parker Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Administration Engulfed in Disarray As Bush Concentrates on Campaign
While President Bush tries to revive his re-election bid on the campaign trail, his team in Washington is engulfed in another kind of crisis as key parts of the Administration seem to be unraveling.
In the latest twist, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, under threat of criminal investigation by the Justice Department, canceled testimony he was to give today about whether he had misused agency funds.
Meanwhile, his wife was quoted in a Texas newspaper as saying that her husband had been in a "stupor," brought on in part by the political feuding between him and Bush appointees in other agencies. [ Page A18. ]


A Novel Is More Than the Sum of Its Opinions
To the Editor:
I must insist on a small but important clarification in "Happiest Couples in Study Have Sex after 60" (news article, Oct. 4).


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
BRIGITTE BARDOT was secretly married to an aide to France's extreme right-wing leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, in Norway in August, it was disclosed this week in Paris.
According to The Associated Press, ALAIN VIZIER, a spokesman for the National Front, confirmed that the 58-year-old actress married BERNARD D'ORMALE, 51, on Aug. 16.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Concern In Moscow Hotel Deal
Hoping to overcome its image as a tourist destination with first-rate sights but second-rate accommodations, Moscow has chosen the Carlson Companies to renovate and manage the city's hotels.
Carlson, the Minneapolis-based hospitality and tourism giant, will also develop a network of retail travel agencies, car rental operations, wholesale tour operations and bus tours in Russia.


Runoff Now Expected in Angola as Leader Falls Short
The former rebel leader Jonas Savimbi said today that he had been told by the United Nations that President Jose Eduardo dos Santos fell short of an outright victory in the recent election and that as a result the two bitter political and ideological rivals would meet again in a runoff.
Nearly two weeks after the elections, no official results have been made public, although it appears that the national electoral council will issue them soon.


Martin Gregg Is Dead; Theater Producer, 51
Martin Gregg, a producer of entertainments and theater for children, died on Sunday at Mercy Hospital in San Diego.
He was 51 years old and lived in San Diego.
He died of AIDS-related causes, said his companion, Milton Arroyo.


Review/Film; A Would-Be Star Tells The Stories of His Life
Before dying of AIDS in June at the age of 33, Jeffrey Strouth, the subject of Reno Dakota's documentary portrait "American Fabulous," lived several lifetimes' worth of frenetic adventure.
Proudly and flamboyantly gay, Strouth also learned how to tell, and perhaps how to embellish, a good yarn.
"American Fabulous," which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a crudely edited autobiographical monologue that was videotaped two years ago in the back of a 1957 Cadillac while driving around in Strouth's native territory, southern Ohio.
Although growing up gay in small-town America must have had its traumas, in Strouth's recollections the experience becomes a grotesquely funny personal odyssey whose pungency is enhanced by the twangy lilt of his delivery.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal
Becco
Family-style dining -- read: bulk eating -- is the newest marketing device by certain types of restaurants, mostly Italian and American.
The latest entry in the all-you-can-devour sweepstakes is Becco, a spinoff of Felidia on East 58th Street.
Housed in the former Carolina on West 46th Street's Restaurant Row, Becco is the creation of Lidia Bastianich, the owner of Felidia, and her son, Joseph.


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japanese Major Suggests a Cure for Scandals
Frustrated by Japan's seemingly endless political scandals, an officer in the Japanese military sent something of a chill through the Government today by suggesting a cure drawn from Tokyo in the 1930's: a military coup.
At first some Government officials thought the article that appeared this morning in Japan's largest-circulation weekly magazine, the Shukan Bunshun, was a joke.
It appeared on the newsstands only hours after the most powerful behind-the-scenes force in Japanese politics, Shin Kanemaru, had finally announced his resignation from Parliament for accepting millions of dollars in illegal contributions and using organized crime figures to help install a Japanese Prime Minister.


Standard Register Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Books of The Times; On the Trail of the Other Nietzsche
Forgotten Fatherland The Search for Elisabeth Nietzsche By Ben Macintyre 256 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
Elisabeth Nietzsche, the sister of the famous philosopher, was not only the chief architect of his posthumous fame, but also a ferocious anti-Semite, ardent Nazi and friend of Hitler who attempted to remake her brother's reputation in her own racist image.
Nearly a half-century before the Holocaust, she and her husband, Bernhard Forster, founded an Aryan colony of German peasants in South America: a settlement that Ben Macintyre, a correspondent for The Times of London, recently tracked down and found in the jungles of Paraguay.


I.B.M. Stumbles, While Apple Sets Records; Big Blue's Shares Slide to 10-Year Low
The International Business Machines Corporation reported yesterday a third-quarter loss of $2.78 billion, reflecting both a huge charge for the 20,000 workers who accepted early retirement and sharply lower net income excluding the charge.
The results shocked analysts and sent I.B.M.'s shares down $5.125, or 7 percent, to $72.875 -- their lowest level in a decade.
The sharp slide in I.B.M. stock accounted for more than half the 20.80-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average, which closed at 3,174.68.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the United States Senate race in Ohio referred to Senator John Glenn's service as an astronaut incorrectly in some copies.
He was in the Mercury space program, not Gemini.


Both Senator and Rival Have Faced Ethics Issues
Underlying the accusations of ethical lapses traded by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and his Democratic challenger, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, are issues of different nature and weight.
In Mr.
Abrams's case, they concern criticisms of his fund-raising practices laid out three years ago by the State Commission on Government Integrity.


Coach Returns to Teach (Same) Game of (New) Life
THEY pace the sidelines.
They mumble into headsets.
They check notes.
And they talk to boys.
Oh, boy, how they talk to boys!
Across the country, high school football coaches are nervously on duty these crisp fall Fridays and sunny Saturdays, setting strategies, ordering plays, screaming reminders to more than 910,000 teen-age knights who don their armor and school colors and venture forth to seek glory on about two acres of grass.
Some spectators think football is just a game.


American Maize Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; The Pirates Lost a Series, Not Respect
JUST don't say it.
Not around me, not around anybody who knows baseball.
Don't call the Pittsburgh Pirates "losers." Don't say they couldn't win the big one.
There are too many people who feel sad that Jim Leyland and the Pirates of this generation couldn't quite make it to the World Series, that they have lost three straight league series.


American Savings of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taxis, Liveries and the New Plan to Shake Them Up
When Noach Dear became chairman of the City Council Transportation Committee in January, one of the first things he did was get a license to drive a cab.
"I wanted to find out first hand what it's like out there," he said.
But he didn't have to get behind the wheel to learn how politically active the taxi industry is.
When Mayor David N. Dinkins floated an ambitious idea to revamp the industry in January, Mr.
Dear's office was flooded with angry calls from cab owners.
It has also been flooded with something else: checks.
In May and June, Mr.
Dear received over $16,000 in campaign contributions from yellow cab, livery and corporate-car companies, city records show.


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allen Friedman, 71, Ex-Teamster Who Wrote of Links to Mob, Dies
Allen Friedman, a former union official who was the co-author of a book on mob influence after being prosecuted in 1983 in a case involving the teamsters president Jackie Presser, died on Tuesday in Cleveland.
He was 71 years old.
He died of heart failure at the Cleveland Clinic Hospital, his family said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Sept. 5 about Joseph L. Rauh Jr. described incorrectly the questions that the playwright Arthur Miller refused to answer for the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1956.
Mr.
Miller was asked to identify writers who had attended Communist Party meetings, not simply former associates with left-wing sentiments.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


A Lawyer Beloved of the Famous and Troubled
The evidence of Robert S. Bennett's ascension as the capital's -- perhaps the nation's -- most sought-after lawyer for big-time white-collar defendants was on display last month at the Federal Courthouse here.
In the morning, Mr.
Bennett sat at the defense table alongside Clark M. Clifford, who had spent more than a half century at the pinnacle of influence in the capital advising Presidents and personifying the Washington lawyer-lobbyist.
Now Mr.
Clifford, accused of fraud in connection with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal, has turned to Mr.
Bennett.


Philip Morris Share Price Plunges 5%
The stock of the Philip Morris Companies plunged about 5 percent yesterday, after the company warned that its tobacco shipments in the United States would drop sharply in the fourth quarter because of heightened competition from low-priced cigarettes.
The forecast set off a flurry of selling on Wall Street as investors grew worried about a slowdown in growth at the critically important domestic tobacco unit, which accounted for about half of Philip Morris's earnings last year.


Binks Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Great Show for All to See in the Big Apple!


INSIDE
Raise in Pension Checks
The cost-of-living adjustment for Social Security recipients in January will be 3 percent, the smallest increase in six years.
Page A20.
In September, consumer prices rose only 0.2 percent.
Page D2.
Presidential Runoff in Angola
Jonas Savimbi, the ex-rebel leader, said he and President Jose Eduardo dos Santos would meet in a presidential runoff in Angola.
Page A3.
A Huge Loss for I.B.M.
I.B.M. reported a quarterly loss of $2.78 billion, and its common stock tumbled more than $5 a share to its lowest level in a decade.
Page D1.
O'Connor Hospitalized
John Cardinal O'Connor was hospitalized after feeling nauseous, but aides said he was not seriously ill.
Page B3.
A PC Window on Whimsy
Software was boring.
Then came flying toasters, and fish that swim across a computer screen.
Page D1.


COMPANY NEWS
ASEA BROWN BOVERI INC., Stamford, Conn., received a pact to upgrade 130 electric-powered commuter railcars for New Jersey Transit.
LITTON INDUSTRIES, Beverly Hills, Calif., won a $23.8 million pact to produce warning systems for planes and helicopters for the Army.


Personal Injury Victims Deserve Jury Trial
To the Editor:
In "Clumsy? Sue New York City" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30), Saul B. Shapiro, a lawyer, tells of his experience dabbling in "negligence cases" for four months, defending New York City pro bono.
He waxes philosophical on the burden such lawsuits impose upon a city overburdened with fiscal woes.
His argument is that these apparently frivolous cases don't deserve a jury trial.
He wants them relegated to an arbitrator or transferred to the Court of Claims, where judges paid by New York can more economically dispose of them.
He reminds me of the definition of a conservative -- a liberal who's been mugged.


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Mario Cravo Neto Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through Oct. 24
In his elegant black-and-white pictures, the Brazilian photographer Mario Cravo Neto depicts models in delicate light, posed against rich black backgrounds and holding such suggestive objects as a shiny stone or a large balloon.
One striking image shows a boy holding a live goose in front of his face.
The bird's brilliant white feathers contrast with the boy's dark skin, while its beady eye appears where his should be.


Cardinal O'Connor Taken From Dinner to Hospital
John Cardinal O'Connor, complaining of nausea and light-headedness, was taken by ambulance last night from the New York Archdiocese's annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria to St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
It was the second time in 14 months that the Cardinal, 72 years old, has been hospitalized.
He suffered heat prostration on Aug. 31, 1991, while celebrating Mass at a religious community in Monroe, N.Y., and spent three days at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.


STUDY CHALLENGES LONGEVITY THEORY
In a finding that has surprised experts who study aging, researchers have discovered that life expectancy may not always decrease as organisms grow older.
A very few individuals are so long-lived that, past a certain age, their life expectancy actually increases.
The subjects of the experiments, which are preliminary, were fruit flies, but some demographers and experts on aging say the implications could be far reaching.
The studies, they say, may help demolish the long-held belief that every species, including humans, has a midnight hour, an age at which the organism essentially falls apart.


Ogilvy Executive To Lose His Post
Julian Clopet, North American president at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, yesterday became the agency's first top executive casualty since Charlotte Beers became chairwoman and chief executive in April.
Ogilvy announced that his position would be eliminated in a restructuring, effective Dec. 31, although he would remain as a consultant through at least next year.
Mr.
Clopet, 52 years old, has worked at Ogilvy since 1968.
He was named president of North American operations in 1990 after 11 years as president and chief executive at Ogilvy Canada.


Review/Jazz; An Evening of Ellington, In Spirit and in the Notes
In their heyday, the big bands honed their music by playing night after night, on tour or in longterm residencies.
The Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra has tried a little of the same discipline; it toured the United States for four and a half weeks before starting its New York season with a concert of Duke Ellington's music on Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
Time together has made a strong ensemble even stronger, polishing the group attack toward a brash, brassy authority.
"We're here tonight to swing as hard as possible," announced Wynton Marsalis, the group's trumpeter and the artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center.
He wasn't kidding.
As a jazz-repertory group, the orchestra has not set out to recreate hallowed recordings (although it's a rare treat to hear Ellington's arrangements in concert rather than on albums of varying fidelity).
The orchestra adds its own improvisations (while staying within Ellington's idiom) and brings new phrasing and emphases to the arrangements, varying the music just as the Ellington band did when it revisited old tunes through the decades.


The Blue Jays Bubble Over but Get Ready to Buckle Down
The Toronto Blue Jays celebrated lavishly and lustily Wednesday after they topped the Oakland Athletics to win their first American League pennant and became the first Canadian-based team to advance to the World Series.
Champagne sprayed for 30 minutes, beer cans and bottles littered the floor and the clubhouse resembled a quagmire.
Roberto Alomar, who lives in the Skydome hotel, a few hundred yards from his job at second base, surveyed the chaotic scene and conceded he would whoop it up on Wednesday night.
He laughed for a moment, then turned serious.


Madison Avenue Is Feeling The Heat From Hollywood
"HOORAY for Hollywood" has not supplanted "Can't Beat the Real Thing" as Coca-Cola's commercial jingle.
Yet the soft-drink giant is becoming increasingly convinced that a powerhouse California talent agency can offer as much, if not more, expertise in advertising as its mainstay New York ad agency.
That startling development, which the Coca-Cola Company confirmed for the first time last week, is fascinating other advertisers and other agencies.
They are keenly following Coca-Cola's unprecedented experiment in dividing creative responsibilities for a huge worldwide campaign, due next spring, promoting its flagship brand, called Coca-Cola Classic in North America and Coca-Cola elsewhere.


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Mideast Negotiators Worry That Time May Be Running Out
As they prepare for yet another round of Middle East peace talks in a few days, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators warn that after a full year of discussions they may be running out of time to reach an agreement.
Israeli officials also suggest that they expect no breakthroughs when the negotiations resume in Washington next Wednesday, in good measure because all parties will be marking time until after the United States Presidential election on Nov. 3.


Abrams Apologizes for Calling Rival 'Fascist'
Hours after Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams sparred sharply over ethics and tactics in the first debate of their Senate campaign, Mr.
Abrams formally apologized last night for calling the Senator a "fascist" at a campaign rally last weekend.
Mr.
Abrams, who had earlier expressed regret for any offense the remark had caused the public but had repeatedly refused to apologize directly to the Senator, said he had now done so because the squabbling had obscured discussion of the candidates' differences on major issues.
Senator D'Amato dismissed the apology as "not sincere" and "politically motivated."


Editorial Notebook; Lord of the Us
One of the most interesting moments in Tuesday's Vice-Presidential debate was all but drowned out in the rehearsed sound and fury.
That was when Vice Adm.
James Bond Stockdale spoke of "US" -- as in "us" or "United States" or "Unity over Self."
These lines came not from a coach or Teleprompter but from his heart, from his long ordeal as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.
In answer to a question about urban enterprise zones, Ross Perot's running mate plumbed deeper themes.
He discussed the great unmentionable in a country that exalts free markets and rugged individuals: the power of we.


Commerce Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nellcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


Digital Equipment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Motorman 'Reckless,' Jurors Say
The jury that convicted the subway motorman, Robert E. Ray, of manslaughter and not murder in the Union Square crash that killed five riders last year was convinced that he had driven the train erratically and even that he might have been drunk at the time, two members of the panel said yesterday.
But while the jury concluded that the motorman's conduct on Aug. 28, 1991, was "reckless," the standard for conviction of second-degree manslaughter, it did not agree that he demonstrated "a depraved indifference to human life," the standard for conviction of second-degree murder, the jurors said.


Gaston Is Now a Tear-Stained Stoic
In the end, the man who sparked emotions among his critics by refusing to show even a hint of his own admitted that he cried.
"I had tears in my eyes," Cito Gaston, the usually stoic manager of the Toronto Blue Jays, told reporters moments after his team clinched its first American League championship on Wednesday.
"I might, again," Gaston said.


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; The Rot of Corruption
At the end of this political campaign we are seeing what an overweening love of power can do to a President and to the institutions of government.
We are seeing the rot of corruption.
That is the meaning of the almost daily disclosure of abuses by agencies of the Bush Administration: the C.I.A., the Justice Department, the F.B.I., the State Department, the Treasury.
The institutions have been corrupted in the attempt to keep George Bush in office.


U.S. to Argue Employers Can Cut Health Coverage
The Bush Administration has decided to back a Federal court ruling that employers may slash the health insurance coverage of workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS, Government lawyers said today.
The lawyers said Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr would present the Administration's views in a memorandum to be filed with the Supreme Court in the next few days.
The memorandum urges the Court not to review the ruling, by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans.


TV Weekend; Remarkable Friendship Of 3 Remarkable People
Three old pros take over "Masterpiece Theater" this Sunday night to illuminate ways of life and methods of acting that regrettably have become endangered species.
Hugh Whitemore has adapted "The Best of Friends" from his own play, which was staged in London in 1988.
With a script largely culled from letters, this true story explores the remarkable friendship of three quite unusual people.
John Gielgud, 88 years old, portrays Sir Sidney Cockerell, curator of the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge University.
Wendy Hiller, 80, is Laurentia McLachlan, the Abbess of Stanbrook Abbey.
And Patrick McGoohan, a mere 65, impersonates the playwright George Bernard Shaw.


Nynex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; True Believers In Value of Noise
AT first glance, the disclosure by Noise Cancellation Technologies Inc. last week that insiders recently sold more than 300,000 shares of the company's stock could well be interpreted as a damaging loss of faith in a nine-year-old company with a promising technology but so far no profits.
Yet, the company explained, this stock was sold so that five officers and directors could pay for warrants to buy still more of the stock.
The warrants expired Sept. 30, and the effect of the transactions was to provide the company with $910,000 in additional cash for working capital.


Sounds Around Town
Pop and Polkas
They Might Be Giants, Variety Arts Theater, 110 Third Avenue (below 14th Street), East Village, (212) 239-6200.
John Flansburgh and John Linnell used to have their backup on tape, for songs that ricocheted from bubblegum pop to art-rock to polkas.
Now, they have added a band that can easily handle the quick changes, and for their stint through Thursday they will have a different opening act each night.
This weekend, the openers are Boss Hog tonight, Brian Dewan tomorrow and, on Sunday, the improvisational guitarist and electric-rake player Eugene Chadbourne.
Shows are at 7 and 10 tonight and tomorrow night; 7 P.M.
Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday.
Tickets are $22.
The band's Dial-a-Song can be reached at (718) 387-6962.


Intelogic Trace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


U.S. Aide Says Laos Markings Remain Puzzle in M.I.A. Issue
A top American intelligence official said today that two sets of large symbols etched into the ground in Laos in 1973 and 1988 were almost certainly human-made signs intended to send a message.
But the official said experts had not been able to prove or disprove that they were distress signals from stranded American prisoners of war.
In the first case, the figures "1973" or "1573" with a "TH" or "TA" were spotted, apparently by satellite, gouged into a field in the Plain of Jars in May and June 1973, after all American prisoners were reported returned.
In January 1988, Central Intelligence Agency surveillance picked up a "USA" dug into a rice field near Sam Neua, along with what was possibly a "K" made of rice stalks.


Candidates On Television
The candidates in the New York Senate race, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, will meet tomorrow in Schenectady from 7 P.M. to 8 P.M. for their second debate.
It will be carried live on WRGB-TV (Channel 6 in Schenectady), the Northeaast Public Radio Network upstate, and the cable stations C-Span (nationwide) and New York 1 (Channel 1 in Manhattan).


Tape Displays the Anguish On Jet the Soviets Downed
In the seconds after Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was hit by a Soviet air-to-air missile on Sept. 1, 1983, near Sakhalin Island, sounds of panic broke out on board, according to Russian Government transcripts from the cockpit recorder published today in Izvestia.
"Smoke!" a voice yelled inside the cockpit.
"From the other side!" There was another shout: "Get up!" -- evidently a command to pull the nose of the plane up.
Then another shout: "No luck!"


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At the Bar
E.
Paul Gibson is a maritime lawyer, a Navy veteran with a master's degree in the law of admiralty.
But nowadays the 38-year-old Mr.
Gibson is as much of an authority on peepholes as on portholes.
Mr.
Gibson represents 21 people who say that the rooms of the Holiday Inns they patronized in South Carolina, Tennessee and Florida were riddled with peepholes, and that voyeuristic or dishonest employees could use the peepholes to monitor their every move.
Mr.
Gibson's clients have taken the hotelier to court.


Police Dept. Ready to Charge 4 With Violation of Rules
Four New York City police officers have been placed on modified duty and are expected to be charged with violating departmental regulations by failing to come forward and volunteer what they knew about the killing of two men on a Queens street, high-ranking police officials said yesterday.
Police officials have said previously that the four are not believed to have witnessed the killings, but were nearby while off duty and frequenting a popular strip of nightspots in Bayside where the fatal shootings took place.
One of the victims was an off-duty Housing Authority police officer.


He's Unfit at Any Speed: Devils Coach Ices Richer
Three days into training camp, Stephane Richer said there were problems with his left knee and his contract, but he was never specific about either.
Richer's left knee has been ruled sound by the Devils' doctors and no one is arguing that the $825,000 Richer earns a year is not a healthy amount.


The Spoken Word
DESIGN SEMINAR, Royal Oak Showhouse, 121 East 73d Street.
A daylong seminar on "The Fine Art of Dining in the English Manner," with Diane Berger, a writer and lecturer on English and American dining traditions; Elizabeth W. Feagans, a vice president of the Royal China and Porcelain Companies; Sheila Chefetz, an author and antiques store owner, and Edward Green, the president of the New York office of Asprey, an English gift store.
Tomorrow, 2:15 to 6:30 P.M.
Admission: $75; $60 for members of the Royal Oak Showhouse, a showcase of more than 20 designers' works.
Information: (212) 966-6565.
TELEVISION-MOVIE SEMINAR, Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street.
A discussion of the genre, with a screening of "Brian's Song," starring James Caan; Mr.
Caan will participate from Los Angeles on a live satellite hookup.
Today at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $12; $10 for members of the museum.
Information: (212) 621-6600.
DRAMATIC AND HISTORICAL READING, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street.
Excerpts from works by noted American historical figures, including Abraham Lincoln, by various readers, followed by a reading by the actress Frances Sternhagen from her one-woman show on the life and works of the poet Emily Dickinson.
Part of the Free Theater Project, which offers readings throughout the year.
Free.
Information: (212) 874-5935.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Living, Dying and Restorative Anger
Bill T. Jones is one of those rare choreographers who always seem to know where they're going and why.
His voyage through a dance might not always be clear.
But one is willing to take it all on faith if necessary, swept along by the intensity of Mr.
Jones's passion and the authority of his presence.
One of the most interesting things about Mr.
Jones's dances are the way pure dance and political message are often inseparably mixed.
Mr.
Jones is not polemical about his beliefs.
There are no grand announcements or introspective confessions.
But almost all he does is imbued with his status in the world as a gay man who is H.I.V. positive and who has lost a lover and friends of many years to AIDS -- and as a fighter.


Kendell Square Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sarajevo Journal; In the Zoo's House of Horrors, One Pitiful Bear
The animal house at the Sarajevo zoo is almost silent now, except for volleys of automatic rifle fire directed toward it from the heights immediately above.
Gone are the roars of the caged lions and leopards and the wolves' howls that punctuated the summer nights.
Gone, too, is the lone zookeeper who risked his life to take them food.
While the battle for survival by 400,000 people trapped by the Serbian siege continues, the struggle has been all but lost at the zoo.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Frank Stella Crosses the Sculpture Threshold
Frank Stella's sculptures -- and there is no way to describe what is on view at M. Knoedler &amp; Company other than as sculptures -- are among his finest works in many years.
Mr.
Stella's art had been disappointing for some time, having ventured down a path that seemed to lead only into the cushioned sanctuaries of the corporate boardroom.
Those hulking, labyrinthine, multi-colored concoctions, part paintings, part sculptures, that he had been producing for more than a dozen years long ago lost much of their operatic fascination and took on the predictable demeanor of official art.
Now it turns out that Mr.
Stella was not, in fact, pursuing a dead end but instead wending his way inexorably here.
The works in his last show, two years ago at 65 Thompson in SoHo, were almost freestanding and left the artist on the threshold of sculpture.
But only with these nearly three dozen works has he made the full transition from painting and created objects that demand to be seen in the round to be fully appreciated.


Study Finds Standardized Tests May Hurt Education Efforts
Widely used standardized tests may be hampering efforts to improve math and science education, and they hurt minority students the most, according to a nationwide study released yesterday.
At a time of widespread dissatisfaction with American efforts in the two fields, the study found that current standardized tests and textbook tests influenced teachers to emphasize memorization rather than reasoning, an emphasis that undermines the curriculum changes sought by math and science educators.
The study may also alter the debate over a proposal, endorsed by all three Presidential candidates, to adopt a national testing system.


Hannaford Bros. Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


CHRONICLE
Col.
MARGARETHE CAMMERMEYER, who was discharged from her post as the chief nurse of the Washington State National Guard in May because she is a lesbian, is coming to New York to be honored at a party by the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund.
The reception is scheduled for Monday at Lola's restaurant.
Since her dismissal, Col.
Cammermeyer said, she has filed a lawsuit against the Federal Government and has become, to her surprise, a national spokeswoman for the cause of gays and lesbians in the military.
She is waiting to sign contracts for a book and a movie.


On My Mind; The Lost Moment
In the inspiring sweep and profundity of the great October Debates, I can see why the one moment that haunts me was lost, disappearing with no notice at all.
It could not possibly compete.
It could not arouse the admiring chuckle-chuckle Ross Perot gets when he covers his face with that Will Rogers mask.
It could not make us purse our lips in criticism of Al Gore for daring to be serious or President Bush for putting his hand in his pocket.
And we had to consider the engrossing question: Was Bill Clinton really sincere when he denied being a liar and a traitor?


Suspect's Rights Cited in Evers Case
Defense lawyers argued before the Mississippi Supreme Court today that Byron De La Beckwith should not face a third murder trial in the assassination of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers, arguing that his rights had been violated in a prosecution that began in 1964.
Mr.
Beckwith, a 71-year-old white supremacist, is accused of assassinating Mr.
Evers, a Mississippi field secretary for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, in 1963.
Over the last 29 years, he has been tried twice without being convicted.
After he was reindicted in 1990, the state's highest court for criminal matters agreed to hear arguments that he should not be retried.


Spassky Attack Quells A Bewildered Fischer
Bobby Fischer seemed to sit entranced yesterday while Boris Spassky intently built up a winning position in Game 20 of their exhibition chess match in Belgrade.
Spassky went on to win, reducing Fischer's lead in the match to 7-4 and serving notice that he had not given up the fight for the $3.35 million winner's share of the $5 million prize.
Fischer needs only three more victories to take the match, but losing like this is bound to give Spassky renewed confidence.
Perhaps Fischer was still fretting over Game 19, in which he let Spassky get away from a lost position with a draw, and reanalyzing the winning moves he had had at his disposal.


M.S. Carriers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A music review on Monday about the New York City Opera's new production of Marc Blitzstein's "Regina" misstated the reason for the withdrawal of William Henry Curry as conductor.
He withdrew for personal reasons, not because of illness.


Turning a Computer Screen Into a Window on Whimsy
Software had become boring.
That was the problem.
It was all about working smarter and saving time and money -- all words and figures and little fun.
Then came flying toasters and aquariums of brilliantly colored tropical fish that can swim across the screen.
The animated images are part of a software program called After Dark that is appearing with increasing frequency on office computer screens when they are temporarily idle.
The program's popularity is a sign that computer users relish giving personality to these otherwise lifeless office workhorses.


Professional Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Restaurants
May We
May We is an inexpensive restaurant that looks like an expensive one.
With its polished town house on the East Side, decorous staff and stylish contemporary cooking, it's the kind of place that at first glimpse could make one think twice about entering.
Surprisingly, main courses do not break the $20 ceiling, although appetizers, many near or above $10, may sneak up on you.


Review/Film; Struggle in the Mideast In Historical Perspective
In a prologue to "Deadly Currents," Simcha Jacobovici's disquieting documentary study of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, a written history tracing the region's ethnic and political strife back several millennia is scrolled up the screen.
Since biblical times, it suggests, nothing has essentially changed.
And although many intelligent and articulate people on both sides offer a range of political perspectives, the cumulative view seems to be that barring a miracle, the conflict is irresolvable because it is built into history.
But if "Deadly Currents," which opens today, is pessimistic, it at least struggles to be balanced.
And as documentaries go, it offers an elegantly interwoven sequence of words and images that concentrate on the human face of the conflict.
The film has no narrator or central character.
Yet certain figures emerge as symbolic touchstones.


Florida Progress reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S.E.C. Approves Rules on Top Pay for Executives
The Securities and Exchange Commission, as expected, today approved new regulations that require publicly traded companies to be more forthcoming about how much they pay their senior executives and eased restrictions that have made it difficult for shareholders to challenge directors.
The regulations, adopted unanimously by the commission, were widely applauded today as a real step toward opening board rooms to all investors, although they fell short of some of the most ambitious steps proposed by corporate-democracy advocates.


Dynamics' Net Up 69%; Lockheed Posts 6% Gain
Two of the nation's top military contractors, the General Dynamics Corporation and the Lockheed Corporation, each reported higher earnings today, measuring up to most analysts' expectations.
"In a difficult environment, the good news is there are no surprises," said Howard Rubel, an analyst with C. J. Lawrence.


Review/Dance; Mythology By Way Of Graham
Like all great entertainers, Martha Graham had her serious side.
Graham was above all interested in communicating with an audience.
For all her rigor, the passions of the heart enlivened her reinterpretations of Greek myths, which she considered the psychology of the ancients.
In "Clytemnestra," her three-act masterpiece of 1958, she knew how to cover a dramatic canvas with a blazing swatch of emotional colors.


General Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; The Dupe As Principal In Moliere's 'Tartuffe'
As Mark Lamos's production of "Tartuffe" reaffirms, it is Orgon, not Tartuffe, who is the principal character in the Moliere comedy.
The focus is on the dupe's deception rather than on the hypocrite who deceives him.
At Hartford Stage, Gerry Bamman is the woefully self-deluding and mirthful object of Tartuffe's confidence game.
Orgon has welcomed the scoundrel into his home and then encouraged him in his subversion of his family and its values.
For Orgon, Tartuffe can do no wrong, and all proof of his misconduct is considered blasphemy, until the husband is faced foursquare with the truth and his own imminent cuckoldry.
As Mr.
Bamman plays him, Orgon is not simply an old fool but the sincerest of acolytes totally overcome by guru worship.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Money: D'Amato's Big Advantage in the Race
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato had a $3 million lead over State Attorney General Robert Abrams, who entered the final month of the Senate contest in New York with only $197,000 in his campaign fund, according to reports released yesterday.
The reports provide a snapshot of the financial conditions of the campaigns on Sept. 30, the last date covered.
They show a one-sided race financially that has forced Mr.
Abrams to focus his attention on raising funds at a time when he would normally be campaigning for votes.
To help him, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has given Mr.
Abrams a list of his own campaign contributors.


Hearing on Police Board: Slurs and Deadlock
For the third time, the emotion and rancor surrounding plans for an all-civilian board to review charges of police misconduct spilled out yesterday at a City Council hearing as dozens of speakers debated the issue.
But the emotional outpouring -- including ethnic slurs hurled at Representative Susan Molinari by some audience members -- did little to affect the deadlock that remains between the Council leadership and Mayor David N. Dinkins on the issue.
While a majority of the Council is apparently ready to embrace an all-civilian review board, the Council and the Mayor are fighting over who should choose the 13 members.


2d Teheran Bomb in a Week Kills the Man Who Placed It
A bomb exploded early today near the old Teheran bazaar, killing the man placing it and wounding four people, the newspaper Keyhan reported.
The explosion was the second in the capital in less than a week.
On Saturday, a small explosion outside the shrine of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini caused "minor damage" but no casualties, official reports said.
The shrine was reopened on Sunday after widespread criticism in the state-run press about lax security.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coastal Banc Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Game 19
Here are the moves for Game 19 of the match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky.
The game was completed too late for some editions yesterday.
SICILIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Fischer
Spassky
1
e4
c5
2
Nc3
Nc6
3
Nge2
e5
4
Nd5
Nge7
5
Nec3
Nd5
6
Nd5
Be7
7
g3
d6
8
Bg2
h5
9
h4
Be6
10
d3
Bd5
11
ed
Nb8
12
f4
Nd7
13
O-O
g6
14
Rb1
f5
15
b4
b6
16
bc
bc
17
c4
O-O
18
Qa4
Bf6
19
Rb7
Nb6
20
Qb5
Rf7
21
Rf7
Kf7
22
Bd2
Rb8
23
Qc6
Nc8
24
Re1
Ne7
25
Qa4
Qc7
26
Kh2
ef
27
Bf4
Be5
28
Re2
Rb6
29
Kh3
Ng8
30
Re5
de
31
Be5
Qe7
32
d6
Rd6
33
Bd6
Qd6
34
Bd5
Kf8
35
Qa7
Ne7
36
Qa8
Kg7
37
Qb7
Kf8
38
a4
f4
39
a5
fg
40
a6
Qf4
41
Bf3
Nf5
42
Qe4
g2
43
Qf4
g1/Q
44
Be4
Qa1
45
a7
Qa7
46
Bf5
gf
47
Qf5
Kg7
48
Qg5
Kf8
49
Qh6
Kg8
50
Qh5
Qc7
51
Qg6
Kh8
52
Qf6
Kg8
53
Qe6
Kh8
54
Qd5
Qf7
55
Kg2
Qg6
56
Kh3
Qf7
57
Qe5
Kh7
58
Kg4
Qg6
59
Kf4
Qh6
60
Kf3
Qg6
61
Qe4
Kh8
62
Ke2
Qd6
63
Qe3
Qh2
64
Kd1
Qh1
65
Kd2
Qh2
66
Kc3
Qh4
67
d4
Kh7
68
d5
Qf6
69
Kc2
Qd6
70
Qg5
Kh8
71
Kd2
Qb6
72
Qe5
Kg8
73
Qe8
Kg7
74
Qb5
Qc7
75
Kc2
Kf8
76
Qa6
Qh2
77
Kb3
Qb8
78
Qb5
Qc7
79
Ka3
Qa7
80
Kb3
Ke7
81
Kc2
Kd8
82
Kd2
Qc7
83
Qa6
Qf4
84
Kc2
Qe4
Draw


Profits Rise For 2 Large Drug Makers
Two large pharmaceutical companies, Merck and American Home Products, reported robust double-digit earnings growth yesterday for the third quarter that ended on Sept. 30.
But a third drug maker, the Upjohn Company, said quarterly profits fell slightly after the company took charges for early retirements and pensions.
Sales of all three were helped by the declining dollar overseas.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.43
3.97
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.92
5.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.00
5.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.04
7.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.49
8.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.58
9.11
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.42
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


MOZAMBIQUE GETS U.N. OBSERVER UNIT
A small group of United Nations cease-fire observers arrived here today, one of the first tangible signs that the 16-year civil conflict that is reported to have killed one million people has officially ended.
Nine troops wearing United Nations blue berets stepped off a South African Airways flight from Johannesburg.
South Africa, until several years ago, was the main backer of the rebel group, Renamo.


Two Officers Charged With Beating a Suspect
Two New York City police officers were charged with beating a suspect in a patrol car and in a Bronx station house in January following his arrest on a gun-possession charge.
Officer Edwin Martinez, 27 years old, and Officer Thomas Moriarty, 25, who are assigned to the 44th Precinct, were arraigned yesterday, charged with second- and third-degree assault on Jose Feliciano, 22, of the Bronx following his arrest on Jan. 25.


The Shameful Tuberculosis Epidemic
"We have turned a disease that was completely preventable and curable into one that is neither," says Dr.
Lee B. Reichman, a leading tuberculosis expert.
"We should be ashamed."
Dr.
Reichman was lamenting that TB, once headed for elimination in the U.S., has been allowed, through shortsighted public health cuts, to surge back in a more lethal form.
Now the nation and its cities are scrambling for money and programs to cope with an epidemic that could have been prevented for a fraction of the cost.


Automatic Data Processing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Drugs, Gangs And Reform Via Love
Although "South-Central" is about gangs, drugs, mindless violence and the paucity of father figures for young black men, the style of the film is distinctly dated.
In setting forth the story of Bobby (Glenn Plummer), who joins a gang and spends much of his life in jail before coming to his senses, "South-Central" plays more like an exploitative potboiler than a civics lesson.
Only late in the film, thanks to a sobering of tone and Mr.
Plummer's credible performance, does the story develop any real impact.
Too much of what has come before takes the form of empty posturing and seething; wide-eyed rants for the benefit of the camera.
"South-Central," written and directed by Steve Anderson, begins with the sight of Bobby being released from a year's imprisonment and immediately being reunited with his buddies, who belong to a gang called the Deuce.
As set forth by Ray Ray (Bryon Keith Minns), a friend of Bobby's with the ambition to become Mr.
Big, the gang's purposes are simple.
"Gangs have gotten to be the strongest force on the streets of L.A.," he says.
"So we have to be the strongest gang." Each Deuce member is instructed to sell drugs without using the merchandise, and to wear an identifying black heart tattoo beneath his left eye.


Best Debaters Come From Public Schools
To the Editor:
Some of us in private education wish that Dan Quayle were right when he said that his public school education put him at a big disadvantage in debates against a private school graduate such as Al Gore.


On Stage, and Off
A Deal Fails
"Money and Friends," a play by the Australian playwright David Williamson, will go on as planned at the James A. Doolittle Theater in Los Angeles in January, but its move to New York has hit a snag.
The show, directed by Michael Blakemore and starring Christine Lahti, was to open at the Richard Rodgers Theater in April.
But two weeks ago the producer, Emanuel Azenberg, dropped out after failing to reach an agreement with Mr.
Williamson's agent, Gil Parker.


Louise Field Cooper, Writer and Satirist, 87
Louise Field Cooper, a novelist and short-story writer, died last Friday at her home in Woodbridge, Conn.
She was 87 years old.
She died of pancreatic cancer, said her son Peter Brintnall Cooper.


CHRONICLE
In the political scheme of things, they certainly make an odd couple, but RALPH NADER and PAUL WEYRICH are joining forces in Washington this morning to promote a common cause: drastic changes in the way Congressional campaigns are financed.
Mr.
Nader, the consumer advocate, and Mr.
Weyrich, the national chairman of Coalitions for America, the lobbying organization for conservative causes, are scheduled to appear at a news conference at the Hyatt Regency Hotel to discuss the findings of the new book "Still the Best Congress Money Can Buy" (Regnery Gateway).
Former Senator WILLIAM PROXMIRE is to join them.


Centel Deal's Next Step
Centel, the telephone company being criticized by some shareholders for its proposed acquisition by Sprint, said yesterday that the Securities and Exchange Commission had cleared both companies' proxy statements.
Centel said the S.E.C. move cleared the way for meetings, scheduled for Dec. 2, at which shareholders for each company will weigh the merger.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trade Gap Widens on Export Fall
The United States trade deficit widened sharply in August, to $9 billion, as American exports suffered their biggest drop in five years, the Commerce Department reported today.
Imports fell moderately.
A separate set of data released today showed industrial output falling two-tenths of 1 percent in September.
The decline was the third in the last four months for this indicator of activity at factories, mines and utilities, which together account for about 30 percent of the economy.


Tennant Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Simms, Next Year Is Too Far Downfield
Phil Simms has heard the reports that he will not return to the Giants this year, that he will retire after the season, that he has played his last professional football game.
How can they be true, he asked today, if he does not know himself?
"Everything you hear is speculation," he said in an interview.
"I'm trying to rehab as fast as I can. I intend to be ready to play again this year. And I don't know about future years because I really haven't thought about it."


John Nuveen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; Hollywood's Love Affair With Tales of Baseball
For Americans -- North and South Americans -- baseball is a decidedly special game and, not surprisingly, it has enjoyed a special role in the movies, another favorite pastime.
Hollywood's enduring fascination with baseball is traced in "Diamonds on the Silver Screen," an hourlong documentary on the American Movie Classics cable channel today at 1 P.M. and tomorrow at 4 and 11 P.M.


Kuhlman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Sports of The Times; Who Needs The Goodwill Games?
WHEN I heard the news that the Goodwill Games were coming here, my first thought was: New York needs another sports event like it needs another hole in the street.
There's not enough room in the newspapers now to cover all of the games that people play around here.
And often we don't even want them.
Were the Mets necessary this season?
Or the Yankees?
Or the Giants, or Jets?
O.K., the Devils are crucial.
You hear people all over town saying, "I'm in a rush, I gotta get to the Devils game!" But that's an exception.


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Bringing It All Back Home for Bob Dylan


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Goodwill Games
The Goodwill Games are held every four years during the summer in even non-Olympic years.
They began in 1986 in Moscow and were held in Seattle in 1990 and are scheduled for 1994 in St.
Petersburg, formerly Leningrad.
They last 16 days and consist mostly of summer sports, with a few winter sports, including figure skating.


Last Call for the Khmer Rouge
Faced with a delicate test of its credibility, the U.N.
Security Council made exactly the right call on Cambodia this week.
The Khmer Rouge faction has been openly defying the peace treaty it signed last year by refusing to demobilize its guerrillas and barring U.N. monitoring and voter registration teams from areas it controls.
As the price for compliance, it seeks revisions to the agreement.


Vitran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Oprah Winfrey, Geraldo Rivera, Joan Rivers, Sally Jessy Raphael, Montel Williams and Larry King: they may be an unlikely assemblage.
But they are assembling this evening at the Righa Royal Hotel on West 54th Street, along with Mike Wallace, Connie Chung, Faith Daniels, Diane Sawyer, Barbara Walters and others to pay homage to PHIL DONAHUE.
With the 25th anniversary of Mr.
Donahue's talk show coming up on Nov. 6, they will tape a two-hour retrospective tribute that will be shown on NBC on Nov. 15.


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


American Electric Power reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Future Voters Show Their Support for the Presidential Candidates


Corrections
A symbol in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday, with a report about the Equitable Companies, was published in error.
It was the logo of Equitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc., a subsidiary of the Equitable Companies.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Clear Forecast at Foggy Bottom: Clinton
Another straw in the political wind: The other day the State Department sponsored a briefing on the 1992 Presidential campaign for some diplomats stationed in Washington, mainly ambassadors and chiefs of mission.
The speakers were political professionals, not Government officials, and included Doug Bailey, a much-respected Republican consultant.
The diplomats fully expected a pep talk about the Bush campaign.
But what they got was a blunt prediction that Gov.
Bill Clinton would be the next President of the United States.


Patents; Another Use For Seaweed: Fighting Fire
USING the remains of dried-out kelp, a leafy seaweed that is a source of food additives, a small California company has patented a new compound for fighting fires.
Kelp is already big business, so big, in fact, that it poses a substantial waste problem.
Every day, more than 2,000 tons of kelp are harvested off the coast of San Diego, primarily to extract a gelatinous compound called algin.
Though many people have never heard of it, algin is used to keep ice-cream smooth and creamy, to preserve the head of foam on a freshly poured glass of beer and to keep oily globules from forming in bottled salad dressings.


Presstek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Environmentally, U.S. Leads the World; Dioxin From Autos
To the Editor:
It is comforting to learn that a federally appointed panel says dioxin in the tissues of Americans is declining, and what's there may be less toxic than previously assumed (news article, Sept. 26).
However, the speculation by the panel about the reasons for this (eating less meat) and the sources of dioxin (factories and incinerators) misses the most probable source -- the cars we drive.


Classical Music in Review
James Galway
Avery Fisher Hall


New York, New York, A Goodwill Games Town
From 64 cities nearly two years ago to 4 finalists when the winner was chosen on Thursday night in Atlanta, New York became the unexpected choice to stage the Goodwill Games in 1998, for a reason none of the other candidates could possibly match.
It's New York.


The Candidates, Unvarnished
There was much to like about Thursday night's Presidential debate, and more to learn than from the first one, when an unwieldy cast of three candidates, three panelists and one moderator produced a hash of choppy sound bites.
It was also better than the Vice-Presidential slugfest, which an overburdened moderator could not control.
Why the improvement? The audience, for starters. It consisted, purposely, of
uncommitted
voters, randomly selected.
They not only asked the questions but provided a valid proxy for the electorate that no panel of journalists or candidates' claque could match.


ATTORNEY GENERAL NAMES PROSECUTOR IN IRAQ-LOANS CASE
Attorney General William P. Barr today named a retired Federal judge from New Jersey to investigate the Bush Administration's handling of a billion-dollar bank-fraud case involving illegal loans to Iraq.


Transamerica Income Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore SUNDAY: 11 A.M., "Business World," ABC (Channel 7 in New York).


World Series; Glavine and Morris To Pitch in Opener
Tom Glavine of the Braves and Jack Morris of the Blue Jays, a couple of 20-game winners who stumbled in the playoffs, will be the starters for Game 1 tonight in Atlanta.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Field Full of Questions After Sea Cadet Triumphs
The road to the Breeders' Cup took some strange twists tonight when Jolie's Halo ran ninth in the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup while Sea Cadet was scoring a rousing victory.
The results did not exactly decide the immediate fate of either horse.
Verne Winchell, who owns Sea Cadet, acknowledged that he would have to pay a supplementary fee of $360,000 to enter his horse in the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic at Gulfstream Park on Oct. 31 because the horse had not been nominated for the race.


Even a Grade School Is No Refuge From Gunfire
The youngest pupils at Jenner Elementary School have not learned how to spell "violence" yet, but they know what it means.
They have already seen a lot of it, sometimes just beyond their classroom windows.
Since March, three Jenner pupils have been shot to death within blocks of the sturdy red brick building on the shabby grounds of the vast Cabrini-Green public housing development, not far from the glitter and wealth of Chicago's Near North Side.


Man in the News: Raymond Walter Kelly; A Street-Smart Boss
On the night last July when Washington Heights erupted, Raymond W. Kelly did all the dutiful, commissioner-like things.
He met with the precinct commanders, helped devise a strategy to control the disturbances and kept City Hall advised.
Then, without any announcement and accompanied by just a single aide, the first deputy commissioner slipped into a department Jeep and drove himself through the neighborhood, past cars that had been set afire and crowds that were hurling bottles at police officers.


Flowers Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 19


Review/Dance; The Lyons Opera Ballet Reciprocates
Bill T. Jones choreographed "Love Defined" for a French contemporary ballet company, the Lyons Opera Ballet, last spring.
On Thursday night the French dancers returned the compliment by making an exuberant guest appearance with Mr.
Jones's own company at the Joyce Theater.
The curtain call was all joyous hands across the sea, with the entire Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company coming onstage to join the members of the Lyons troupe, which had just finished a United States tour.
The American dancers will perform "Love Defined" at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) during the season, but the New York premiere was reserved for the company for which it was created.


Sports Heroes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Beethoven to Berg, but Not in a Straight Line
Sometimes recital programs take the form of small history lessons.
A generation of composition is followed by the next.
"See how one thing leads to another," the listener is instructed.
And indeed, Robert Taub's splendid evening of piano music at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday looked historical on the printed page: Brahms learns from Beethoven, Berg from Brahms.
The Milton Babbitt of 1947 still holds on, however lightly, to this chain of command; the Babbitt of 1991 has floated clear.
But Mr.
Taub's thinking emerged less linear than appearances made it, less cause and effect, not so much about sequential events as about shared ones.
The Brahms piano pieces of Opus 116 began the evening as a statement of principles.
Beethoven's "Waldstein" Sonata at the end served as a summing up.


Ex-Head of Fox Network Denies Trying to Buy NBC
Barry Diller, the former chairman of the News Corporation's Fox Inc., denied published reports yesterday that he was negotiating to acquire the NBC network.
The stock of the General Electric Company, which owns NBC, rose $1.125, to $76.25, but analysts said they believed that the company's recent strong earnings report was responsible rather than the possibility that G.E. might be discussing a sale of NBC.


Stepan Cp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Choreography by Graham Troupe
Throughout her career, Martha Graham made a point of encouraging company members to try their hand at choreography, one of them a sprout named Merce Cunningham.
It is a policy the company has continued, and two of the results of that wise endeavor were on view on Thursday night at City Center.
Both pieces were romantic duets of the sort that once filled out ballet programs.
But the dances created by Donlin Foreman, a Graham principal dancer, and Pascal Rioult, a soloist, were full of surprises.
Neither choreographer settled for the kind of reaches and swoons that are characteristic of the ballet genre, delivering their messages of passion and regret with blessed crispness and invention.
Both chose classical music of a sort Graham never worked with.
Mr.
Foreman's " . . . ing," danced by the choreographer and Terese Capucilli, was set to a Brahms sonata.
Mr.
Rioult's "Narayama," which he performed with Joyce Herring, was set to the adagio from a Mendelssohn concerto.


Surveillance of Diseases Is Deficient, Report Says
Public health surveillance systems are inadequate to detect threats from new diseases and the re-emergence of old ones, the National Academy of Sciences said in a report issued here Thursday.
It said the sudden appearance of new diseases like AIDS and the resurgence of old ones like tuberculosis that can kill millions of people around the world are inevitable despite the great advances in medicine.


Prien Journal; Leather Pants, Golden Beer (and Bitter Farmers)
Friends describe Paul Paulus as "a good Bavarian," and he knows no reason why a person would want to be anything else.
"I have traveled everywhere," asserted Mr.
Paulus, a retired bank employee who now spends much of his time painting Bavarian landscapes.
"There is nowhere I haven't been. And I can tell you without any doubt, there is no place better or more beautiful than right here."


A New School Board Feud
New York City's Board of Education is bickering again.
This time Ninfa Segarra, a board member from the Bronx, has turned a reasonable idea -- studying how the high schools are run -- into yet another power play.
What's good for students gets lost in the process.
The city's 124 high schools are ripe for serious re-examination.
The dropout rate has improved somewhat, but many graduates are still unprepared for college or work.
And fear of violence distracts many students from learning.


'Safe' House Seat Becomes Mystery
Stretching from the row-house neighborhoods of blue-collar Elizabeth to well-heeled, mountainside communities like Summit, the Seventh Congressional District of northern New Jersey was once the most ethnically varied political caldron in the state.
And for the last 20 years, it has been the fief of Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo, a Republican.
But heading into next month's election, the redrawn Seventh District is without Elizabeth and its huge blocs of immigrants.
It is also without the personable Mr.
Rinaldo, who surprised constituents and fellow politicians alike in September when he announced his retirement just days before the filing deadline for the Nov. 3 election.


Corrections
The About New York column last Saturday about H. L. Humes misstated his place of death.
It was St.
Rose's Home in New York City.
The column also omitted a founder of The Paris Review, along with Mr.
Humes and George Plimpton.
He was Peter Matthiessen.
The column also referred imprecisely to the money Mr.
Humes gave away to students at Columbia University in 1969.
It was a few thousand dollars, representing only a small part of his inheritance from his father.


Southeastern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Judge Reduces Bilzerian Term
Federal District Judge Robert Ward in Manhattan has reduced the prison sentence of Paul A. Bilzerian, the former corporate raider and chairman of the Singer Corporation, to 20 months from four years.
The Florida investor was convicted in 1989 of violating Federal securities laws and, in addition to the prison term, was fined $1.5 million.
He began serving his term in December 1991 and thus has 10 months left under the reduced sentence.


Attwoods Plc reports earnings for Year to July 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW POLICE CHIEF IS A VETERAN
Mayor Dinkins appointed Raymond W. Kelly, a New York City police veteran, as the city's 37th Police Commissioner.
The selection ended a candidate search and deliberations that took two months and put Mr.
Kelly in charge of a Police Department shaken by allegations of corruption and racial insensitivity.
Page 1.
TEACHER SHOT AT SCHOOL
A 23-year-old machine-shop teacher was shot in the shoulder in a stairwell at a vocational high school in Brooklyn by an unknown assailant who apparently melted into streams of students entering and leaving rooms between classes.
The police said the assailant's motive and identity were unknown.
Page 29.
RUCKUS AT CROWN HEIGHTS TRIAL
The trial of a black teen-ager charged with murdering a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights degenerated into a series of screaming matches, as the judge and the lawyers sniped and sparred over the way the defense lawyer was conducting his case.
Page 29.
CARDINAL O'CONNOR GOES HOME
John Cardinal O'Connor left St.
Vincent's Medical Center 20 hours after he was taken there by ambulance after complaining of nausea and light-headedness during the annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Doctors determined that the 72-year-old Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York had suffered an intestinal virus.
Page 30.
REGION
MORE LAYOFFS IN CONNECTICUT
Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet-engine maker, said that it would lay off 3,600 workers in Connecticut, more than 16 percent of its local work force, over the next eight months because of a steep drop in commercial-airline contracts.
The news sent shock waves through a Connecticut economy that had begun to stabilize in the recession, and it seemed certain to deepen President's George Bush's re-election problems in a state he once called home.
Page 1.
AN AGREEMENT ON SEIZED ASSETS
The Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson, agreed to make a public accounting of money he has seized from criminals, a source of revenue that some county legislators have described as a secret "slush fund." In return, Mr.
Catterson will retain complete control of the money.
Page 31.
AN APPEAL TO JURY IN ABUSE CASE
Defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial denounced the state's case, saying that their clients were not criminals, but teen-age boys who were swayed by their hormones and a young woman's sexual aggression.
In nearly four hours of opening statements, they appealed to the jurors to be fair and open-minded but not to apply their own sense of morality to the case.
Page 31.
A NEW FACE FOR 7th DISTRICT
The Seventh Congressional District, once the most ethnically varied political caldron in New Jersey, has been the fief of Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo for 20 years.
But heading into next month's election, the redrawn Seventh District has lost its huge blocs of immigrants.
And it has lost Mr.
Rinaldo, who announced his retirement in September.
All this means a once predictable district is now up for grabs.
Page 31.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 29
Traffic Alert 28


Sound Leadership for the Police
Mayor David Dinkins's appointment of Raymond Kelly to lead New York City's troubled Police Department merits a round of applause and a sigh of relief.
The department faces two urgent crises: one of morale, the other of administering the community policing program.
Mr.
Kelly comes well equipped to manage both.
Commissioner Lee Brown's sudden resignation in August left the Police Department leaderless at a bad time.
Tensions persisted between the police, the Mayor and many citizens over riots in Manhattan's Washington Heights neighborhood that broke out after a police officer shot a Hispanic man he was trying to arrest for gun possession.


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


CHRONICLE
The Presidential campaign debate had almost ended on Thursday evening when the issue of women and minorities in politics came up.
PRESIDENT BUSH responded by saying, "This is supposed to be the women's -- the Year of the Women in the Senate; let's see how they do." In the middle of his next sentence, the moderator, CAROLE SIMPSON of ABC News, interrupted because time was running short, so his words "I hope a lot of them lose" were muffled.
But the number of viewers who caught the remark was sufficient to cause consternation in many places yesterday.
JANE DANOWITZ, executive director of the bipartisan Women's Campaign Fund, for example, said that the phone started ringing at her home in Washington almost as soon as the debate ended and that it continued ringing in her office today.


Patents; A Video Game Controlled by Voice
Hoping to create what she calls an "electronic puppet theater," an inventor in Cambridge, Mass., has patented a voice-controlled video game in which a person can speak into a microphone and become one of the characters in an animated cartoon.
The system was invented by Elissa Edelstein, founder of Interactics Inc., a start-up company, who wanted to engage children who have problems learning to communicate.
The interactive computer system responds to the tone and volume of a person's voice, rather than actual words, and can be programmed to redirect the story line based on what it hears.


Hospital Stay For O'Connor Lasts 20 Hours
John Cardinal O'Connor left St.
Vincent's Medical Center yesterday afternoon, 20 hours after he was taken there by ambulance after complaining of nausea and light-headedness during the annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Doctors determined that the 72-year-old Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York had suffered an intestinal virus, said a hospital spokeswoman, Valerie Gunderson.
"The doctors did say, contrary to rumors which have circulated, that they found no evidence of cardiac arrhythmia," Ms.
Gunderson added.
Arrhythmia is an irregular heartbeat.


Top Deputy Named New York Police Commissioner
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed Raymond W. Kelly, a New York City police veteran, as the city's 37th Police Commissioner.
The selection ended a candidate search and deliberations that took two months and put Mr.
Kelly in charge of a Police Department shaken by allegations of corruption and racial insensitivity.
Mr.
Kelly will replace Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, who resigned in early August.
Because Mr.
Kelly had served as Mr.
Brown's top deputy and was a staunch advocate of the Police Department's sweeping managerial transformation -- putting many more officers back on the street -- he was long believed by many law-enforcement officials to be the leading candidate to replace Mr.
Brown.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Volkov Upsets Edberg Top-seeded Stefan Edberg was upset yesterday after Michael Chang and Ivan Lendl won their quarterfinal matches in the $1.1 million Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Aleksandr Volkov of Russia defeated Edberg, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5, foiling the Swede's bid to defend his title.
The second-seeded Chang scored a 7-6 (7-2), 6-3 triumph over an American qualifier, Kenny Thorne.
Fifth-seeded Lendl beat fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, 6-3, 6-4. (AP) Fernandez Advances to Semis: Mary Joe Fernandez defeated the defending champion, Anke Huber of Germany, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the $350,000 Porsche Grand Prix tournament in Filderstadt, Germany.
The fourth-seeded Fernandez's opponent in the semifinals will be top-seeded Gabriel Sabatini of Argentina.
Sabatini had little trouble eliminating Germany's Wiltrud Probst, 6-4, 6-1, while Fernandez had to rally to beat the fifth-seeded Huber, 5-7, 6-3, 6-1. (AP) GOLF  U.S.
Beats South Korea  Fred Couples, Tom Kite and Davis Love 3d gave the United States its second shutout in two Dunhill Cup matches yesterday when they swept South Korea, 3-0, in St.
Andrews, Scotland. (AP) Stockton Leads Senior Event: Dave Stockton drove to a precarious first-round lead in the $500,000 Transamerica Senior championship in Napa, Calif.
Stockton's seven-under-par 65 left him one stroke ahead of Kermit Zarley. (AP) HOCKEY  Capitals Leave Cellar  Mike Ridley and Pat Elynuik scored goals in a 13-second span of the third period and the Washington Capitals extended the Ottawa Senators' road woes with a 5-1 victory at Landover, Md.
The Capitals broke a three-game losing streak and climbed out of the Patrick Division cellar past the idle Islanders.
In Winnipeg, Manitoba, Trevor Linden and Geoff Courtnall each scored twice as the Vancouver Canucks beat the Jets, 6-2.
The Canucks (4-0-0) moved into a tie for first place in the Smythe Division with the Los Angeles Kings. (AP)


Indy-Car Race Is Over Before It Starts
The Marlboro Grand Prix of New York, an Indy-car race that had been scheduled to make its debut next July on the streets surrounding the World Trade Center, has fallen victim to high costs.
When the 1993 Indy-car schedule was released yesterday, the July 11 date reserved for the New York race was instead given to a race in Cleveland, which will be organized by Motormarketing International, the promoter that was trying to stage the New York race.


Sparring at the Bench Disrupts Crown Hts. Trial
The trial of a black teen-ager charged with murdering a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights degenerated into a series of screaming matches yesterday, as the judge and the lawyers sniped and sparred over the way the defense attorney was conducting his case.
The day ended when Justice Edward Rappaport fined the defense attorney, Arthur Lewis Jr., $100 for arriving an hour late to court.


Prosecutor To Account For Assets
The Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson, today agreed to make a public accounting of money and assets he has seized from criminals, a source of revenue that some county legislators have described as a secret "slush fund."
In return, county administrators and several legislators affirmed that Mr.
Catterson will retain complete control of the money.
And they granted that under state and Federal law, Mr.
Catterson has wide discretion over how the fund is used.


World Series Matchups
On the Mound: Batteries Need Recharging
A curious development occurred in the playoffs: Pitchers for both teams encountered unaccustomed trouble.
Jack Morris, the Mr.
October of pitchers, was battered for one Blue Jays' loss and one early knockout.
His emotionally charged teammate, David Cone, suffered a premature departure, too.


G.M. Yields and Will Provide Truck-Crash Data
The General Motors Corporation has suffered a setback in a deepening legal battle over the design of pickup trucks it built from 1973 to 1987 and fatal fires arising from accidents involving some of those trucks.
Critics say that fires resulting from gasoline-tank ruptures in collisions have been responsible for more than 100 deaths.
G.M., which insists that the vehicles meet all safety standards, has acknowledged to the Government that it is a defendant in more than 100 lawsuits in connection with the tank design.


Tellabs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


30,000 Missiles Set Off an Idea
Ted Turner first envisioned the Goodwill Games on a trip to Moscow in 1980.
"They had 30,000 missiles pointing at us, and we had 30,000 pointing at them," he said yesterday.


Computer Breakdown Causes Delays at 3 Major Airports
A computer glitch at a regional air traffic control center forced departing flights to be delayed up to 90 minutes at the three major airports in the New York region yesterday afternoon, leaving thousands of travelers crammed into waiting areas, air transportation officials said.
The breakdown deprived air traffic controllers of what are called flight-data strips, computer printouts they use to identify and keep track of departing planes and their flight plans.
At the same time, it deprived the controllers of the ability to identify arriving flights.


Msgr. John Tracy Ellis, 87, Dies; Dean of U.S. Catholic Historians
Msgr.
John Tracy Ellis, a leading Roman Catholic historian whose criticism of the church's colleges and universities in the United States moved them to seek higher academic standards, died yesterday at Providence Hospital in Washington, his hometown.
He was 87 years old.
He died of complications of a hip fracture, said a spokeswoman for the Catholic University of America, where he taught for many years.


Animation Auction Is Questioned
Although the auction at Sotheby's in Los Angeles today is advertised as "the only opportunity collectors will have to buy production artwork" from the film "Beauty and the Beast," the animation pieces on the block aren't entirely the real thing.
The background watercolors of trees and castle walls are from the Walt Disney movie, but the gouache images of Belle, the Beast, Gaston and Mrs.
Potts are not.
Because of this, purists among collectors and dealers question the validity of the 250 items, which are estimated to bring a total of $670,000.
Each piece consists of a watercolor-on-paper from the film, painted with a landscape or interior, and a gouache on celluloid, called a cel, not used in the film, on which one or more of the animated characters is depicted.
The movie was animated by computer, and the cels were produced after the computer imagery was completed so that the artists who hand painted them could match the colors on the cels with those in the film.
Most of the 988 cels produced were made to be stored in the Disney archives.


European Rift Exposed By a Rate Cut in Britain
The move by Prime Minister John Major's Government to lower interest rates an additional point today, to 8 percent, coming on the same day that the heads of the 12 nations of the European Community met here to discuss Europe's future, was clear evidence of the wide gulf between the individual economic needs of the community nations and their professed desire for greater economic integration.
The 12 leaders ended their one-day summit meeting by reiterating their commitment to bringing their economies into sync with one another and to keeping alive the European Monetary System, which nearly collapsed last month when Britain pulled out amid turmoil in the currency markets.


8 Members of China's Politburo Are Said to Submit Resignations
Eight leaders, including the President and Defense Minister, are submitting their resignations from the Communist Party Politburo at the party congress now under way in Beijing, a semi-official newspaper reported today.
The resignations had been largely expected, but they indicate a major shake-up at the top of the party.
The Politburo now has 14 members, so the departure of 8 means new faces will be in the majority.


Blackman Is Out With Back Spasms
Rolando Blackman, expected to start for the Knicks at shooting guard, is suffering from back spasms and may miss most of the exhibition season.
Blackman sat out tonight's preseason opener, in which the Knicks defeated the San Antonio Spurs, 96-90, before 15,792 at the Knickerbocker Arena.
Though the Knicks hope Blackman can return next week, no timetable has been set.
Blackman first felt pain in his back three weeks ago while working out on his own.
But instead of missing training camp in Charleston, S.C., Blackman thought it was important to practice with his new teammates.
So he participated in all practices in Charleston, including the two-a-day workouts, which aggravated the injury.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Welfare; Talk of Cutting Welfare Rolls Sounds Good, but Progress Is Far From Sure
Since President Bush took office, the nation's welfare rolls have exploded to record highs.
What he and Gov.
Bill Clinton propose to do about that offers a study in contrasts: Mr.
Bush has a modest plan that is unlikely to do great good or harm, while Mr.
Clinton calls for sweeping changes that will be difficult to enact and whose effects are impossible to predict.


Change and Trust (Sound Familiar?) on Hardwood
Change and trust were the two recurring themes here tonight as players from the New Jersey Nets and the Detroit Pistons debated their common issues of the 1992-93 National Basketball Association campaign.
"With every new relationship comes trust," said the Pistons' captain, Isiah Thomas.
Thomas was referring to the team's rapport with its new head coach, Ron Rothstein, who has succeeded Chuck Daly, who moved on to the Nets after nine years in Detroit.


Fearing Tanks, Bosnians Block Relief
Maneuvering by the warring sides for advantage in the Sarajevo siege took an unusual turn today when Bosnian Government forces defending the city barricaded the road carrying relief supplies and raised weapons against United Nations military officers trying to reopen it.
By placing a shipping container across the airport road and threatening force against United Nations soldiers sent to remove it, the Bosnian forces cut the city off from the flow of food and medical supplies arriving aboard an airlift run by the United Nations.
This put the Bosnian commanders in the position of re-enforcing a siege that Serbian nationalist troops have maintained for six months and that has trapped 400,000 people in conditions of increasing despair.


One Year Later, Anita Hill Interprets Thomas Hearings
A year after she arrived in a Senate hearing room to accuse Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment, Anita F. Hill took the stage at Georgetown University Law Center today to deliver a thoroughly academic indictment of the senators and the society that had judged her.
Poised and seemingly at ease in a setting of 400 fellow lawyers and academics, Professor Hill, who teaches law at the University of Oklahoma, offered her most comprehensive account to date of the national psychodrama in which she starred.


Perot Makes His Pitch
Ross Perot took to the airwaves to lay out his plans for eliminating the Federal deficit and radically changing election laws.
Page 7.


Reviews/Fashion; In Many Guises, A Supple Charm
The incredible mix of cultures and designers, each with an individual style, gives a complexity to the showings here that cannot be approached anywhere else in the world.
The first week of ready-to-wear openings for spring and summer saw the introduction of strong designs from Tokyo by Rei Kawakubo of Comme des Garcons and by Yohji Yamamoto, over-the-edge clothes by John Galliano of London, two separate collections by Karl Lagerfeld that thoughtfully explore new ways for women to dress in the 1990's, and traditional French clothes by Hubert de Givenchy.


HON Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


EUROPEAN LEADERS RENEW UNITY VOW IN SPITE OF STRAIN
Leaders of the European Community pledged today to continue to push for a treaty to bring about political and monetary union, but economic strains continued to pull their nations' economies further apart.
The leaders held an unusual summit meeting to try to reassure Europeans that their drive for unity would not dilute separate European national identities and to repair the damage done by recent turbulence on the European financial markets to the monetary system.


No. 1 Water Agency Picks Conservation-Minded Chief
Before going to college, Michael J. Gage spent the summer of 1967 as a logger in Alaska, cutting towering fir and cedar trees.
The experience, he says, left him with respect for environmental concerns.
Mr.
Gage, who this week was elected board chairman of the Metropolitan Water District, is expected to pay considerable attention to environmental matters as he heads the nation's largest water agency.
Based in this city, it takes in six Southern California counties, 52,000 square miles and 15 million people.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton's Coattails Beckon D'Amato (!)
To hear Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato speak these days, one would think he was the Democratic candidate in the Nov. 3 Senate election, and not his opponent, State Attorney General Robert Abrams.
As President Bush continues to lag in the polls, the Republican Senator is invoking the name of the front-runner, Gov.
Bill Clinton, at every stop, as if trying to grab the Democrat's coattails.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Environmentally, U.S. Leads the World
To the Editor:
In "Bush's Nonsense on Jobs and the Environment" (Op-Ed, Sept. 25), Curtis Moore portrays the United States as an environmental laggard, which has fallen behind Japan and Germany in protecting the globe.


PictureTel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Observer; Genoan Gets His Due
Now that we've seen through Christopher Columbus, what are we going to do about him?
Sure, we are going to applaud kids for denouncing him in school assemblies and we're going to spread the rotten truth about him all over TV and op-ed pages, but that's not doing something, that's just big talk.
A few brave towns took real action on Monday by refusing to celebrate Columbus Day.
It showed how painful it's going to be to turn Columbus into Mr.
Nobody.
For example, in some places Columbus Day is a school holiday.
Kids like it, coming as it does right in the middle of the most beautiful month of the year.


Prosecutor Who Battled Corruption
Frederick B. Lacey, the former Federal judge and corruption-busting prosecutor from New Jersey named today to investigate whether the Government bungled the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro bank fraud case, says he has a potent weapon if his independence is threatened.
He can always resign.
"I want something and I don't get it," he said when asked at a news conference today whether he would truly get a free hand from the Administration that appointed him.
"You know what I can do? I can submit a resignation. And I think that with the press out there, were that to happen, that would be enough of a threat to get what I needed."


Classical Music in Review
Philharmonia Orchestra
Carnegie Hall


Environmentally, U.S. Leads the World; Trouble With Ethanol
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration's politically motivated decision to force greater use of ethanol in gasoline further rewards the highly subsidized ethanol industry, whose profits are at a two-year high, and hurts oil industry workers whose numbers have declined 450,000 in the last 10 years.
The principal beneficiary is the Archer Daniels Midland company, which stands to profit handsomely.


Unraveling of Measure to Revamp Consumer-Credit Reporting
Legislation to change the way credit bureaus operate bit the dust late last month just before Congress adjourned, and the story of how and why demonstrates the interplay of the consumer movement, the nation's credit bureaus and politics.
For four years, both the House of Representatives and the Senate have considered changes in the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970, the law that governs how credit bureaus function.
Among them were provisions to reduce the cost of getting a credit report and to require credit bureaus to establish toll-free numbers to handle complaints from the public.


Religion Notes
God and Party Platforms
When Albert J. Menendez heard President Bush chide the Democrats in August for failing to mention God in their party's 1992 platform, he thought it a strange test in a nation whose guiding principles include the separation of church and state.
So Mr.
Menendez, a researcher, began to read the Republican and Democratic platforms of the last 136 years. (Noting that he did things "the old-fashioned way," he did not use a computer to search for references to God; instead, he read every word, looking for references to the Creator and Divine Providence, too.)


Italian Premier Backs Off His Austerity Measures
As European Community leaders met in Birmingham, England, Italy's dream of a place among the senior players came under renewed challenge today when the Government backed off austerity measures depicted here as a ticket to European respectability.
Without radical cuts in the wide gap between government spending and income, Italy has no chance of gaining prominence in what many Europeans suspect is turning into a "two speed" Europe, with some powerful economies linked to Germany's heading for integration more swiftly than others like Italy's and Britain's.
To meet the criteria, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato, one of the 12 leaders in Birmingham today, has gambled his four-party coalition's future on a package of increased taxes and reductions in Italy's social services to save more than $70 billion in next year's budget.
But even as community leaders met today, Mr.
Amato's Government announced that it was softening its initial proposals for cuts in health care spending, bowing to a clamor from a fractious Parliament scheduled to vote on the 1993 budget on Tuesday.
Government officials argue that Mr.
Amato's savings are not being diluted because cuts will be made in other areas to make up for concessions on health care and pensions.
But that contention is disputed.
"The more the budget is diminished and corrected, the greater the imminent need for an emergency measures," Gianni Agnelli, head of Fiat, Italy's biggest private corporation, told reporters in Milan today.
In some ways, the debate touches on a far wider issue.
For much of this summer as the European Community has agonized over its future, Italy has also been conducting an equally troubled debate over the question of where it is going.
With demonstrations on the streets of Rome and strikes across the nation, some commentators have concluded that the answer is: backwards, toward the so-called years of lead of the late 1970's when the land was riven by labor unrest and terrorism before the boom that built the world's fifth biggest economy in the 1980's.
"Suddenly the climate has gone back to that of the early 70's," the respected business weekly Il Mondo said recently.
"Throughout the country, the labor union grass roots seems to have chosen confrontation of the hardest kind on the streets."
In recent weeks, stoppages have halted airline flights, closed schools and left public buildings shuttered, representing the highest watermark yet from a tide of unhappiness with the austerity proposals.
More strikes by shopkeepers and others are planned for next week.
It was after a four-hour strike by millions of people on Tuesday that the Government announced a retreat from its proposal to cut back severely on Italy's generous state pension plan.
"Pensions were to have been frozen next year," said a senior legislator, Angelo Tiraboschi, a member of Mr.
Amato's Socialist Party.
"This is no longer the case."
The decision to allow an inflation-linked increase in retirees' pensions next year will cost the Government some $2.8 billion dollars, parliamentary officials said, a shortfall expected to be financed in part by reducing Italian aid to the third world.
And after vocal complaints from opposition parties and the labor unions, the Government announced further concessions today, changing the proposed levels of annual earnings that qualify families and individuals for free health care.
An Ambiguous Relationship
Initially, the Government had said that any family or individual earning more than the equivalent of $34,000 a year would no longer be entitled to free health care.
But a compromise announced in Parliament today lowered the ceiling for single people, raised it on a sliding scale for families and levied small tax increases supposed to finance the increased cost.
The austerity effort reflects Italy's ambiguous relationship with the rest of the community.
As Mr.
Amato and other political leaders routinely assert, the nation is as "European" in its aspirations toward economic and political union as the most fervent supporters of the ideal.
Yet no other West European country has been so profligate in running up domestic debt to finance political largesse as Italy, and no other European country feels the same need for economic prescriptions from the community to convince its people that, finally, the designer-belt needs tightening.
"It means persuading people to accept an abrupt drop in their standards of living, their whole way of life," said Luccio Colletti, a leading left-wing analyst.


Sports of The Times; Tarkanian: Past, Present and Future
JERRY TARKANIAN pushed an unfinished dish of pasta out of the way and sipped a glass of red wine.
As sheets of rain hit the window, Tarkanian admitted that he was beginning to have mild anxiety attacks about his debut as head coach of the San Antonio Spurs last night against the Knicks.
So much to learn, so little time: 48-minute games, 20-second timeouts, 24-second clocks.
Moving screens, moving, vicious picks.


A Teacher Is Shot on Her Way to Class
A 23-year-old machine-shop teacher was shot in the shoulder in a stairwell at a vocational high school in Brooklyn yesterday by an unknown assailant who apparently melted into streams of students entering and leaving rooms between classes.
The police said the assailant's motive and identity were unknown.
After the shooting at the East New York High School of Transit Technology, at 1 Wells Street in East New York, the teachers' union denounced what it called continuing violence in public schools and called for greater security and the installation of metal detectors at all city high schools.


South Africa Extends Political Amnesty
Brushing aside fierce objections from the African National Congress and liberal critics, the South African Government disclosed plans today to begin a systematic amnesty that would protect state officials against prosecution for major political crimes.
Legislation sent today to the white-controlled Parliament, and virtually certain to pass, would empower President F. W. de Klerk to forgive any politically motivated crime after secret review by a commission he will appoint.


Defense Lawyers in Glen Ridge Abuse Case Say Woman Was Aggressor
Defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today denounced the state's case, saying that their clients were not criminals, but teen-age boys who were swayed by their hormones and a young woman's sexual aggression.
In nearly four hours of opening statements, they called the state's case tomfoolery, mumbo-jumbo and magical distortion.
They argued that the sexual activities between the young woman and four former football teammates at Glen Ridge High School on March 1, 1989, were rooted in the sexual curiosity and chemistry of teen-agers and the sexual revolution.
They appealed to the jury of 10 women and 6 men to be fair and open-minded but not to apply their own sense of morality to the case.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Races; 2 Women Take On Tough Incumbents
November's elections are sure to bring a sharp increase in the current total of 31 women in Congress.
But defeating an incumbent is still the hardest way to get there, for a man or a woman, even in a year when the institution's popularity has sunk.
Most of the women likely to be elected are running in open seats, where the incumbent did not seek re-election, or in new House districts, created either to account for increased population or to give black or Hispanic voters a chance to control a district.


16 Venues, Here's What You'll Get
There might be a new aquatic center.
Or two.
Or none.
Ticket sales could mean revenues of $15 million.
Maybe a little less.
Or much more.
Such prickly details hardly seemed to matter yesterday, as blissful New York organizers and politicians celebrated their surprisingly successful bid to play host to the 1998 Goodwill Games in New York City, Long Island and New Jersey.


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guatemala Indian Wins the Nobel Peace Prize
Rigoberta Menchu, a Quiche Indian who fled the violence of her native Guatemala and became an eloquent spokeswoman for indigenous peoples and victims of government repression, won the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize today.
In announcing the award in Oslo, the Norwegian Nobel Committee said Miss Menchu, 33 years old, "stands out as a vivid symbol of peace and reconciliation across ethnic, cultural and social dividing lines" in Guatemala and abroad.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; A View From Nebraska: Debates Hardly Crucial
After it was all over, George Hoare tried, without any help from Ron Brown or Rich Bond, to extract some small bit of significance from Thursday night's debate.
"I guess one thing that came out of it," he said, brightening visibly at the thought, "was that Dana Carvey exaggerates Bush, but he cannot exaggerate Perot."
It might be nice to think after all the spin that has been dispensed, all the commentaries that have been filed and all the instant polls that have been taken, that the Presidential debates have had a real impact on the 1992 election.
But if they have, out here in the middle of the country at least, it is hard to find many signs of it.


Care to Blow Your Own Horn? First, Decide on New or Used
The $3.4 billion-a-year musical instrument business usually reaches a crescendo at this time of year.
The start of school and the pre-holiday season is a time when many parents try to instill a love for music in their children with the gift of a first violin, guitar, trumpet or piano.
Parents and young musicians as well as professionals face the fundamental question of whether to buy a new or used instrument.
There is no simple answer, experts say, for the choice depends as much upon individual needs as it does on economy.


E'town Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An October Sun Shower


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Triton Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Greece Pursues Peace in the Balkans; '74 Events on Cyprus
To the Editor:
It was not "reciprocal folly" that led to Turkey's armed intervention on the troubled island of Cyprus as you state in " 'Ethnic Cleansing,' Cypriot Style" (editorial, Sept. 5).


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Philadelphia Orchestra
Carnegie Hall


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Generations Together
To the Editor:
In "Seniors and Juniors" (editorial, Sept. 30), you applaud older adults who support children's issues and programs.
I am vice president of the New York State Intergenerational Network, an organization with just that purpose.
It has identified more than 400 programs in the state where the elderly serve youth, and young people serve the elderly, to their mutual benefit.
Anyone interested in supporting intergenerational efforts may become a member.
A directory of the these state programs is available to members.
LESLIE FOSTER New York, Oct. 3, 1992 The writer is director of volunteers and community service, Isabella Geriatric Center.


Federal Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Angola Talks Stop, Delaying Political Pact
The leading opposition figure canceled a scheduled meeting with President Jose Eduardo dos Santos today, stalling talks on a settlement of Angola's political crisis in the wake of inconclusive national elections.
The mediator who has been trying to get the two men together, Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha of South Africa, told reporters this afternoon that what had been billed as a crucial meeting between the two men had been called off because of misunderstandings.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN MEDICAL ALERT CORP., Oceanside, L.I., has entered into a contract to provide its Personal Emergency Response System to Emergency Ambulance Response SystemInc.
BESSEMER CAPITAL PARTNERS L.P., announced the acquisition of MS/Essex HoldingsInc.
The transaction was financed by a combination of bank loans including a $130 million term loan and commitments for up to $155 million of revolving credit loans.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The Home Video column on Thursday referred incorrectly to a film mentioned in a new videocasette, "Laurence Olivier: A Life." It is "Richard III," not "Richard II."


Seneca Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Patrick Re-signed
The Rangers signed defenseman JAMES PATRICK to a contract yesterday.
Terms were not released.


Your Taxes; Break for Users Of Mass Transit
EVEN though President Bush is expected to veto tax legislation passed by Congress just before it adjourned last week, Americans are likely to have some tax increases next year, as well as some tax breaks.
The reason is that the energy bill, which he is expected to sign, has a number of tax provisions.
One notable provision that has been pushed for the last two years and would take effect in January expands a subsidy available to people who take mass transit to work, and cuts the subsidy for some who drive automobiles to work.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds increased $1.26 billion, to $387.58 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The assets of the 378 taxable retail money market funds rose $655.2 million, to $308.87 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $605.5 million, to $78.72 billion.
The total assets of the 274 institutional funds decreased $9.50 billion, to $201.52 billion.
The assets of the 221 taxable institutional funds were down $9.56 billion, to $179.84 billion.
The assets of 53 tax-exempt institutional funds grew $64.5 million, to $21.68 billion.


X-Rite Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Heights Mansion Unveils Face Lift
To the Editor:
Press coverage of Washington Heights last summer was dismaying in its focus on the negative.
Northern Manhattan is normally virtually ignored by the news media, but filled the headlines in the case of Jose Garcia, the accused drug dealer, whose shooting by a New York City police officer touched off an urban uprising.
The clearing of the officer brought the area new attention of the same kind (news article, Sept. 10).
It is time to hear good news about this area.


Upjohn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Vivid Tombstones of Fordham; In the Bronx, a Painter Keeps Alive the Names of Victims
Perched atop a wobbly ladder, Michael Tracy finished his latest graffiti mural, a Technicolor tableau whose images ranged from a curvaceous cartoon siren to a steely-eyed Charles Bronson.
The figures attest to the lures and dangers of street life, and as he does with many of his murals, Mr.
Tracy topped this one with a scroll of names from his Fordham neighborhood, the first few lines dictated by fate.
"Yo, Tracy!" shouted a grinning teen-ager from across Morris Avenue. "Put my name up!"


Bertha Levin, Hadassah Pioneer, 98
Bertha Levin, a longtime supporter of Jewish causes in New York City and Israel, died on Thursday at her home in Jerusalem.
She was 98 years old.
She had been suffering from pneumonia, a family spokeswoman said.


Corrections
A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in the Vietnam War and a correction in this space on Oct. 6 rendered a comment by President Richard M. Nixon incorrectly.
In March 1973 Mr.
Nixon said he wanted "to get the Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from the White House tapes, is ambiguous.
In its full context, it can be read as a reflection of a desire to end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of the growing Watergate scandal.
Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a reference to the scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr.
Nixon was about to deliver.


Best Ratings to Thursday's Debate
Thursday's Presidential debate was the most watched of this year's political debates.
The town-meeting-style debate scored a 43.4 rating on the four broadcast networks. (It was also caried on PBS, CNN and C-Span, but those numbers will not be available until next week.)


Kodak to Take a Charge Of $140 Million for Cuts
The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it would take charges totaling $140 million, or 43 cents a share, against third-quarter earnings because of costs associated with selling businesses and with an early-retirement program.
Kodak had said earlier that it would make the cuts, but the Rochester-based photography giant had not quantified the cost.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; In Half-Hour, Perot Details Plan for Cutting Deficit
With his campaign for President still lagging far behind his Republican and Democratic rivals, Ross Perot took to the airwaves tonight to lay out his plans for eliminating the Federal budget deficit and radically changing Federal elections laws.
Using a half-hour block of time he bought from NBC for $150,000, the Dallas billionaire detailed a $754 billion package of tax increases, spending cuts and additional Federal spending that he said would produce a Federal budget surplus in six years and would spur economic growth.
The format of tonight's show was similar to his last 30-minute broadcast last week when he detailed what he saw as the problems wrought by the $4 trillion national debt.


Maud Sargent Landscape Architect, 93
Maud Sargent, a retired landscape architect and planner in New York City and Philadelphia, died on Wednesday at her home in Chester, Conn.
She was 93 years old.
She died of complications of bone cancer, a spokeswoman for her estate said.


Ladd Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Decision Time Nears on Arazi
Although the former wonder colt, Arazi, appears bound for the Breeders' Cup, the race in which he will compete remains a mystery.
His French trainer, Francois Boutin, said today that Arazi will be pre-entered next week in the $1 million Mile, a grass race, and the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic, a one-and-a-quarter-mile race on dirt.
If Arazi is accepted into both fields, which are limited to 14 starters, Boutin plans to announce his decision on Oct. 28, the final entry date for the Oct. 31 event at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, Fla.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
The west side of Broadway will be closed between 86th Street and 96th Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Symphony Space street festival.
TOMORROW
Second Avenue will be closed between 14th Street to 34th Stree, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Second Avenue street festival.
The east side of Broadway from 110th Street to 116th Street will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Upper West Side street fair.


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


D'AMATO RETURNS TO THE ATTACK
After weeks of tough television commercials attacking his rival, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has now begun broadcasting a new ad condemning Robert Abrams, the State Attorney General, for calling him a fascist.
Mr.
Abrams has apologized for the remark.
SCRIPT Announcer: "Bob Abrams called Al D'Amato a fascist. It was deliberate. He used the same tactic of ethnic and religious pandering in the primary. There is no place in America for this. There is simply no excuse for Bob Abrams pandering to religious and ethnic fears and hatreds. Bob Abrams's repuation is stained and dishonored forever. It deserves to be."  PRODUCER Russo, Marsh Associates of Sacramento, Calif.
ON THE SCREEN Sepia-toned news clippings of stories about Mr.
Abrams's remark, with the narrator's words superimposed in white, over the sound of menacing cellos.
At the end of the ad, the background fades to black and the final words appear in stark white letters, along with the small line at the bottom, "Paid for by friends of Senator D'Amato."  SCORECARD By seizing on Mr.
Abrams's comment -- which Mr.
Abrams contends was the spontaneous result of being heckled by D'Amato supporters, and which he has apologized for -- Mr.
D'Amato seeks to make himself a victim.
But in accusing Mr.
Abrams's of pandering, Mr.
D'Amato is himself effectively pandering to those Italian-American and Catholic voters who were already angry at Mr.
Abrams's attacks on Geraldine A. Ferraro's integrity and family finances in the Democratic primary, as well as any Jewish voters offended by Mr.
Abrams's likening of Mr.
D'Amato's tactics to those of the Nazi propaganda chief, Joseph Goebbels.
No stranger to tough talk, Mr.
D'Amato has called Mr.
Abrams a "sissy" and a "plastic Bobby doll," among other things.
In this ad, Mr.
D'Amato poses as greatly aggrieved, but his aides acknowledge that Mr.
Abrams's remark played into the Senator's hands politically, allowing him to attack Mr.
Abrams yet again, all in the name of defending his honor.


Child Killings In City System Reach Record
Twenty-seven children, whose families had been identified by New York City's child protection system as abusive or neglectful, were killed last year, the highest number since the city began keeping the statistic in 1986, a panel reported yesterday.
The number has risen in each of the last three years.
In 1989, the number of children killed in troubled families known to the city's Human Resources Administration was 7.
It rose to 16 in 1990.


INSIDE
U.S. Trade Gap Widens
The United States trade deficit widened sharply in August, to $9 billion, as exports suffered their biggest drop in five years.
Page 41.
Chinese Leaders Resigning
Eight Chinese leaders, including the President and Defense Minister, are reportedly submitting their resignations from the Politburo.
Page 3.
Teacher Shot on Way to Class
A shop teacher was shot in the shoulder in a stairwell at a vocational high school in East New York.
The police have no motive or suspect.
Page 29.
Innocence Falls Victim
Chicago is shaken over the gang warfare that since March has killed three grade-school pupils at a run-down public housing development.
Page 6.


Classical Music in Review
Anne-Sophie Mutter
Carnegie Hall


Payco American reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WESTINGHOUSE SHARES TOUCH A LOW OF $10.75
A division of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation announced plans yesterday to lay off about 1,400 Maryland workers by the end of the year, blaming cuts in military spending and continuing economic stagnation.
The company's Electronic Systems Group, headquartered in Linthicum, Md., laid off 2,500 Maryland employees last year.
The new round of job cuts will affect management, professional, clerical, technical and manufacturing employees.
Pittsburgh-based Westinghouse employs about 17,200 workers in the Electronic Systems Group.
About 12,000 of them are in Maryland.
The group, which had 1991 sales of $3.2 billion, makes airborne and ground radar, space electronics, air traffic control and command systems.


Bush's Bold Plan for Car Insurance
President Bush's plan to contain exploding auto insurance premiums, which was all but drowned out by campaign protesters at a speech yesterday in Edison, N.J., will not become law anytime soon; the plan has not yet even been translated into a legislative proposal.
But state regulators and insurance companies, now trapped between the reality of rising costs and the public's fury over rising premiums, are likely to welcome the effort to elevate the debate over auto insurance affordability to a national forum.
And many policy analysts will no doubt be intrigued with the President's bold plan, which could drive most auto injury claims out of court and pare individual premiums by 20 to 30 percent.


Classical Music in Review
Boston Symphony Orchestra
Carnegie Hall


Executive Changes
ACCEL INTERNATIONAL CORP., Dublin, Ohio, a holding company that provides specialty insurance and services, named Gerald L. Noelle senior vice president and chief actuary.
BELVOIR LTD., New York, a designer and manufacturer of women's apparel, named Robert J. Matura chairman and chief executive.
EXEL LTD., Hamilton, Bermuda, an insurance holding company, named Gavin R. Arton senior vice president and investor relations officer.
MACRONEX INC., Research Triangle Park, N.C., a biopharmaceutical discovery and development company, appointed Dennis D. Burns president and chief executive.
OFFSHORE PIPELINES INC., Houston, appointed Mike H. Lam vice chairman and chief operating officer.
Richard R. Foreman, president, will also become chief financial officer.
RESIDENTIAL FUNDING CORP., Minneapolis, a unit of General Motors Acceptance Corp., named Davee Olson executive vice president of finance and chief financial officer.


Environmentally, U.S. Leads the World; No C.F.C. in Packaging
To the Editor:
You should be ashamed of yourself for publishing "Ozone Shock," the appallingly irresponsible Oct. 5 Greenpeace advertisement.


'Yes' to One Canada? If Jays Win the Series, Stay Tuned
A surge of national pride as a baseball team from Canada plays in the World Series for the first time could give a sorely needed lift to the beleaguered "yes" camp in the country's divisive national unity referendum.
In a close political contest, some poll takers and political analysts here say, the national euphoria may be just enough to tip the scales to "yes" on Oct. 26, the day of the national vote.
That would be the day after Game 7, if the Series, which begins on Saturday night, goes the full distance.


Air Fare Plan Fails, American Admits
After vigorously defending the simplified fare structure he announced in April, Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American Airlines, recently told a group of airline financial analysts in New York that the four-tier structure had been a failure.
He suggested that there were limits to how far American might go to defend it.
As if to prove that point, the airline recently matched USAir and Trans World Airlines in offering two additional low-priced tiers in selected markets, below its lowest tier.


Greece Pursues Peace in the Balkans
To the Editor:
In "Blueprint for a Wider War" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30), George Kenney states that Greece might be provoked by other countries in the region in the Yugoslav crisis, but he also, against all evidence, introduces the theory that Greece covets part of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush, Angered At Jersey Rally, Assails Clinton
Angered by a crowd packed with jeering supporters of Gov.
Bill Clinton, President Bush today broke out of a speech that was supposed to unveil a new car insurance plan and for the first time accused his Democratic opponent directly of evading the draft.
It was not clear whether Mr.
Bush was consciously trying to accuse Mr.
Clinton of criminal conduct or if he merely became twisted in his words because of his evident anger.


A Profit For Maker Of Chips
Texas Instruments Inc. reported a sharp improvement in earnings today for the third quarter, with its computer chip unit posting its first quarterly profit since the last quarter of 1989.
The company earned $57 million, or 58 cents a share, in the quarter that ended on Sept. 30, in contrast to a loss of $113 million in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues rose 11.2 percent, to $1.89 billion from $1.70 billion.


COMPANY NEWS: A 'Golden Carrot'; Utilities Go to the Source For Efficient Refrigerator
Build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path to your door.
But a consortium of 25 electric companies has discovered that you can also draw a pretty good crowd by offering a few million dollars as a prize.
In July the utilities said that they wanted someone to manufacture a refrigerator that runs on 25 percent less electricity than the Government standard and uses no chlorofluorocarbons, the refrigerant blamed for eating holes in the ozone layer.
The companies said they would pay $27.5 million for the best design, with the money being used to subsidize the sale of the machines.


No Headline
How can you protect your kids when anywhere that you go can be the wrong place at the wrong time? -- JEANETTE WALKER, a Chicago mother.  [ 6:3. ]


'Press 1 for Dad': Now, Voice Mail For the Home
Voice mail, the business world's high-tech answer to answering machines and those little "While You Were Out" message pads, is heading for home.
For a monthly fee, residential telephone customers can have their calls taken by automated message-taking systems like the ones used in many offices.
Voice mail may not drive the billion-dollar answering-machine industry out of business, but telephone companies are hoping it will appeal to many residential customers.
There are no tapes to break, fray or self-destruct; callers never get a busy signal (voice mail can record more than one message at a time), and the systems offer more privacy than an answering machine: a caller can be instructed to press 1 for Dad, 2 for Mom or 3 for Jimmy.
Dad has a code of his own, and unless he tells Mom and Jimmy what it is, they cannot hear his messages.


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shooting Followed Tougher Efforts to Collect Child Support
John T. Miller nursed his anger over child-support payments from the moment his pregnant, 19-year-old girlfriend demanded them in 1966 through two six-month jail terms and 26 years as an intermittent fugitive from welfare authorities.
Yet few who knew the heavy-set, 50-year-old trucker believed him capable of the fury that left him and four female welfare workers dead in this lake town Thursday.


Sanders Question Is Doused
There isn't much about Deion Sanders that isn't in dispute, his two-sport career and his clubhouse conduct heading the list.
One thing is clear, however, and it insures that there will probably be more controversy.
Sanders will be on the World Series roster for the Braves.
"There, for me, has never been any doubt about that," said Atlanta Manager Bobby Cox.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Tarkanian: Past, Present and Future
JERRY TARKANIAN pushed an unfinished dish of pasta out of the way and sipped a glass of red wine.
As sheets of rain hit the window, Tarkanian admitted that he was beginning to have mild anxiety attacks about his debut as head coach of the San Antonio Spurs last night against the Knicks.
So much to learn, so little time: 48-minute games, 20-second timeouts, 24-second clocks.
Moving screens, moving, vicious picks.


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mosinee Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


If Tonight Is the Opener, It Must Be Morris Time
Jack Morris will do something Saturday night that only one other pitcher ever has done: start the first game of the World Series for the second successive year with a different team.
Tom Glavine will try to do something that no other pitcher has done: beat Jack Morris in a World Series game.
Morris, who last year pitched into the eighth inning of the Minnesota Twins' 5-2 opening-game victory over Atlanta, will start for the Toronto Blue Jays against the Braves in a Canadian team's first appearance in the World Series.


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Mark Controls Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Store Manager Chases Robbers and Is Slain
The manager of a supermarket in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, was shot and killed yesterday afternoon after he attacked three men who had robbed the store by throwing canned goods at them, the police said.
David Othman, the manager of a C-Town supermarket at 801 Washington Avenue, died at Kings County Hospital after being shot once in the torso, said Sgt.
Richard Johnson of the 77 Precinct.
Another employee, Mr.
Othman's nephew, was shot in the hand but not seriously injured.
Two suspects were arrested soon after the shootings.


Candidates on Television
The candidates in the New York Senate race, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, will meet tonight in Schenectady from 7 P.M. to 8 P.M. for their second debate.
It will be carried live on WRGB-TV (Channel 6 in Schenectady), the Northeast Public Radio Network upstate, and the cable stations C-SPAN (nationwide) and New York 1 (Channel 1 in Manhattan).
It will be rebroadcast tomorrow, from 11 A.M. to noon, on WCBS-TV (Channel 2 in the New York metropolitan region).


G.M. Expects Smaller Loss For 3d Period
The General Motors Corporation, in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, confirmed today what Wall Street has been bracing for: another quarter of large financial losses.
The loss won't be quite so large, however, as the $1.06 billion deficit the leading auto maker posted for the third quarter of 1991.
G.M. said it expected a 20 percent improvement or better, which indicates a loss that could amount to $845 million for 1992's third period.


In Search Of Beasts In Canyons Of Concrete
SINCE Paleolithic times man has scratched images of animals into his dwellings to attract game, invoke the protection of totems or raise real-estate values.
In New York City at least, the practice seems to have died out somewhere in the 1930's.
Now, in an era where new sports teams are more likely to be named for weather conditions like hurricanes and heat rather than beasts like lions and tigers, two faunaecentric New Yorkers are bucking that long-term trend by taking stock of the animals that still adorn the city's architecture.


As the Setting Gets Bigger, Alomar's Bat Gets Bolder
His first major league hit came against Nolan Ryan.
His greatest hit came off Dennis Eckersley.
It's an impressive list.
It's not nearly done.
Indeed, it has been theorized the list will have 3,000 entries before Roberto Alomar is done.
"I let my ability speak for itself," Alomar likes to say. "People can see."


The QE2 Resumes Her Position on the High Seas


Magma Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thiokol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Budget Deficit Is the Thorn In Clinton's Economic Plan
Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign is struggling with a tricky economic puzzle: how to give the economy a quick boost without increasing the Federal budget deficit.
Campaigning today in Richmond, Mr.
Clinton said he wanted to figure out some new policies "to bump this economy some" without widening the deficit.


Bridge
One of the most successful charity bridge efforts in North America is the annual game in aid of the Israel Cancer Research Fund.
Many nationally known experts participated Wednesday night at the Westbury Hotel, 5 East 69th Street, and the charity benefited by more than $28,000.
The winners were Lynn Tarnopol and Selma Schlechter, both of Manhattan, with Madeline Bloom of Brookville, L.I., and Barbara Kantor of Sands Point, L.I., in second position.
Tarnopol is one of the chief organizers of the event, along with Eve Wald and Mary Rem, who together founded the event six years ago as a home effort, and Dolores Salzman.
Claire Tornay, who acts as a consultant, held the South cards on the diagramed deal and ran into an awkward bidding situation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The U.S. trade deficit widened sharply in August, to $9 billion, as American exports suffered their biggest drop in five years, the Commerce Department reported, while imports fell moderately.
In another dismal economic report, the Government said that industrial output fell two-tenths of 1 percent in September.  [ Page 41. ]
President Bush was to unveil a plan to cut car insurance premiums nationwide in a New Jersey campaign speech, his aides said, but he became so rattled by jeering Clinton supporters that he railed against the Democrat, accusing him of evading the draft.  [ 1. ]
Insurance regulators are intrigued by the President's bold plan, which is intended to drive most auto injury claims out of court and pare individual premiums by 20 to 30 percent.  [ 41. ]
Ross Perot contended a $754 billion package of tax increases and spending cuts would produce a budget surplus in six years, during a half-hour telecast for which he paid NBC $150,000.  [ 7. ] Companies
Pratt &amp; Whitney said it would lay off 3,600 workers in Connecticut over the next eight months because of a steep drop in orders for its aircraft engines from commercial airlines.  [ 1. ]
G.M. projected a large loss in an S.E.C. filing, around $845 million for the third quarter, or 20 percent better than the $1.06 billion deficit a year earlier.  [ 41. ]
Barry Diller denied he was negotiating to buy NBC.
Shares of parent G.E. rose $1.125 to $76.25, but analysts cited its recent strong earnings, rather than the published report involving the former Fox chairman's interest in the network.  [ 41. ]
American Airlines' Robert L. Crandall is winning praise from analysts, travel agents and airline consultants for his efforts to institute a new fare structure, although he himself told analysts in New York that the four-tier structure was a failure.  [ 41. ]
Eastman Kodak said it would take charges of $140 million against third-quarter earnings because of costs associated with selling businesses and with an early-retirement program.  [ 43. ]
Texas Instruments reported a sharp improvement in earnings for the third quarter, with its chip unit posting its first profit since the last quarter of 1989.
The company earned $57 million, or 58 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $113 million a year ago.  [ 43. ]  International
European leaders pledged to continue working for political and monetary union, as economic strains continued to pull them further apart.
Britain, the host country, lowered interest rates a full percentage point to 8 percent, sending the pound down.  [ 1. ]
Britain's rate cut was clear evidence of the wide gulf between the European nations' individual economic needs and their professed desire for greater economic integration.  [ 4. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks closed nearly unchanged after a recovery in bond prices rescued the market from earlier losses of more than 30 points.
The Dow industrials slipped 0.27 to close at 3,174.41.  [ 44. ]
The negative economic news helped bond prices, but they still fell as traders reacted to fears of the Federal deficit.  [ 44. ]
The dollar advanced against most major currencies except the yen after the Bank of England cut key lending rates and traders sold the pound.  [ 51. ]
Oil prices slipped 5 cents a barrel, as traders cashed in profits from two days of gains.  [ 51. ] Today's Columns
Straphangers could get a tax break -- one of several tax provisions in the energy bill that President Bush is expected to sign.
But deductions for employer-provided parking spaces would be capped at $155.
John H. Cushman Jr.: Your Taxes.  [ 42. ]
Dried-out seaweed is used to fight fires in a compound patented by a small California company, taking the kelp left over after algin is removed.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 42. ]


The Avant-Garde: Softer, but Still on the Edge
If you can't afford to buy new clothes for spring, just wear your old ones out in the rain.
When they've shrunk so much you can barely get your arms in the sleeves, you'll be right in style.
But don't forget to throw out the shoulder pads.
Like oversize blazers and stiffly tailored clothing, they're passe.
At least that's the story out of Paris so far.
The avant-garde designers have been on this wavelength for a long time, and now they seem almost mainstream.
Almost, but not quite.
Designers like Ann Demeulemeester, Marcel Marongiu and Helmut Lang are still experimenting with cut and drape, often leaving fabric edges unfinished and wrapping material around the body to make a skirt or a dress.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the manslaughter conviction of the motorman in a 1991 fatal subway crash misstated the number of New York City subway and bus drivers who have tested positive for alcohol.
Of the 2,076 employees given random drug and alcohol tests between November 1991 and last month, 12 -- not 12 percent -- tested positive for alcohol.


CONNECTICUT HIT BY 3,600 LAYOFFS
Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet-engine maker, said today that it would lay off 3,600 workers in Connecticut, more than 16 percent of its work force here, over the next eight months because of a steep drop in commercial-airline contracts.
Nearly 470 of those people got notices today.
The company, long a mainstay of the Connecticut economy, had announced a job-reduction plan in January that would have gradually reduced employment through the mid-1990's because of declining military orders for jet engines.
Today's cuts both accelerate and expand that plan and are centered in the commercial sector of the business, which company officials said had looked secure only nine months ago.


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.40
4.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.90
5.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.02
5.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.09
6.08
7.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.50
7.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.59
8.59
9.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.43
6.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Put the Jailed to Work Cleaning Our Highways
To the Editor:
"Litter City" (editorial, Sept. 28), on the "old tailpipes, hubcaps and other refuse" on New York City highways, brings to mind the drive from the city's airports north to Connecticut.
It is a drive I frequently take, not without a feeling of horror and despair at the high banks of litter along the roads, the graffiti on every wall or bridge.
I wonder what visitors to this country think when they see such chaos.
I know what I think.


Debate on the Air
Live coverage of the final 90-minute Presidential debate will be provided by ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, C-Span, CNN, PBS and National Public Radio, and in the New York City area by radio stations WCBS-AM, WINS and WNYC.
Oct. 19, Monday -- Presidential East Lansing, Mich., 7 P.M.
Eastern


Transfer Linked to Harassment, Police Say
A Queens precinct commander transferred from his post this week is the subject of complaints from two female officers that he failed to crack down on sexual harassment in his precinct.
The former commander, Deputy Inspector Hugh Selzer, was transferred on Tuesday from head of the 110th Precinct, which covers Elmhurst and Corona, to executive officer of the 15th Division in Brooklyn.


Stop Feuding or Sell Island, Judge Warns Family
A Manhattan judge warned yesterday that she would order the sale of Gardiners Island at the eastern end of Long Island unless the family that has owned it for 353 years stops feuding and agrees on a plan to maintain and conserve it.
Referring to Sara Gardiner, who died in 1953 and who was the last family member to own the island outright, Surrogate Eve Preminger said Mrs.
Gardiner "intended that the island serve as a family home, and certainly not as a weapon."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  EUROPEANS CLUTCH AT UNITY
Leaders of European Community nations pledged at a meeting in London to keep striving for a treaty on political and monetary union.
But in a reflection of their economic strains, Britain cut its key interest rate, causing the pound to resume its slide against the German mark.  1  Britain's interest-rate cut suggests a focus on separate needs.  4


Corrections
A brief report in Book Notes on Oct. 7 misstated the timing of William Shawcross's first interview with Rupert Murdoch for an unauthorized biography.
It took place before Mr.
Murdoch abandoned plans to write his autobiography, not afterward.


Sherwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Foreign Affairs; No National Interest
No wonder Americans don't want to ask questions about foreign policy or even hear about it anymore.
It is not just that the cold war is over and their lives at home have soured.
Foreign policy turns them off.
As practiced by Presidents and their minions for over two decades, foreign policy seems to have produced endless trouble: scandals from Watergate to Iraqgate, fodder for political trashing, smoke screens for domestic failures, enervating hypocrisy, billions of wasted dollars, lies and dead Americans.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton
To the Editor:
As one of the demonstrators at the United States Embassy in London in the fall of 1969, I was dismayed by President Bush's implication that Bill Clinton and the rest of us somehow surrendered the moral right to voice disapproval of our Government's policies when we took up temporary residence abroad.


A Walters Special: Who's Crying Now
Barbara Walters, who's known for eliciting tears from the subjects she interviews, cried herself, recently, while taping one of her upcoming television specials.
"I won't give away what we talked about," said Kathie Lee Gifford, the talk-show host, who along with her husband, Frank Gifford, the commentator on Monday Night Football on ABC, was interviewed by Ms.
Walters at the couple's home in Connecticut on Oct. 6.
"She did say to us while we were there, 'This is the first time I've ever cried.'


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
As an uncomfortable-on-the-inside, giggling-and-smiling-on-the-outside preadolescent and adolescent nude model for my artist mother, I wonder how Sally Mann's work is imprinting itself on her children's sexuality.
It's what I learned through modeling -- that my body had no boundaries -- that was so damaging.
I had no sense of my body as a private place, worthy of care and protection.
I was a thing -- to be used at whim ("Picture time!").


For Nikon Aficionados, A Club of Their Own
IF you were a member of the Nikon Historical Society, you would no doubt know that the Nippon Kogaku Company, creator of the Nikon camera and Nikkor lenses, got into the photography business because of the earthquake of 1923.
The Japanese Navy, which until then was in charge of all optical research for the country, lost all its laboratory facilities; the Government then turned to Nippon Kogaku, an optical company known mainly for binoculars, for all its research and development.
The Nikon Historical Society, which celebrated its ninth anniversary last month, was founded by Robert J. Rotoloni, a camera collector from Munster, Ind.
"After writing my second book, 'Nikon Rangefinder Camera,' on the early history of the Nikon, and its Rangefinder system in 1983," he said in a telephone interview, "I decided the time was right to start a society for Nikon collectors and those interested in the factual history of this important company. We began with only 50 members."


In Love With the Last Virgin
THE DIVINE COMEDY OF JOHN VENNER
By Gregory Blake Smith. 268 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $20.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Sally Mann's photographs of her children reveal a love of such ferocious intensity it is no wonder people get scared ("The Disturbing Photography of Sally Mann," by Richard B. Woodward, Sept. 27).
What Woodward rightly calls Mann's "shameless attitude toward the flesh" has enabled her to see and love her children whole.


Three Shows in One At the Guggenheim
"Dear Comrades," Frank Lloyd Wright addressed his fellow architects on a trip to Moscow in 1937.
"I have traveled across the frontiers of five nations, from one great hope of the world, the U.S.A, to greet another great hope, the U.S.S.R."
What an optimist!
In 1937, both Great Hopes were dim.
Wright's native country was gripped by the Depression.
The Great Terror stalked his Soviet hosts: Stalin had staged purge trials in the very hall where Wright spoke.
Still, the architect was not alone in wanting to build a bridge between the two countries.
Like many artists in the 1930's, Wright felt that they were cultural allies, with much to teach each other about the making of modern civilization.


E(vil) = m(urder)c(onspiracy)
THE MURDER OF ALBERT EINSTEIN
By Todd Gitlin. 297 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Sept. housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.24
1.23
Sept. housing permits, millions, annual rate
1.06
1.08
Thursday
Sept. Federal budget, billions
-$24.7
-$6.0
Friday
Mid-Oct. car sales, millions, annual rate
5.8
5.6
Monday: Final Presidential debate *
European Community Ministers meet *
Convergence 1992, a conference on electric cars, opens in Detroit.
Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey of retail sales *
Chrysler scheduled to release its third-quarter earnings Thursday: Mid-Oct. jobless claims *
Second-quarter personal income by state *
A.T.&amp; T. releases third-quarter earnings.


Cone Has Little Need For a Scouting Report
The lineup is no mystery to David Cone. How to pitch to it remains a puzzle.
Cone versus the Braves.
It is a matchup with a history, one that includes brilliance and farce, and as of Game 2 of the 1992 World Series, it is going to be a contest with giant ramifications.


Bluestone
To the Editor:
Having lived a half block from Columbus Avenue the better part of my life, I was amazed to read in "Bluestone Dressing for Historic District" on Aug. 16 that the Department of Transportation plans to spend $2.2 million to replace existing sidewalks on Columbus Avenue from 66th to 88th Street with imitation bluestone, on the recommendation of the Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Update; Dedication and Technology Solve 18-Year-Old Slaying
Guadalupe Diaz was raped and strangled when her apartment in Washington Heights was ransacked 18 years ago.
As the years passed, her death remained unsolved and the police file of the investigation yellowed with age, buried under newer murder cases amid the violence of the 34th Precinct.
But last year, information about old, unsolved murders was entered into a computerized fingerprint search that had only recently been introduced.
Out spewed an identification of a latent print found at the murder scene but never identified.


Sports of The Times; History Sits With Cabrera In a Bullpen
IN other baseball theaters, history's hitters always stayed on stage.
Bobby Thomson opened at third base for the New York Giants in the 1951 World Series after his homer off Ralph Branca won the National League pennant.
Bucky Dent was at shortstop for the Yankees after his homer off Mike Torrez stunned the Red Sox in the 1978 American League East playoff.
No matter how often Babe Ruth and Reggie Jackson struck out, they never had to check the lineup card.
Henry Aaron, Joe DiMaggio, Ted Williams and Stan Musial never had to wait around for a manager's nod.


Topics of The Times; Postal Patrons
Postal Service letter carriers across the country must still be having back pains.
And the House must still be recovering from an epidemic of writer's cramp.
The Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call reports that in the first four days of September, House members posted an astounding 11 million pieces of mail to their constituents, using their free mailing privilege known as franking.
The reason for this large outpouring is simple: Sept. 4 was the House deadline for sending out taxpayer-financed newsletters prior to the Nov. 3 election.
The urge to write home typically rises with the onset of an election.
New figures also show that the volume of free mailings ballooned in December 1991 -- suggesting that many members husbanded their 1991 franking allocation to get the most benefit for their 1992 campaigns.


Ditka and Harbaugh Turn to Common Opponent
Remember the last time Mike Ditka, the Chicago Bears' coach, left the field?
He was fit to be tied.
He was angrier at his quarterback, Jim Harbaugh, than at the Vikings, who had overcome a 20-0 fourth-period deficit to gain a 21-20 victory.
The rally began when Minnesota intercepted a Harbaugh pass for a touchdown.
Well, today, after a bye week, Ditka will lead his Bears against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


Kathryn F. Dyer, T. L. Bendheim
Kathryn Francis Dyer, the daughter of Judith D. Presswood and Robert B. Dyer, both of Houston, was married there last evening to Thomas Leon Bendheim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Bendheim of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Marc Brownstein and the Rev.
Thomas K. Tewell, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Rice University Chapel.
Mrs.
Bendheim and her husband, both 29 years old, are management consultants with McKinsey &amp; Company in Dallas.
She graduated cum laude from Texas A &amp; M University.
She received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, who also received a master's degree in international studies from Penn.


Results Plus
GOLF U.S.
Loses, but Advances in Dunhill The United States lost, 2-1, to Ireland yesterday in the Dunhill Cup, yet the Americans made it to the semifinals on the strength of emphatic earlier victories over New Zealand and South Korea in the team tournament at St.
Andrews, Scotland.
The Masters champion, Fred Couples, had a one-over-par 73 and lost by four strokes to Christy O'Connor Jr.
Davis Love 3d went down by two shots to Philip Walton, who carded a 72.
The United States Open champion, Tom Kite, was the only American to win, shooting a 70 to edge Ronan Rafferty by a stroke.
The United States wound up tied with Ireland and New Zealand at 2 points, but advanced because of a better aggregate score of 640 strokes.
Ireland had 648 and New Zealand had 652.
The Americans beat both New Zealand and South Korea, 3-0, and will meet England in a semifinal today.
Australia, which won all its matches to finish with 3 points, also qualified for the semifinal after defeating South Africa, 2-0, and will meet Scotland.  (AP)


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE TROJAN HORSE.
Retold and illustrated by Warwick Hutton.
Margaret K. McElderry. $14.95. (Ages 7 and up) There are memorable illustrations in this version of the familiar tale of the siege of Troy, among them those of the sea serpents attacking Laocoon and his sons, the Greek soldiers armed and silently waiting inside the mighty horse, and the fires billowing out through the gates of the city.
A stunning achievement.


OCT. 11-17: I.B.M. Warning; Miscarriages Linked To Chip-Making Chemicals
What was once thought to be a clean, light industry -- the manufacture of computer chips -- appeared less so last week.
I.B.M. acknowledged that it had warned its workers and other companies about two chemicals that may significantly increase the risk of miscarriage.
Health researchers at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, in a study commissioned by I.B.M., found that among 30 women who worked with the chemicals at two I.B.M. plants and then became pregnant, 10 had miscarriages -- a 33.3 percent rate.
The two chemicals, diethylene glycol dimethl ether and ethylene glycol monethyl ether acetate, are used as solvents in the chip-making process.


POSTINGS: 70 Units in the Bronx; For the Aged and Disabled
Construction has begun on Edison Arms Apartments, a federally funded, 70-unit low-income housing project for the elderly and the physically disabled in the Fordham-Bedford section of the Bronx.
The housing, which is being financed by a loan from the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development to Fordham University and the Fordham-Bedford Housing Corporation, will be situated at 2828 Decatur Avenue between Oliver Place and 199th Street.


Unbeaten Alabama Thwarts Tennessee
Like nearly everything else that has to do with Alabama's Crimson Tide, the cigars stuck in the young faces in the visiting dressing room at Neyland Stadium could be traced to Paul Bryant.
On the third Saturday in October, the day of the frenzied get-together between Alabama and Tennessee, the Bear turned the Tide dressing quarters into a smoke-filled room.
Ten years after Bryant's final season, this Alabama team held on to a 17-10 victory over the Volunteers that could have deteriorated from a statistical domination to a defeat.


Both Sides in El Salvador Back Land Program
With tensions rising between El Salvador's Government and its former guerrilla adversaries, both sides have accepted a United Nations plan to distribute farmlands to thousands of former combatants and rebel supporters.
The accord, announced Friday, resolved the most complicated and important of several major problems threatening to derail the peace accords that ended 12 years of civil war.


U.S. Team Exacts a Measure of Revenge
Most of the hair grew back after, say, the first month or so.
Of course, that didn't make any of the members of the United States volleyball team feel much better.
It wasn't their baldness that nagged at them after they returned home from Barcelona, Spain.
It was the color of their Olympic medals -- bronze -- and the reason they had received them.
Yesterday at Madison Square Garden, the Americans looked almost normal -- Steve Timmons was carrot-topped, Dan Greenbaum had sideburns to match his stubbly goatee, and Bob Samuelson was still bald.
It was clear from the outset, though, that this wasn't just a normal match on a normal day.
The opponent in the exhibition was Japan, the team that beat the Americans at the Summer Olympics -- not on the court but in a protest filed afterward, a protest that overturned the Americans' five-set victory and eventually forced them to face Brazil, the gold-medal winner, in the semifinals rather than the championship game.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Mann photographs only in the summer.
"Nothing happens during the other seasons," she says.


At Long Last, Are Consumers Ready to Buy?
The American economy may be on the verge of finally showing some decent growth.
Consumers were not quite as hostile to buying this summer as it first appeared, and it looks as if low interest rates have made it possible for them to do so.
One little-noticed effect of the long decline in interest rates of the past couple of years has been the bailing out of consumers, not to mention corporations, that were in trouble with high rates but have now managed to refinance a lot of their debt.


Better Undead Than Unread: Have Vampires Lost Their Bite?
VAMPIRES, as everybody knows, never die of natural causes.
In fiction, they never die at all but come trooping back each year in wardrobes of new or at least refurbished outfits.
Immortal though they are, however, their birth rate is subject to mysterious annual fluctuations.
Last year was a rather slack season for vampires, as it was for supernatural horrors of all species.
This year, movie theaters and bookstores swarm with them.
Moviegoers, having survived "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," now risk the perils of "The Reluctant Vampire," "Dracula Rising," "Innocent Blood" and "To Sleep With a Vampire." The piece de resistance, "Bram Stoker's Dracula" (Francis Coppola's supposedly faithful adaptation of the 1897 novel that started the modern vampire craze), is expected in time for Thanksgiving.
"Bloodsucking," as Leeza Gibbons recently chirped on television's "Entertainment Tonight," "is big box office."


Federal Goodies
To the Editor:
George F. Will's assault, in "Restoration: Congress, Term Limits and the Recovery of Deliberative Democracy" (review, Sept. 27), on Federal funds for midnight basketball, an inner-city athletic program, would sound a tad less churlish if Mr.
Will himself were not a frequent V.I.P.-box guest at R.F.K.
Stadium, which was largely built, naturally, with Federal funds.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  RUSSIA'S NEW ARMS CLIENT


In the 90's, Questions Of Color And Identity
LISA JONES is a fresh talent.
The adjective speaks of audacity.
It means the opposite of stale, canned, faded and fatigued.
In "Combination Skin," the main feature of a double bill produced by Company One in Hartford, Ms.
Jones does a super demolition job on the cant and the hypocrisy that purports to categorize the contemporary black woman.


A Defunct Car, Like Its Homeland, Was the Sum of Its Parts
Remember the Yugo, that cheap car from Yugoslavia?
It was made in this sprawling Serbian industrial town, which proudly welcomes visitors to "the home of the Yugo." But the sad fact is that the Yugo no longer has a home.
Its plight may cause only mild surprise in the United States, where the car was offered for a sticker price of $3,999, but developed a reputation for shoddy construction and was withdrawn from the market this year after a splashy introduction in 1986 and sales of about 150,000 cars.
But here, the Yugo really stood for something, like technological prowess, industrial accomplishment and social progress.
The Yugo was viewed here as the Yugoslav Model T, putting ordinary families on the road and accounting for more than two-thirds of the domestic car market.


Polgar Demonstrates Cut-and-Slash Style
JUDIT POLGAR of Budapest, who is at the top of the International Chess Federation's scale of women players, is also the most tactical, with a strong preference for cut-and-slash.
It is remarkable how often and in what variety of positions the world's youngest grandmaster (she is 16 years old) gets the inspiration for sacrifices that create attacking chances.


OCT. 11-17: Spy's Sentence Stands; White House Is Last Chance As Court Refuses Pollard
The Supreme Court spoke last week on the punishment of the convicted spy Jonathan J. Pollard, but his supporters are hoping it is not the last word.
Without comment, the Justices declined to review the life sentence of Mr.
Pollard, the former Navy intelligence analyst who pleaded guilty in 1986 to spying for Israel.


Fast Money
The office building, a dreary block of reinforced concrete and glass on the seedy western fringes of midtown Manhattan, hardly rates a second glance.
Nor does a dimly lit extension to the marble and steel lobby tucked beyond the elevator bank and leading to an unmarked beige door, discreetly monitored by a television camera recessed in the ceiling.
If it all seems unremarkable and uninviting, that is by design, something you begin to understand the moment you walk through the door.
For you enter a maze of locked anterooms, rigged to trap, or at least slow, a determined intruder.
And beyond the maze sits the object of these security measures, the computer system that is the heart of global capitalism.
Here, coded requests to make payments of tens or hundreds of millions of dollars on behalf of this emir or that aerospace conglomerate pour in through 134 dedicated telephone lines.
Twenty-two electronic black boxes made by the Racal-Guardata Corporation screen the incoming requests for coding flaws that would expose an illicit message before handing off the orders to a pair of Unisys A-15 J mainframe computers.
In less than a second, the funds are on their way to Tokyo or Riyadh, or anywhere else money talks.


Michelle Berry, Anthony Galban
Michelle Marie Berry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Berry of West Simsbury, Conn., was married there Friday to Anthony Suarez Galban, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leandro S. Galban Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
R.
R.
Russell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church.
Mrs.
Galban, 25 years old, is a commercial-casualty insurance underwriter at Aetna Life and Casualty in Hartford, where her husband is a consultant on general-liability insurance products.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a management consultant in Hartford for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the management-consulting concern.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WOMEN'S CONFERENCE
Supermoms, daughters, sisters, friends, lovers, co-workers and women in nearly every conceivable social context will be the subject of a conference called "The Roles Women Play -- Exploring Today's Relationships" on Tuesday from 9 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.


The Ups and Downs of a Pasta Specialty
DINERS who judge an Italian restaurant by its pastas will be delighted by Il Bagatto in Valley Stream.
Although many of the meat and seafood entrees are also noteworthy, Il Bagatto peaks with its pastas.
Two pasta specials were the hits of a recent evening.
Pappardelle, the triangular-shaped flat noodle, was bathed in an earthy brown sauce flecked with prosciutto and rife with slices of portobello mushrooms.
The other memory maker was bow ties mingled with shrimp in a snappy pink sauce.


We Open in Ireland


Unexpected Finds; Britain
ALTHOUGH SIR Terence Conran's ambitious plans to revitalize London's riverside life have not been altogether realized, in one respect he has succeeded gloriously.
There may still be empty apartments at his Butlers Wharf site near Tower Bridge, but there's a full restaurant.
I'd been to the Pont de la Tour in the evening, and admired the seafood bar and elegant spaces of the dining room.
But I was unprepared for my discovery of the charm of the terrace, with its breathtaking 200 feet of river frontage.
Seated at a table there I felt I was at the foot of the multistory bridge for which the place is named -- even though the bridge itself was several hundred yards away.
The glimpse of a high-masted Dutch barge processing down the Thames was a bonus.


Marianne Carey And D. J. Hayes
Marianne Christine Carey, a daughter of former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey of New York and the late Helen Owen Carey, was married yesterday to Dennis John Hayes, a son of Ann T. Hayes of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Martin F. Hayes 3d of Orlando, Fla.
Msgr.
Patrick F. O'Toole performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Isle Church on Shelter Island, L.I.
Ms.
Carey, who is 36 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an event coordinator at Event Associates, a fund-raising and special-events company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, now of Gulfstream, Fla., is an executive vice president of W. R. Grace &amp; Company in Boca Raton, Fla., and is of counsel to the New York law firm of Whitman &amp; Ransom.


Polishing the Musical Legacy Of a Modern-Day Medici
The home of Paul Sacher, the 86-year-old Swiss conductor, is aptly named Schonenberg (Beautiful Mountain).
It is set in tranquil hills near his native Basel; the walls are hung with Picassos, Braques, Klees and Chagalls.
For nearly six decades, Schonenberg has been a symbol of hope for composers, and it has often served as a retreat for their creative work.
Mr.
Sacher has commissioned or given the premieres of more than 200 compositions, including works by no fewer than 20 composers of world renown, from Bartok, Stravinsky and Hindemith to Tippett, Carter and Takemitsu.
Patronage on this scale is reminiscent of Lorenzo de' Medici.


Change in Scoring For Social Games
THE placid world of social bridge, which continues from year to year untroubled by the tempests of the tournament world, is about to have a small shock: new "Laws of Contract Bridge," as distinct from Duplicate, will come into force on Jan. 1.
One of the revisions is of considerable consequence.
The penalties for failing by more than three tricks in a doubled contract when not vulnerable are now increased, as they have been in duplicate since 1986, as follows: four down is 800, not 700, five down is 1,100 not 900, and so on.
In other words, the numbers correspond to vulnerable penalties with a one-trick differential.


Money Talks


Ruth E. Lazar, Jeffrey Schweon
Ruth Evelyn Lazar, an associate at Amster, Rothstein &amp; Ebenstein, and Jeffrey Schweon, an associate at Varet Marcus &amp; Fink, both law firms in New York, were married last evening at the Americas Society in New York.
Cantor Ellen Math officiated.


Lola Jurado, Peter Natiello
Maria Dolores Carolina Jurado Chiriboga, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jose Jurado of Guayaquil, Ecuador, was married yesterday to Peter Ryan Natiello, a son of Robert A. Natiello and Dr.
Margaret M. Natiello of Wyckoff, N.J.
The Rev.
Kevin E. Carter performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in Wyckoff.
Mrs.
Natiello, who is 29 years old, is known as Lola.
She is a Latin American specialist in the finance department of the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington.


Kuwait's Opposition Victors Trying to Unite
Kuwait's fractious political opposition, stunning even itself by taking control of Parliament, is trying to turn a loose coalition of squabbling groups into a workable parliamentary bloc.
But the diversity of the new legislators -- who include Western-oriented businessmen, Islamic fundamentalists, Arab nationalists and tribal leaders -- means that coalitions and alliances will probably rise and fall according to the issues raised.
And it remains unclear how much power the ruling family will permit the opposition to wield.


Ornamental Grasses Show Their Stripes
What a glorious time of year this is.
The trees are showing off their splendid fall colors.
The leafy canopies range from the bright reds to golden hues to several shades of bronze.
And when the hillsides are interspersed with the green of conifers, nothing can match nature's palette.
Even the asters and chrysanthemums remain in bloom.
And though most of the birds have gone, winter residents are hanging around to keep up their happy chatter.
The squirrels are especially busy making noises as they flick their tails and wonder where they will bury the nuts they are carrying in their mouths.
The farmers are happy.
Their grain fields are ripening and the ryes, sorghums, wheats and oats are coming in.
And the silos are getting filled with food for the herd.
And there is a harvest of ripening apples.


Canal Trip
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article on the Erie Canal trip ("Skippering a Canal Boat," July 19).
By coincidence, my wife, Janis, and I spent a similar week on the Owasco in May.
We had a great time in spite of four days of heavy rain.
Janis spent considerable time reading the detailed accounts of other people's trips in several logbooks.
After the third or fourth glowing account, we decided to spend our last night in Seneca Falls.
This proved the high point.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 11 about row housing in Jamaica, Queens, misidentified a college created through urban renewal there.
It is York College, a four-year institution, not York Community College.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; Tale of a Passport File
To the Editor:
The allegations of suspicious disclosures in connection with Gov.
Bill Clinton's passport file are a clear indictment of the Bush Administration and the Bush campaign.
As a lawyer specializing in United States immigration and nationality law, I can assure you only one person can gain access to a passport file, and that is the person himself or herself.


What They're Wearing: Glam Pants
No one could ever accuse pants of being overly masculine attire after viewing some of those worn to a recent Manhattan rock-and-roll gala given by Gianni Versace.
Models and guests sent the fashion temperature soaring in their strappy tops and sexy pants.


50-Cents-a-Gallon Tax Could Buy a Whole Lot
The United States has a budget deficit, a trade deficit and an appetite for oil so huge that the fate of oil-exporting kings and emirs is a major focus of foreign policy.
To help get out of this fix, Ross Perot, like the Presidential candidates Paul Tsongas and John B. Anderson before him, has proposed that the United States impose a stiff tax on gasoline, both to stem the national appetite for imported oil and to raise money.
Washington has always assumed that raising gas taxes to rival those in Europe or Japan would infuriate every voter with a driver's license, and neither President Bush nor Gov.
Bill Clinton has endorsed Mr.
Perot's idea.


Suffolk Police Nominee Backed
Suffolk County Police Chief Peter Cosgrove, the second person nominated this year to become police commissioner, today won the approval of two County Legislature committees.
Although the public safety committee voted unanimously for the appointment and the legislative and personnel committee voted 5 to 1 in favor, legislators remained guarded about whether Mr.
Cosgrove, 52 years old and a 26-year veteran of the department, would be a success.


Hunks Help To Sell History
Hollywood has lately revived its interest in historical pageantry, and the insurance policy is the longhaired leading man.
What better way to attract the dating crowd to, say, the French and Indian War than to provide the sight of Daniel Day-Lewis in form-fitting buckskin?
What better way to send Columbus to the New World with a smile on his face than to give him a coy, beautiful Queen Isabella (Sigourney Weaver) to authorize his mission -- and to turn Columbus into Gerard Depardieu, an actor who clearly appreciates feminine attention wherever he finds it?
It took a lot more than tomahawks to make a box-office success of "The Last of the Mohicans," that's for sure.
What it took was the inclusion of heartthrob elements, plus a strain of modern-day silliness, in a story not previously known for its sex appeal.
The reviewer for this newspaper who teasingly complained, in 1936, that the Randolph Scott version of "The Last of the Mohicans" had been made to include a chaste kiss had no idea that James Fenimore Cooper's stodgy Hawkeye would ever become matinee-idol material.
Now Mr.
Day-Lewis, teamed smolderingly with the beautiful Madeleine Stowe, brings serious chemistry to a role that seemingly had no romantic potential at all.


Buddhist Art
To the Editor: As a student of Tibetan Buddhism, I was delighted to see coverage, in your Sept. 20 issue, of Buddhist sites in Mongolia and Bhutan.
However, I must take issue with the description of the art found in the entrance to a monastery (which was later converted to a museum).
In "The Glory That Was Karakorum," the author, Nicholas D. Kristof, states that "the risks of defying the gods are graphically illustrated . . . where a wooden guard . . . carries spears and swords and wears a helmet of skulls. He resembles something out of a Mongolian Stephen King novel, and the flayed carcass of a human sinner lies beneath his feet."


Unexpected Finds; FRANCE
EIGHTEEN MILES north of the French wine town of Beaune is a meticulously preserved 18th-century village of some 1,500 people known as Gevrey-Chambertin.
It is one of the most famous wine communes in the world, and also home to my favorite Burgundian restaurant, Pierre Menneveau's Rotisserie du Chambertin.
The restaurant is set in wine cellars that once belonged to Mr.
Menneveau's grandfather, Charles Marchand, who sold his business in the 1930's.
In 1967, Mr.
Menneveau bought back the vaulted cellars and opened the restaurant with his wife, Celine, who cooked.
After she died, in the early 1980's, he eventually went into partnership his present chef, Jean-Pierre Nicholas.
The restaurant has gone from strength to strength ever since.


Data Bank/October 18, 1992


SHOE GARNISH
John Cadley's essay made me smile, chuckle, even laugh out loud.
As a fellow copywriter, I don't recall ever staring at a shoe -- not even one with tassels.
I have, however, frequently stared into a typewriter or word processor -- with the same results, or lack of them.
Maybe when I'm stuck, I should use his system of going out to lunch.
And when that fails, take a nap.
FRAN EMLER
Cincinnati


Chattanooga
Mention Chattanooga and everyone thinks of one thing, but there's much more to this surprising city in the hills of southern Tennessee than the Chattanooga Choo-Choo.
In fact, the last passenger train stopped rolling in 1970 and the old railroad station has been turned into a rather remarkable hotel and repository of railroad lore.
But from its enormously successful new $45 million aquarium to its Civil War landmarks to some venerable natural attractions in and around the city, Chattanooga is becoming an increasingly popular destination.
The biggest new draw is the Tennessee Aquarium, billed as the world's largest aquarium to focus on freshwater habitats.
On the banks of the Tennessee River, the aquarium with its environmentally sensitive setting has helped draw attention to the city's efforts to clean up its air and water.
The main problem has been accommodating the crowds, and peak periods bring lengthy waits.


Andrea Pollack, Michael Gabay
Andrea Elyse Pollack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon M. Pollack of New Vernon, N.J., was married last evening to Michael Ari Gabay, a son of Alex Gabay of Great Neck, L.I., and Nanci Gabay of Williams Island, Fla.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Gabay, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did Mr.
Gabay.
She and her husband received law degrees from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the managing director in the taxablefixed-income division of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment bank, in New York.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
CRANBERRY FESTIVAL
Fresh cranberries as well as those squeezed into juice, baked into muffins and doughnuts or cooked into jams and jellies will be featured at the ninth annual Chatsworth Cranberry Festival from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. today.
An antique car show will add to the festivities.


INSIDE A SOWETO HOSTEL
Bill Keller has written a remarkable account of the violence surrounding the hostels in South Africa ("Island of Fear: Inside a Soweto Hostel," Sept. 20).
But I was sorry to see him describe the violence as "black on black," which, as he says in the article, is something the South African Government likes to do.


Corrections
A report in the Making a Difference column last Sunday about an eight-week filmmaking course at the New York Film Academy referred incorrectly to the academy's relationship to Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Film Center.
The academy rents space in the center, but is not affiliated with it.


Dinkins's Tactic: Start Spreading the News
Mayor David N. Dinkins's strategy for his re-election campaign next year became clearer last week when he appointed a political consultant to his cabinet and gave him a mandate to improve his public-relations efforts.
At the same time, Mr.
Dinkins announced that Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch Jr., the political adviser who masterminded the Mayor's victory in 1989, will go directly to head the Dinkins re-election campaign after he finishes his stint as deputy director of Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign in New York.
Mr.
Lynch was on a leave of absence from his city post.


Low Prices in a High-Rent Location
THE former Le Peep's in the center of Greenwich has, with new ownership, been transformed into Ashton's.
The setting in the long dining room is restrained, with floral and ship prints on pale orchid walls, burgundy carpet and matching tablecloths, and dining areas separated by lattice dividers.
The place retains elements of the old Le Peep's menu at breakfast and lunch, but dinner is somewhat more interesting, with a few pizzas and pastas, as well as a half dozen other entrees.
What is amazing about Ashton's, considering its high-rent location on Greenwich's major shopping street, are its low prices.
Entrees for $6 to $12 represent good value anywhere in Fairfield County, but seem especially so in Greenwich.


Unhappy Shareholders Will Find Coups Easier
For many corporate executives, there are few more terrifying prospects than the possibility of being called into the boss's office and fired.
While junior executives frequently get the ax when times are tough, chief executives generally have no such concerns.
They can only be ousted by the board of directors, and in many cases the board is packed with the boss's handpicked choices.
But now job insecurity may percolate to the highest levels.
To the dismay of the Business Roundtable, the organization that represents large corporations, the Securities and Exchange Commission voted last week to make it easier for shareholders to get together and plot a corporate coup.
Under the old rules, such holders usually had to spend a lot of money, make a lot of filings with the S.E.C., and walk a legal tightrope to make sure they did not violate complicated rules.
In the meantime, the incumbent management could mount a counterattack.
The Bosses Can Be Fired
Under the new rules, shareholders are free to get together and chat whenever they wish, although they will still need to be careful not to violate the rules.
The possibility exists that the big institutions -- insurance companies, pension funds and mutual funds -- that now own most of the shares in corporate America could cut a deal to throw out the top officials, and act before those officials knew what was happening.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; How to Be a Billionaire
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Perot: Where's the Cattle?" (editorial Sept. 30): True, Ross Perot when queried by television hosts will not discuss his remedies for national revival, nor clue us in by reading from his book, "United We Stand." Instead, he urges that for insight as to why we should support him and his positions, we should go out and buy his book.
Simply put, Mr.
Perot wants his cash up front.


Review Finds Inquiry Into Iraqi Loans Was Flawed
Sometime in late 1989, a team of Federal prosecutors in Atlanta made a decision, one that would guide one of the biggest bank fraud investigations in history and influence President Bush's troubled re-election campaign.
The Italian Government, they concluded, did not know that a bank it owned had secretly lent billions of dollars to Iraq, providing crucial funds for President Saddam Hussein's military machine.
Three years later, a reconstruction of the Government's investigation of corruption at the Atlanta branch of the Italian-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro shows that the conclusion at the heart of the case -- that Rome was uninvolved -- was based on incomplete information and a flawed investigation.


Vindicated Victim
To the Editor:
Not mentioned in Patricia Bosworth's article is the 1975 film "Fear on Trial," based on the book of the same name by the blacklisted television and radio personality John Henry Faulk.
Both recount Faulk's blacklisting during the 1950's and 60's and his lawsuit against the blacklisters, which he won.


CRIME/MYSTERY: IN SHORT -- FICTION
ARMS OF NEMESIS By Steven Saylor. St. Martin's, $19.95.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
119.50
121.85
129.88
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4814
1.4958
1.6878
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2448
1.2493
1.1270
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6489
1.6840
1.7275
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$342.20
$349.75
$360.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Busy Keep Getting Busier
Jeremy Irons (right) has been very busy lately.
He recently finished making Louis Malle's screen version of the Josephine Hart novel "Damage"; he's now shooting "M. Butterfly," based on the Broadway play; and he's prepping for his role in "The House of the Spirits," based on the book by Isabel Allende.
But perhaps he's overscheduled.
On Monday night, Mr.
Irons and his wife, Sinead Cusack, who stars in the new film "Waterland," went to see Ethan Hawke, who's also in the film, in Pirandello's "Joke" at the Sanford Meisner Theater in Chelsea.
By the time the stars arrived for a premiere party for "Waterland" at Manhattan Brewery in SoHo, Jane Holzer, one of the hosts, had left, and the klieg lights were gone.


East Jerusalem Funeral Doubles as Arab Protest
Outlawed Palestinian flags were flown and nationalist slogans chanted as several thousand Palestinians marched through a ramshackle neighborhood of East Jerusalem today in a funeral procession that doubled as an anti-Israel protest.
It was one of the larger demonstrations of its kind in Jerusalem in years, involving several Palestinian factions that are normally rivals, and it reflected a recent revival of the anti-Israel uprising that had been dormant for many months.


Debating Intermarriage, and Jewish Survival
In a synagogue in Denver, a Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in Manhattan, a community center on Long Island, couples are gathering these days for a kind of reconciliation.
These couples -- Jews and non-Jews in mixed marriages -- are not estranged from one another.
With the encouragement of rabbis and other leaders who would once have condemned such marriages, they are taking part in a nationwide effort to preserve America's Jewish population.


Chamber Players Tuning Up Again
IN Wilton the Candlelight Concert Series begins its 45th year of bringing chamber music to Fairfield County, while Chamber Music at St.
John's opens its 10th season at the Episcopal Church in Salisbury; both recitals are scheduled at 4 o'clock this afternoon.
In the Wilton Congregational Church, the four members of the Calliope perform on 40 period instruments in their exploration of religious and secular music from the 12th through the 17th centuries.
Tickets will be available at the door, or call 762-8354 for reservations.


Aliens Find a European Gateway at Spain's Coast
Huddled together in tiny boats with outboard motors, their eyes fixed on the lighthouses of Spain's southern coast just 10 miles away, groups of 20 or more Arabs and Africans set off most nights from the beaches of Morocco for what they hope will be a new life in Europe.
The perils are enormous.
The swells in the Strait of Gibraltar sink some boats, while boatmen, fearful of arrest, often force their passengers to swim the last 200 yards to the shore.
Some 35 bodies have been found on beaches near here this year.
Moroccan newspapers put the toll of drowned and missing in the hundreds.


Jennifer Greenleaf And Robert Storer
Mrs.
Richard M. Sykes of Muttontown, L.I., and John M. Greenleaf of Nantucket, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Stone Greenleaf, to Robert Hansen Storer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Storer of East Moriches, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Greenleaf, 24 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She was a member of the Junior Assembly in 1985.
She is a designer for Becker-Williams Inc., an architectural and interior design concern in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


Aimee Bell, David J. Kamp
R.
Aimee Bell, a daughter of James and Rosemary Bell of Scranton, Pa., was married yesterday to David J. Kamp, a son of Seymour and Lola Kamp of Highland Park, N.J.
Daniel Eaton, a justice of the peace in Munsonville, N.H., officiated there at the home of Donall Healy, an uncle of the bride.
Ms.
Bell, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an editor of the Vanities section of Vanity Fair magazine in New York and is the books editor there.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and received a master's degree in English from New York University.
Her father is a laywer in Scranton and the chairman of Sycamore Inc., a consulting company there.
Her mother is a choral singer in Scranton.


Berlin: Into the Future
THE POTSDAMER PLATZ IS as much a suggestion as an actual place.
A convergence of streets in the center of Berlin, it has played a symbolic role in the life of the city from the time it served as the official gate of entry for Prussian royalty returning from the residence at Sans Souci to the time of its conspicuous disappearance under the Berlin wall.
It occupies a few blocks by American standards, something I could walk across, if I chose not to stop, in about 15 minutes, but its emptiness is deceiving.
The Potsdamer Platz has become the traffic hub of the reunified city, of what one wants to call Helmut Kohl's Berlin, as it was the hub of Kaiser Wilhelm's Berlin and of Adolf Hitler's Berlin (though Albert Speer, in his plans to remake the city, would have diminished it); it is the planned site of a huge urban development project -- of hundreds of offices and apartments, of shopping centers and theaters and hotels.
It is a far-off memory and a blueprint for the future, a traffic jam and a code word, Berlin-as-boomtown and Berlin-as-ghost town, a place as vague and complicated and unavoidable as Germany itself.
Without the wall, the Potsdamer Platz is once again countryside, a stretch of Brandenburg landscape.
It is flat and sandy, only dramatic during a rainstorm; deep, deep green in summer, and as gray as the overcast skies in winter, spring and fall.
Its soil is undoubtedly poor, like the rest of the famously poor soil of Brandenburg, where a tradition of impoverishment, of real hunger, didn't end until Frederick the Great introduced the potato.
The area could in fact be a spot of land along the Havel River, outside one of those towns named by the Slavs who lived there before the Germans came -- except for the price of its real estate, which is expected to climb as high as that of any place on earth.


Bronx River Parkway: Acting to Save a Dream
WHEN the Bronx River Parkway and its surrounding reservation opened 67 years ago, it was heralded for its "verdant glades, picturesque meadows and stretches of woodlands," a creative combination of park and roadway that "balanced the needs and desires of the population with conservation techniques."
Today, hapless motorists connecting to the narrow roadway from the modern Sprain Brook Parkway face a series of narrow twisting curves that flood so quickly that last month some drivers, stranded atop their submerged cars, had to be rescued.
Crime has increased along the woodland pathways, lakes are filling with silt, and numerous specimen trees are being choked by vines.


Can Timeout Help Jets Pick Up the Pieces?
The Jets, with a 1-5 record and staggering and stumbling toward the remaining 10 games on their schedule, took the National Football League's version of the standing eight count this week.
They are off today because it is their division's bye week.
The break couldn't have come at a better time.
Next up on the Jets' schedule are games against Buffalo on Monday night, Oct. 26, then against Miami and Denver.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; 2 Veteran Lawmakers Engage in a Bitter Battle
The Senate race here between Bob Packwood and Les AuCoin could be a classic, as the candidates confront 1992's spectrum of issues great and small, from trade to health care to the environment, and from term limits to Congressional pay.
But content aside, it is not an elegant contest between these two effective, veteran lawmakers.
An angry battle of television commercials, along with the exaggerated knees-and-elbows debating style that both candidates employ, reflect an underlying reality: the two cannot stand each other.


World Markets; Muted Optimism for a Battered Japan
ANDREW BALLINGAL has some wonderful news.
Over the next two years, predicts Mr.
Ballingal, the strategist here for Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities, the Japanese stock market's Nikkei index will rise at least 50 percent from its recent low.
After that fantastic rally, the index would stand at more than 21,000 -- still down 12 percent or so from the beginning of this emphatically miserable year.
Much of the turmoil that hit currency and financial markets last month missed Japan, to the relief of most Japanese.
But avoiding that mayhem has done nothing to heal this market's deep, long-term ills.


Risky Business
SELLING OUR SECURITY
The Erosion of America's Assets.
By Martin Tolchin and Susan J. Tolchin. 427 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Cold Shower For McCarver
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding the Tim McCarver-Deion Sanders situation: McCarver finally got exactly what he deserved.
Maybe next time, McCarver will think twice before he questions the character of a professional athlete who gives 100 percent for not just one, but two franchises.


Sweeteners for the Relocated to Sell
LIKE many couples scouring the residential real estate market these days, Chuck and Eileen Slater were looking for a steal.
They had outgrown and sold their three-bedroom Cape Cod in Ridgewood, N.J., and wanted to take advantage of depressed home prices in the New York metropolitan region.
The Slaters weren't disappointed.
After a brief search, they found a four-bedroom, Federal-style home on a third of an acre in Ramsey, N.J., for $340,000.
Not exactly a fire-sale price, but substantially lower than comparable homes in the affluent community.


Renaming Glassboro: A Positive Step
The recent death of my father, Dr.
Thomas Robinson, president emeritus of Glassboro State College, came too soon for him to convey his feelings to the community about Henry Rowan's generous gift to the college.
The Sept. 13 article "How Glassboro College Got a New Name" depicts a man who has chosen to make a significant investment in New Jersey.
The taxpayers in New Jersey will reap rewards far into the future because of Mr.
Rowan's gift.
I am aware that there has been controversy over the change of the name of Glassboro to Rowan.
On his behalf, I want readers -- especially those with a connection to the college -- to know that Dr.
Robinson saw the name change as another positive step in the evolution of the college.


Breakfast Tradition: Seaweed at 7
VISITORS to Japan often miss one of the country's great culinary treats, the traditional Japanese breakfast.
Admittedly, some might not feel quite up to eating dried fish flakes, pickles and seaweed at 7 or 8 in the morning.
But these and other delicacies included in a Japanese breakfast constitute a tantalizing -- and healthful -- alternative to bacon and eggs.
Most visitors ordinarily encounter Japanese breakfast while staying in traditional inns, or ryokan, where it is served as a matter of course.
A Western-style breakfast -- or something vaguely resembling one, since a green salad is generally included -- has to be specially requested.


Opening Night Splash
For Ann Magnuson, at the Fez Bar in NoHo, Oct. 11.


Bill in Trenton Seeks to Prohibit Disclosing Rape Victims' Names
Questions of privacy and press freedom have dominated the debate in the New Jersey Legislature over a bill that would make it a crime to publicize the name of a rape victim.
The bill, written and sponsored by Assemblyman Lee A. Solomon, Republican of Haddon Heights, was approved by a vote of 45 to 9 in the Assembly on Thursday with only one member speaking against it.
The Senate is expected to take up the bill in the next few days.
The measure, which would make the publication of the name of an alleged rape victim punishable by a fine and a jail sentence, is strongly opposed by the New Jersey Press Association.


CRIME/MYSTERY: IN SHORT -- FICTION
SHOWCASE By Alison Glen. Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.


Forget the Gold Standard
To the Editor:
In "Praise for Bush's Gold Initiative" (Oct.4), Jude Wanniski trots out, once again, his hobby horse of an international gold standard.
Mr.
Wanniski's (and Mr. Bush's) proposal would be more convincing if the message were internally consistent and more respectful of historical fact.


Caught in an S.&amp; L. Nightmare
When Thomas D. Ramage was asked in 1983 to serve on the board at Valley Federal Savings and Loan in Roswell, N.M., the young physician jumped at the chance.
He says he saw the part-time post as a form of community service, a way to give the growing thrift institution an outside voice.
Besides, Dr.
Ramage dabbled in real estate in the area -- a prosperous patch of oil and natural gas in southeastern New Mexico sometimes called Little Texas -- and wanted to learn about banking.
Valley Federal gave Dr.
Ramage a director's manual to read and he also studied some business journals.
The doctor, an internist specializing in rheumatology, was confident he could handle the job, which paid $300 for each monthly board meeting.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; Loss of Democratic Vote Imperils Bush in South
Here in the rolling hills just outside the Talladega National Forest, the leaves are beginning to turn, and so, it seems, are many of the Reagan Democrats.
If enough of them vote Democratic in what was supposed to be the rock-solid Republican base, President Bush's re-election hopes could be doomed.
"Clinton's for the common man; Bush is for the rich," said Roger Dunaway, a 43-year-old crane operator from nearby Coldwater who voted for Mr.
Bush and Ronald Reagan in the past but seems to have nothing but disdain for Mr.
Bush now.
"It's time to get the Republicans out of there."


Drug Programs Expand but Waiting Lists Remain
JUST after dawn each day, a 45-year old man drives his Saab through the near empty streets of New Haven's south side to a small methadone clinic next to the city's welfare office.
Within five minutes he moves to the front of a line where a nurse checks his chart and empties a vial filled with 100 milligrams of the green liquid into a cup of orange juice.
She hands it to him and watches him drink and swallow the mixture, which the man describes as bittersweet.
A talkative man with light blue eyes, a muscular build and a braid that trails to the middle of his back, the artist and martial arts teacher said that the drug had stabilized his life after years of severe drug abuse that nearly crippled his artistic powers and wreaked havoc on his social life.


Peru Waiting to See if Rebels Open Offensive
A police helicopter hovering over a jail patio here recently was not loud enough to drown out a guerrilla chieftain bellowing final marching orders to his followers: the Sixth Military Plan must now begin.
Abimael Guzman Reynoso, the leader of the Shining Path insurgents, originally planned to start his new military campaign next year, the 100th anniversary of Mao Zedong's birth.


William F. Chafin, 35; Started Gay Magazine
William F. Chafin, a record producer and founder of a national magazine for homosexuals and lesbians, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 35 years old.
He died of AIDS-related lymphoma, his family said.


Amy D. Seltzer, Harry B. Hedison
Amy Dean Seltzer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold I. Seltzer of New York, was married yesterday evening to Harry Brett Hedison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haig Hedison of South Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
Daniel Freitas, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Wequassett Inn in Chatham, Mass.
Rabbi Michael Gelber took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hedison, 30 years old, is the director of investor relations at Biogen Inc., a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a senior vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the investment-management concern, in New York.
Her mother, Adele Seltzer, is an interior designer in New York.


Holey Ground at the Edge of the World
LATE ONE JULY AFTERNOON IN 1964, I WALKED ALONG A leafy path near the western coast of Wales.
Suddenly the land dipped, and I saw below me, in a great hollow, a sunken cathedral of a strange purplish stone.
Nearby were the delicate, arcaded ruins of its bishop's palace.
Sea birds mewed overhead.
The buildings gave off, that day, an unearthly light: the whole place seemed to swim in it, as if under water.
I had a strange sense of being in another element, another focus, at a journey's end of exceptional peace.
I had no idea, then, that this church, St.
David's Cathedral, was a holy place to the Welsh, the shrine of David, the patron saint of Wales, built on the site of his sixth-century monastery and the repository of what are believed to be his bones.
This was just an unexpected stop during a car trip around the westernmost tip of Wales.
"And so we came to the end of the world, where the patron saint sleeps by the Western shore," wrote the Rev.
Francis Kilvert in his diary on his first visit to the cathedral in 1871.


Conversations/Robert McBride; A Bomber Lives With His Guilt In a Land of Scant Innocence
"So now tell me, what do you think about me?" asked the bomber, his dark eyes challenging through round tortoise-shell frames.
This is a question South Africans often pose in one form or another after endeavoring to make themselves understood to outsiders.
Robert McBride, one of the most famous saboteurs in the furtive military underground of the African National Congress, works harder than most South Africans to explain himself, since he finds that for those outside the liberation fraternity what he did surpasses understanding.
What he did is this: In June 1986, he taped together more than 100 pounds of explosives, attaching a mine with a 15-minute timer as his trigger, and swaddling this propulsive charge with bags of machine-gun bullets and metal scraps for shrapnel.
He secreted his lethal contraption in the spare-wheel well of a powder-blue Ford Cortina, which he parked one Saturday night on a crowded beachfront esplanade in Durban.


Move in Baldwin Case
The judge who ignored a psychiatrist's warning before freeing SCOTT BALDWIN last month wants to hear from the same psychiatrist before deciding what to do with the former Nebraska player after his second violent psychotic episode.
Baldwin, who severely beat a Lincoln woman during one episode last January and was later found not responsible by reason of insanity, was shot by the police in Omaha last month when he went on a rampage a few days after District Judge PAUL MERRITT signed an order allowing him to be treated as an outpatient at an Omaha mental health center.


OCT. 11-17: Angola Elections; Gun Battles Break Out As Vote Tally Drags On
The end of the cold war seemed to bode well for Angola's Jonas Savimbi, the American-backed guerrilla leader.
The Angolan peace accord signed in the glow of reconciliation between Washington and Moscow left Mr.
Savimbi's organization, Unita, poised to achieve at the polls what it was unable to by civil war: the unseating of the formerly Soviet-backed Government.


Smith's New Beginning Has Perfect Ending
It has not taken long for Charles Smith to make a strong impression with the Knicks.
Smith finished Friday night's preseason opener against the San Antonio Spurs with 11 points, 10 rebounds and 8 blocked shots, leading New York to a 96-90 victory at the Knickerbocker Arena in Albany.
Last night, Smith added 9 points and 4 rebounds, helping the Knicks gain an easy 118-100 victory over the Dallas Mavericks at Madison Square Garden.


Where Holy Meets Chic
ON the table are some of Janet Mavec's rather arcane reference books: "A Dictionary of Saints" and "Church Vestments: Their Origin and Development."
In the luxuriously appointed Madison Avenue gallery (fresh flowers, wall-to-wall carpeting, damask-draped tables) is a divine (one might say) array of 163 "Signs of Faith."


Surgery for Steve Smith
The Miami Heat's starting point guard, STEVE SMITH, underwent outpatient arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday and will be sidelined for at least several days.


Easy-to-Cook Lentils as a Good Source of Fiber
Of all the varieties of fiber-rich dried beans, lentils are by far the easiest to cook.
They belong on the pantry shelf along with rice and pasta to use regularly for salads, side dishes and soups and to bolster casseroles.
There are many kinds of lentils on the market, the most common being the fairly flat brown variety.
There are also orange lentils in the same shape.
French lentils are dark green, smaller and rounder.
These are excellent for salads because they tend to hold their shape better.
The lentils from France come from an area called Le Puy, near Gascony in the southwest.


Exhibit A: The Highs and Lows of 'L.A. Law'
"L.A. Law" comes back this week, and diehard fans are holding their breath.
When the lawyers at McKenzie, Brackman reconvene Thursday night at 10 for the show's seventh season, will it regain some of its snap?
The NBC series began as a story of and for the 80's.
Greed, glitz, power, lust -- the Steven Bochco-Terry Louise Fisher creation relished, and skewered, them all.
It regularly landed in the top 20 and became the proverbial water-cooler show, buzzed about the morning after.
It was required viewing for lawyers, whose clients began to expect courtroom skills to match those of the attorneys in the great-looking, verbally dazzling ensemble cast.


Hail the Hemlock
A news flash on the hemlock woolly adelgid: it is still devastating hemlocks in the East (Tsuga canadensis and T. caroliniana).
But there are four species that are more resistant to the pest: T. heterophylla and T. mertensiana, which are from the West Coast, and two Japanese species, T. diversifolia and T. sieboldii.
Dr.
Mark S. McClure of the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, who has studied the insect for six years and has just returned from studying it in its native habitat, Japan, suggested planting these species as ornamentals but not for widespread use in a forest.


Christina Weltz, Edmond F. Ritter
Dr.
Christina Ray Weltz, a senior resident in general surgery at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., was married in New York yesterday to Dr.
Edmond Frederick Ritter, an assistant professor of plastic and reconstructive surgery at Duke.
Justice Felice Shea of the New York State Supreme Court officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Ritter, 31 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of S. Robert Weltz Jr. of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Audrey Rosenman of New York.
Her father is a retired stockbroker.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in New York.
The bride is also a stepdaughter of Gloria Weltz of Santa Barbara and of the late Mervin Rosenman.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; Race and the Economy
To the Editor:
In last Sunday's debate, the candidates addressed the "racial division which continues to tear apart our great cities." None of the candidates made the necessary linkages between our deindustrializing economy and massive unemployment, homelessness, unfair housing, high school dropouts, high infant mortality and the nexus between race and class.


Russia Talks Biznes
If dragging Russia into the high-tech consumer age has proved harder than anyone suspected, don't blame the language.
Since the dawn of the Age of Perestroika, the jargon of American business and electronics has been eagerly welcomed in Russia, from the entry-level
biznes
and
kompyutery
through
griny
, or
buksy
(dollars),
press rilis
and
imidzh
(image).
One reason is that unlike the Russian character, which is traditionally resistant to innovation, the Russian language, with its plethora of prefixes and endings, is eminently suited to adopt and shape verbal imports.
Tack on a syllable at the front or back, change a thing here or there, and a new arrival takes on forms even its parents would not recognize.
Xerox, for example, keenly sensitive to the misuse of its familiar trade name as a common verb, might easily overlook the rise of
otserit
-- a Russian evolution of
ot-kseroks-iro
vat
(to make a Xerox).


Hospitals Court Women, Who Pick the Family's Doctors
Much as the auto industry discovered in the 1980's that marketing specifically aimed at women could help sell cars, hospitals are realizing that wooing women is good business.
Over the last five years, thousands of hospitals nationwide have set up programs for women.
Some, like the "stork clubs" with pink-and-green birthing rooms and special T-shirts for the newborn, offer more style than substance.
But others have created women's centers, staffed by women doctors who say they can take a more preventive, holistic and feminist approach to care than would be possible elsewhere.


Little Things of 4 Lost Lives Recalled
Carol Goodrich sat in semidarkness on her front porch and reflected tearfully on almost 20 years of friendship with her neighbor, Florence A. Pike, one of the four women shot dead in a county child-support-collection office by a man who claimed he had been unfairly targeted as a father who did not pay child support.
Mrs.
Goodrich baby-sat for Mrs.
Pike's three children and played with her four grandchildren.
Mrs.
Pike helped Mrs.
Goodrich through a bad patch when her parents died, and she was always trying to persuade her daughter, Paula, to get a college education.


Point System For Lift Tickets
A new type of ski lift ticket that is valid until the number of points it represents are used up -- rather than until the end of the day or week -- will go into use for the first time in the East at the Attitash Ski Area in Bartlett, N.H., this winter.
Each time a skier uses the ticket -- actually, a magnetized card -- a set number of points are deducted.
The ticket, good for two years, can be used by more than one person.
Mount Bachelor resort in Bend, Ore., started offering point-based tickets last year, and it reported that 16 percent of its skiers used this type of pass.
These tickets are also common in Europe.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore


Glavine Puts Braves in a Head-Start Program
Tom Glavine, whose last post-season appearance was as dreadful as his team's last game was electrifying, claimed a large dose of redemption tonight.
In the process, he deflated the high-riding hopes of an entire country.
Glavine, who Tuesday night was battered for eight runs in the second inning of the sixth game of the National League playoffs against the Pittsburgh Pirates, pitched a four-hitter as the Atlanta Braves downed the Toronto Blue Jays, 3-1, in the first World Series game ever for a team from Canada.


Best-Laid Plans


Diane M. Dolan, Michael T. Sauter
Diane Marie Dolan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Dolan of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Thomas Sauter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Sauter of Jackson, Mich.
The Rev.
George Baker officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Epiphany in New York.
Mrs.
Sauter, 25 years old, is a special-education teacher at the Frost School in Rockville, Md.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a cell biologist at New York University.


Darkness and Light


No Headline
Now I don't buy into the charges of racism, but if you have a force that is not keeping up with a city that has increased minorities, you have a force that is less than dynamic. -- RAYMOND W. KELLY, New York City's new Police Commissioner.  [ 1:1. ]


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; Can He Send Others?
To the Editor:
Gov.
Bill Clinton is not the only person who had mixed feelings about the Vietnam War.
Like thousands of other young men, I served during that war, and I understand what Bill Clinton went through as a young man more than two decades ago.


Amy Fisher Case: Parable or Aberration?; Long Islanders Consider the Implications
The Amy Fisher case, which has dominated the news of Long Island since the spring, has repeatedly taken unexpected twists and turns.
The case has received major attention in the newspapers and on television, spawned movie deals, spurred judicial and political commentary and figures prominently in the conversations of ordinary Long Islanders.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 11 about living in Southport, Conn., misstated the schooling available in the Greens Farms Academy in Westport.
It covers kindergarten through the 12th grade.


Friends


To Keep or to Buy, There's the Rub
THE question occurs to a lot of us from time to time: Should I fix up the clunker or should I bite the bullet and lay down a bunch of cash for a new car?
Fortunately for the automobile manufacturers, the answer usually lies in our hearts instead of our heads, and we sigh and set about finding something new.
But now the bean-counters at Runzheimer International have sorted out the actual cost of the decision, and their analysis might help some of us to make a wiser choice.


Ellen von der Heyden, James Gillespie
Ellen von der Heyden, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl M. von der Heyden of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to James Gillespie, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Gillespie of Olveston, England.
The Quaker ceremony took place at the First Church of Round Hill.
Mrs.
Gillespie, 27 years old, is a product manager for Time-Life Music in Alexandria, Va.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the executive vice president of RJR Nabisco Inc. in New York.


Unexpected Finds; France
AT ANY TIME OF the year, if the sky is blue and I can tear myself away from the office, I declare it an "arrondissement day." I then dust off my trusty red-covered street map, don a pair of walking shoes and take to the streets of Paris.
On a recent wander around the neighborhoods of the Bastille and Nation, the city's 11th and 12th arrondissements, I clicked off addresses at a rapid pace, revisiting street markets I had not seen in years, discovering a new boulangerie and then, just before 1 P.M., finding myself at the wine bar of my dreams.


Talking: Co-op Loans; Refinance Eases for Buildings
THERE'S been a slight thaw in the icy attitude lenders have been taking lately toward co-op buildings eager to refinance their underlying mortgages.
"I think the worst is over," said Harry Avradinis, president of NYM Capital Group of Manhattan, mortgage brokers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: ISSUES -- Health Care; Bush and Clinton Aren't Saying It, But Health-Care Taxes Are Likely
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton both say they will rein in health costs and provide health insurance for 35 million uninsured Americans without raising taxes for anyone.
But experience suggests that such promises are unrealistic, that health-care costs eventually explode even if they are artificially controlled, and that some new taxes are likely if the Government guarantees health insurance coverage for all.


Eileen A. Delaney, Laurence Fell Jr.
Eileen Ann Delaney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Delaney of Holmdel, N.J., was married there yesterday to Laurence Thomas Fell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fell of New Vernon, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the ceremony at St.
Catharine's Church.
Mrs.
Fell, 32 years old, is a bond-sales assistant at Salomon Brothers, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father is a customer-service manager in Middletown, N.J., for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Russia and Its Nasty Neighborhood Brawls
Every time the smoke of a new ethnic brush fire rises on the horizon, anxious glances turn to Russia.
The reflex is as involuntary as it is natural: If the flame were ever to spread through the unstable tangle of the collapsed empire, the inferno would be awesome.
So far, the conflagrations along the southern fringe of the old empire -- in Moldova, the Caucasus, Central Asia -- have been largely contained.
But every new flare-up raises new threats and revives old ones.
So it was when gunplay broke out this month in the Black Sea town of Gagra between Abkhaz separatists and Georgian militiamen.


Mastercard Aid At Thomas Cook
Mastercard has announced that it will provide its cardholders with emergency aid and other services free at 1,600 offices of the Thomas Cook Group in 120 countries.
Cardholders can report lost or stolen cards, get cards replaced within 24 hours in the United states or two days elsewhere.
They can also get air tickets validated or rewritten and make emergency phone calls or send telex or fax messages from Thomas Cook offices without a charge beyond the cost of the call, fax or telex.


Laurie Angiolini, Robert W. Kitts
Laurie Angiolini, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elso F. Angiolini of Nutley, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert W. Kitts, a son of Richard F. Kitts of Bloomfield, N.J., and the late Mary T. Kitts.
Msgr.
Louis F. Fimiani performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Family Church.
Mrs.
Kitts, 29 years old, is the assistant admissions director for the paralegal studies program at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison, N.J.
She graduated from William Paterson College.


Appealing 'Mousetrap'
AGATHA CHRISTIE wrote plays that were every bit as successful as her best-selling books.
Her "Mousetrap" is the longest continuously running show on the London stage.
"The Mousetrap," which is still playing there, is performed all over the world and has gathered so many bits and pieces of lore that its collection of trivia could be turned into a complete game of Trivial Pursuit.


An Opera, Too
To the Editor:
Jay Parini observes how well Steinbeck's "Of Mice and Men" functions in various media, i.e., as novel, play and film.
The work is also seen to good advantage in Carlisle Floyd's 1970 opera of the same name.


It's Play Ball! for Women Behind Bars
At a point in the year when most teams have put away their bats and balls and mitts for the season, the Saw Mill Deli from Yonkers, a women's softball team, was experiencing a case of pregame jitters.
They were scheduled to play the notorious Taconic Bombers, whose reputation preceded them.
"I expect them to be big," said the left center fielder, Valerie Geremia, 26 years old.
"Really big."


Amy Oksner, James Kendrick
Amy Deborah Oksner, the vice president of sales at RPA, an automated-paging network service in Jersey City, was married yesterday to James Michael Kendrick, a senior lawyer at the New York law firm of Carro, Spanbock, Kaster &amp; Cuiffo.
Donald Aronson, the Mayor of Englewood, N.J., performed the ceremony at the Englewood Club.
Mrs.
Kendrick, 37 years old, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Oksner of Saugerties, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was a freelance cartoonist who drew for "Superman" comics and was a writer for "Dondi," a former syndicated comic strip.


Elizabeth A. Old, Robert W. Ker 3d
Elizabeth Adams Old, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan W. Old Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert Walker Ker 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ker Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Terence Elsberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Ker, 30 years old, is a marketing manager in the Optima credit-card division of the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president and chief executive of Grandmet U.S.A., a consumer-products conglomerate, in Montvale, N.J.


Murder Least Foul: The Cozy, Soft-Boiled Mystery
THE serial killer is getting what was coming to him.
Thrillers like Thomas Harris's "Silence of the Lambs" have incited a new wave of polite, "cozy" mysteries, remarkable for their nonthreatening content and nonviolent characters.
After indulging homicidal maniacs who tracked blood all over the genre for the last few seasons, mystery readers were probably ready for more civilized killers with more agreeable manners.
In a recent survey of the marketplace, the trade journal Publishers Weekly reported that cozy mysteries, especially those with female protagonists, are the new publishing rage, outpacing crime novels that feature male private eyes and police detectives.
Mystery bookstore owners say they are shoving their hard-boiled titles aside to make more shelf space for these softer, gentler novels.
At least one bookseller, Phyllis Brown, the proprietor of Grounds for Murder in San Diego, says she would "starve to death" if she couldn't count on the cozy trade generated by such authors as Martha Grimes, Joan Hess and Sharyn McCrumb.


New &amp; Noteworthy
PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK, by Melissa Fay Greene. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) Progress in civil rights was slow to come to McIntosh County, Georgia, until an unarmed black man was shot there by a white police officer in 1972.
This book details the legal struggles that followed and the political rise and fall of Thurnell Alston, the black community's leader.
"I will keep it on the shelf next to James Agee, another irreverent natural writer who tried, through his appetite for life and language, to drive inconsequence from the world," Theodore Rosengarten said here last year.
JUMP: And Other Stories, by Nadine Gordimer. (Penguin, $10.) Nadine Gordimer, who last year won the Nobel Prize in Literature, is an expert at finding the political within the personal, the personal within the political.
Like her previous work, most of the 16 stories in this collection examine apartheid's social legacy in her native South Africa at the same time that they explore the individual lives caught in its web.
"Ms. Gordimer takes upon herself this burden of getting it straight and telling it straight, which far too many of her compatriots have refused," our reviewer, John Edgar Wideman, said last year.
"Her eloquence breaks through the silence, parses it, shames it."


Topics of The Times; Dubious Funding for Cuban Exiles
A new public TV documentary, "Campaign for Cuba," offers an unflattering portrait of a Florida-based exile group, the Cuban American National Foundation.
Critics claim that the group's founder, Jorge Mas Canosa, has tyrannically tried to silence them.
As if to prove them right, Mr.
Mas Canosa's lawyers tried to keep the program off the air last Wednesday.
The effect was to build an audience for a provocative inquiry.
What most provoked Mr.
Mas Canosa was the program's claim that his foundation had received nearly a million dollars in grants from the National Endowment for Democracy, an agency whose mandate is to promote pluralism abroad.
The foundation received grants totaling $780,000 from 1984 to 1990 as a conduit for an international human rights project.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Mann's photographs neither move nor disturb me, but her comment on ketchup does.
Why should a 10-year-old be denied her favorite condiment with dinner?
If Mann is concerned about seeming "common," she might try serving it in a chalice.
Otherwise, I suggest that the children withhold modeling services until they are happy with the menu.
RALEIGH MAYER
New York, N.Y.


The Wrong Stuff
ANGLE OF ATTACK
Harrison Storms and the Race to the Moon.
By Mike Gray. 304 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Wendy Lippman, Michael Arnon
Lillian Lippman of Merrick, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Wendy Lippman, to Michael Arnon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Arnon of Palm Beach, Fla.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lippman, 33 years old, is a vice president of Grey Direct Advertising in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University.
Her mother is a special-education teacher in Nassau County public schools.
Ms.
Lippman is also the daughter of the late Lawrence Lippman.


Corrections
A review on page 44 of The Times Book Review today, about "Murder at 75 Birch," by Richard T. Pienciak, refers erroneously to the conduct of Steve Corbett, a columnist for The Wilkes-Barre (Pa.) Times Leader, in pursuing a local homicide investigation.
On March 26, a county judge, at the request of the District Attorney, dismissed charges that Mr.
Corbett had violated Pennsylvania's wiretapping law.


Pamela Schiller, Brian R. Socolow
Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon B. Schiller of Louisville, Ky., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Renee Lori Schiller, to Brian Roy Socolow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Socolow of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Schiller, 27 years old, is a media manager at Elizabeth Arden in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in private practice in Louisville.


POSTINGS: Conference in Newark; Urban Housing
The often vexing problem of providing low-income housing while retaining and attracting middle-income residents is a challenge shared by municipalities across the country.
To examine how design can be part of the solution to these and other prickly urban-housing problems, the New Jersey Institute of Technology School of Architecture in Newark will be host at a daylong conference next Friday.


Jane C. Wiesenthal, Jay A. Cohen
Jane Carter Wiesenthal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Wiesenthal of New York, was married last evening to Jay Arman Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Cohen of Hamden, Conn.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Cohen, 24 years old, graduated from Union College.
She is a law student at Yeshiva University.
Her father is a senior vice president and a director of the Shepaug Corporation, a diversified holding company in New York.
Her mother, Ellen C. Wiesenthal, is a floral designer.


Unemployment Before Employment; Frustrated, New York Teen-Agers Look for Their First Jobs
On Columbus Day, Dolayna DeArmond wistfully thought of the fun things she might do with a day off from school: going to the movies, shopping, hanging out with her girlfriends in Crown Heights.
Instead, the 15-year-old did what she has done for the last two years without much success: looked for a job to help her single mother put food on the table and money in the bank for college.
Ms.
DeArmond, a sophomore at Harry Van Arsdale High School, is one of thousands of New York City teen-agers whose hopes of joining the working world are running up against Depression-era employment rates.


Visitor Center at NASA Complex
As the home of the nation's Manned Space Flight Program, the NASA/Johnson Space Center 20 miles south of Houston has long been a powerful magnet for tourists, attracting one million visitors in 1991.
But with a $70 million visitor center, set to open this weekend, it seems certain to become more popular.
The complex, Space Center Houston, has been in various phases of planning and construction since 1986 by the Manned Space Flight Foundation, a nonprofit group that is independent of the Federal Government.
It promises visitors a broad array of exhibits and programs.


Berryhill Goes From Walk to Wallop
Nothing can be so cruel as the "What have you done for me lately?" mind-set of the post-season.
Just ask Pittsburgh's Barry Bonds.
Or Dave Winfield, who had to wear a 1-for-22 World Series yoke for 11 years.
Or Atlanta's Damon Berryhill, who batted .167 in the National League playoffs.
Berryhill, the substitute catcher filling in for the injured Greg Olson, knows his most important task is to call games, good ones for an exemplary pitching staff.
Yet that average, coupled with the post-season slumps of Ron Gant and Terry Pendleton, had made Berryhill one more close-to-automatic out than the Braves needed.


Sharp Clashes as D'Amato And Abrams Debate Issues
In the second debate of their Senate campaign, State Attorney General Robert Abrams and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato collided forcefully last night, stressing their sharp differences on nearly a dozen issues from abortion to the economy, health care, education and the tone and tactics of their own campaigns.
Locked in a tight race, both candidates made strong appeals to the political middle ground, each painting the other as an extremist out of step with the concerns of New Yorkers, and each striving repeatedly to wrap himself in the mantle of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who holds a big lead over President Bush in the state, according to all the polls.


Forum; There's Still a Way for Bush to Win
WHEN it was a two-man race, voters judged the differences between President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton principally by ideology.
They wanted to understand the approach each candidate would take to solve the nation's problems.
But with Ross Perot's re-emergence -- one-liners and all -- the focus of the race has shifted.
Voters now are far more likely to judge each candidate on the issue of leadership.
And if leadership is the issue, Mr.
Bush can still win.
To understand which candidate is the better leader, the public will be paying special attention to the way each candidate advances his agenda.
But agendas -- like elections -- do not take place in a vacuum; each candidate must also define the context for his agenda.


Susan E. Jones, James R. Putman
Susan Elisabeth Jones, a daughter of Janet Jones of Worthington, Ohio, and the late James P. Jones, was married yesterday to James Reding Putman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
F.
Putman of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
Herbert M. Goetz, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Swasey Chapel at Denison University in Granville, Ohio.
Mrs.
Putman, 31 years old, is a vice president in municipal-bond sales at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Alabama.
Her father was the founder and senior partner of the Worthington law firm of Jones, Troyan, Coco, Pappas &amp; Perkins.


Nancy Stula, David Bikerman
Nancy Stula, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Stula of Colchester, Conn., was married yesterday to David Bikerman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Bikerman of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Chris Emerson, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Seamen's Inn in Mystic, Conn.
Mrs.
Bikerman, a research assistant in American paintings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Hartford and has a master's degree in art history from Columbia University.


Business Diary/October 11-16
THE ECONOMY Voters Make Their Interest Clear to the Candidates


Don't Fence Them In
To the Editor:
Sweeping generalities are not becoming to a historian.
Alan Brinkley says about the West, "No other region has had so long and intensive an experience of racial and ethnic diversity; no other place displays the imprint of multiculturalism more clearly." Let him come to Brooklyn!
PETER REILLY Brooklyn


Topics of The Times; Creative Teaching, L.A.-Style
While politicians argue loudly about how to reform the nation's schools, creative programs that really make a difference often go unheralded.
Fortunately, that's not true for a program in Los Angeles that offers a different way of teaching humanities to high school students.
The program, Humanitas, recently won a $100,000 Innovations Award from the Ford Foundation and the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard as one of the outstanding creative projects by state and local governments.


Mutual Funds; After the Crash, It Paid to Hang On
TOMORROW marks the fifth anniversary of the 1987 stock market crash, when the Dow Jones industrial average fell 508 points, or more than 20 percent, in a single day.
Given that precipitous drop, how long did it take fund investors to recoup their losses?
Not too long, as the chart shows.
Because of their heavy income component, growth-and-income and equity-income funds bounced back within just 12 months; the other three types of stock funds, those focusing on growth, small-company growth and capital appreciation, took three months longer.
After five years, all stock fund investors were doing quite well.


The Dolphin Defense No Laughing Matter
AN ugly pattern had occurred for the Miami Dolphins in nearly all of their 11 previous meetings with the Buffalo Bills before this season.
Actually, it was a common thread whenever the Dolphins encountered a team with a massive and confident offensive line that was intent on shoving the Dolphins' defense backward.
Buffalo had won 10 of those 11 meetings.
In those 11 games, the Bills had twice scored 40 points or more, six times scored 30 or more and nine times 24 or more.
In a 31-17 Bills victory in 1989 at Buffalo, Thurman Thomas rushed for 148 yards and Larry Kinnebrew rushed for 121 more.
Last November, in a 35-31 Bills' victory at Buffalo, Thomas rushed for 165 yards.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Those hunting for truly disturbing images of children need not focus on such small game as Sally Mann.
Compared with the banal and mawkish images of children we see on television and in magazines every day, the information in Mann's beautiful photographs is hardly cause for alarm.
Producers of sitcoms routinely put their child actors through the absurd paces of sham childhoods; politicians casually exploit their offspring for a boost in the polls, and advertising imagery accelerates children's maturity in the most grotesque and irresponsible ways.


Home Truths on Two Home Fronts
Wouldn't "The Holy Terror," the Simon Gray drama at the Promenade Theater, be better off as a one-man play?
Granted, it would have to be one terribly agitated man, given to hallucinations and apt to forget, in a flash of fury, where he is and whom he's talking to.
But if the jangled soul were haunted enough by the events of his life, you really wouldn't need the other characters who turn up in Mr.
Gray's latest work to reach our shores.


Outlook in Beijing Cold for Hong Kong Chief
With just three days left before his first official trip to China, and with a number of pressing issues to be discussed, Hong Kong's new Governor, Christopher Patten, still has not been told whether he will get to meet with key Chinese leaders, and many fear he faces a cool reception in Beijing.
Mr.
Patten goes to Beijing on Wednesday, carrying a handful of political proposals he wants to institute before the British colony reverts to China in 1997.
The proposed changes, announced by the Governor last week, would broaden Hong Kong's electoral base and give residents more of a say in the selection of legislators.


'The Busy, Busy Wasp'
"Andrew does have a habit of turning into the character he's writing about," says a London literary agent who has known him for years: "When he was doing Belloc" -- the Catholic writer -- "he had a conversion; when he was doing Tolstoy, he left his wife; and, well, you know" -- she pauses for effect -- "there are a lot of people out there with hammer and nails at the ready."


Candidates On Television
Last night's debate between the candidates in the New YUork Senate race, Senator Alfonse M. d'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, will be rebroadcast today, from 11 A.M. to noon, on WCBS-TV (Channel 2 in the New York metropolitan region).


Casting a Vote For Ripken
To the Sports Editor:
I would like to take issue with Murray Chass, who, in his Baseball Notebook (The Times, Oct. 4), stated that Cal Ripken Jr. did not deserve the American League's most valuable player award last year because the Baltimore Orioles were never in the pennant race.
Before disqualifying Ripken arbitrarily, Chass would do well to remember that Ripken's .323 batting average, 34 home runs and 114 runs batted in were enhanced by his participation in every game of the 1991 season and by his near-flawless defensive performance at shortstop.


Students Clash Over Abortion at Cornell
A clash between students on both sides of the abortion issue at Cornell University turned violent this morning as three police officers were injured and three abortion-rights demonstrators were arrested.
Just before 9:30 A.M., as about 30 people were scheduled to start the All-Ivy Pro-Life Conference, a group of more than 100 abortion-rights demonstrators, about half of whom were Cornell students, gathered outside the meeting hall.
Lieut.
Randall H. Hausner, a Cornell public safety officer, said the abortion-rights group entered the building, blowing whistles and chanting, about 10:30 A.M.


Not Hilton's. Not Westin's. Merely A Shoehorn.
One of life's little luxuries is a shoehorn that does not have a hotel's name on it.
This hand-forged, hot-rolled steel spiral, blackened in the forging process, was designed by Michael Aram, an American metalware designer, and is made in India.
Mr.
Aram also designs decorative hardware, flatware, letter openers and candlesticks, some of which are sold at Mxyplyzyk.
But this shoehorn is the prime mover.
A great gift for anyone with shoes. $35 at Mxyplyzyk.


Corrections
A map on Sept. 20 with an article about Mongolia misidentified a lake north of Ulan Bator.
It is Lake Baikal, not Lake Balkhash.


Insensitive Enough to Survive
FOLLY
By Susan Minot. 278 pp. Boston: Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Charges of Political Favoritism Mark Charged Battle Over a West Point Hotel
For generations, the quaint Thayer Hotel on the grounds of the United States Military Academy here has provided a respite for cadets' families and West Point visitors.
But for the last four years the famous hotel, which remains open although rundown and, some say, dangerous, has been the center of a quiet but furious battle that has sometimes made the Academy's lessons on warfare seem tame.
The fight, over which of two competing bidders will win the right to "privatize" the hotel now owned by the Government, has dragged in major Wall Street and construction industry players.
And it has brought assertions by one group of contestants that a member of the other group, a top political aide to President Bush, has used his influence and has benefitted from favoritism by military officials.


Julie Starkweather and Todd Halloran
Julie Clay Starkweather, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Starkweather of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Todd William Halloran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Halloran of Bolton, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Stiers performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Halloran is a senior manager of consumer-card marketing at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
She received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her husband.


In the Region: Connecticut; Small Tenants Help Fill Greenwich Space
WHEN vacancy rates in Greenwich office buildings hit 33 percent recently, it seemed the town had been caught in the same real estate slump as other Fairfield County communities.
But no one seems worried.
Real estate executives and planners agree that the rate is distorted by a couple of large empty office complexes and that the character of the downtown office district is changing, perhaps for the better.


Bugs Bunny, Cross-Dresser?
In a show of support for Madonna's book "Sex," Gerald Levin, the president of Time Warner Inc., made an appearance at the party Thursday night celebrating the book's publication by Warner Books.
Mr.
Levin, like many of the guests, was wearing leather: a brown leather jacket with Bugs Bunny on the back.
"I always try to wear something from the company," he said, standing near a booth where three leather-clad people were selling kisses for a dollar.


49ers Put Taylor On Injured Reserve
San Francisco 49ers placed receiver JOHN TAYLOR, who suffered a leg injury against the Jets, on the injured reserve list yesterday.
Taylor had 8 catches for 191 yards and 2 touchdowns before he suffered a broken left fibula in the Sept. 20 game.
The latest X-rays on Friday showed that the healing process was taking longer than expected.


Giving Drivers Tailor-Made Data on Car Insurance
Some people call Peter B. Lewis, president and chief executive of the Progressive Corporation of Cleveland, a maverick and an eccentric.
And Mr.
Lewis, who favors black Stetson hats and has a passion for contemporary art, does not dispute the labels.
After all, he is a committed Democrat, "which really makes me an eccentric in the insurance business."
Politics aside, Mr.
Lewis, 58 years old, has indeed built a track record of foraging into risky businesses -- like insuring motorcycle riders -- that make most competitors wince.
And his pioneering reputation will surely be reinforced by his latest venture, one to help Californians shop for auto insurance.
By many accounts, it is the first service of its kind in the nation.


Rangers Continue Suburban Nightmare
In recent seasons, as the Islanders declined and the Rangers rose, the dwindling fan base at Nassau Coliseum could always take comfort in the fact that the suburban team usually played well against its city rival, especially when they met east of the East River.
This season, part of that is still true.
The Islanders welcomed the Rangers back to the Coliseum tonight with a 6-3 victory that was so one-sided that even the "1940!" chants grew half-hearted.
It was the Islanders' second consecutive victory and their third consecutive outing without defeat.


CRIME/MYSTERY: IN SHORT -- NONFICTION
THE TRUNK MURDERESS: WINNIE RUTH JUDD The Truth About an American Crime Legend Revealed at Last.
By Jana Bommersbach.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.


The Gas Tax Is Only a Start
To the Editor:
"Raise the Gas Tax to Cut the Deficit" (Forum, Oct. 4) did not go far enough.
What we should have is a stiff tax on energy waste -- whether in gasoline, hydroelectricity, oil, coal, gas or nuclear.
We are the world's worst wastrels and it costs us a lot of money.


Fact as Fiction
To the Editor:
Some American movies did explore the bad time of the Hollywood blacklist, even when it was going on.
They did this, though, in the guise of fiction.
Seeing "High Noon" again, long after its first release in 1952, I found my palms sweating, an excessive reaction, I thought, perhaps personal and involving my own experience with having to sign a loyalty oath at the University of California at Los Angeles.


TALLY IN ANGOLA LEADS TO RUNOFF
Nearly two weeks after Angola's first democratic elections, and with the country's stability hanging in the balance, official final results of the vote were released today.
As expected, they show the two main rivals for the presidency will have to compete again in a runoff.
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, the candidate of the leftist governing party, registered a surprisingly sturdy victory with 49.6 percent of the vote, but he failed to win 50 percent of the votes, enough to avoid a runoff with the second-placed finisher.


Laurie A. Haranzo And C. M. Raleigh
Laurie Anne Haranzo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Haranzo of Wheeling, W. Va., was married in New York yesterday to Christopher Maheu Raleigh, the son of W. James Raleigh of New York and the late Jo Maheu Raleigh.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Raleigh, 29 years old, is an assistant vice president in the asset-management department at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is a partner in the Wheeling law firm of Haranzo &amp; McGuane and the owner of Warwood Tool Company, a hand-tool manufacturer there.


Graves Starts a Brawl But Wins the Game
Marvin Graves's 17-yard pass to tight end Chris Gedney was good for a touchdown in the last minute today at Mountaineer Field and the play enabled Syracuse to defeat West Virginia, 20-17.
Gedney, who is 6 feet 5 inches and weighs 254 pounds, was in the back of the end zone when Graves's soft pass came his way.
The Orange receiver outjumped the defending back, strong safety John Harper, 6-1, 190, and that ended a tense, dramatic contest.


Movement And Meaning
SOME people have spouses and children.
Others have pets.
Madonna has a machine that runs on nerve and money with gears made of people.
On the street outside the party Thursday night for her book "Sex," while the Presidential candidates were debating in Richmond, a mob of onlookers and press people were being restrained behind barricades by the police, security thugs and public-relations women in puritanical pilgrim attire.
Madonna, her hair pinned up in little blond Heidi braids, walked in at about 10 o'clock, in time to make it onto the 11 o'clock news.


Dodd Holds Lead in Polls In Connecticut
In the race for United States Senate, Connecticut voters are encountering a cozy, backyard version of a Bill Clinton-Ross Perot face-off: a quintessential public man, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, against an archetypal businessman, Brook Johnson.
Mr.
Dodd, the Democrat, is leading by a large margin in polls as he seeks a third term in the Senate, where one of his predecessors was his father, Senator Thomas J. Dodd.
But Mr.
Johnson -- who followed his father into textile mills, working his way up to executive and finally owner -- is mounting an expensive attack, financed almost entirely by himself, that focuses on the Federal deficit and blames it on Washington insiders like Mr.
Dodd.


Update; Child Found in Trash Bin Returns to New Haven Home
Three-year-old Jasmine Smith, who was rescued two weeks ago from a trash bin in the Bronx, was returned to her home in New Haven on Friday, after Connecticut officials apparently failed to persuade a judge to remove the child from the custody of her mother, Camilla Smith.
Jasmine had been in the custody of the State Department of Children and Youth Services at Yale-New Haven Hospital since she was found.
State officials contended that she had been neglected, and two days of hearings were held at Juvenile Court in New Haven on Thursday and Friday.


Easy-to-Cook Lentils as a Good Source of Fiber
Of all the varieties of fiber-rich dried beans, lentils are by far the easiest to cook.
They belong on the pantry shelf along with rice and pasta to use regularly for salads, side dishes and soups and to bolster casseroles.
There are many kinds of lentils on the market, the most common being the fairly flat brown variety.
There are also orange lentils in the same shape.
French lentils are dark green, smaller and rounder.
These are excellent for salads because they tend to hold their shape better.
The lentils from France come from an area called Le Puy, near Gascony in the southwest.


Marian MacKinney and Lynn B. Lorch
Marian Greenwood MacKinney, a New York gallery owner, was married yesterday in Napa, Calif., to Lynn Bruce Lorch, a hospital executive.
The Rev.
Stephen Carpenter, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Rands, the bride's uncle and aunt.
Ms.
MacKinney, who is 42 years old and is keeping her name, owns Portraits Inc.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Loren G. MacKinney of Napa.
Her father, who is retired, is an emeritus professor of pediatrics at the University of Southern California.


CRIME/MYSTERY: IN SHORT -- NONFICTION
BLOODY BUSINESS An Anecdotal History of Scotland Yard.
By H. Paul Jeffers.
Pharos, $19.95.


In the Wings, Survival Tactics
Whither American Ballet Theater?
If the answer were obvious, the question would not be asked.
Yet after months of uncertainty, stemming from an increasingly unmanageable deficit and the resignation of its artistic director, a major American cultural institution has an opportunity for rebirth.
It is a renewal that could go beyond mere survival.


A Host So Intense, So Gracious
THE salvias are blooming at Wave Hill, so try to get up to this public garden, perched over the Hudson River in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, to see the many faces of this plant.
The genus has more than 700 species, and about 40 kinds are growing at Wave Hill.
If you can't make it there, find out where the salvias are in your area, because this is their season.
Actually, this graceful member of the mint family, which comes in a multitude of shapes, colors and aromas (pineapple sage is in this genus), blooms from June through the frost.
Its deep blues, purples and reds seem to intensify with the fall skies.


Well, About That Energy Prophet . . .
To the Editor:
We in the Tennessee Valley found that S. David Freeman's guessing ("An Energy Prophet Who Guessed Right," Sept. 27) was not as good as ratepayers in the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, for which he now works, might hope.


INSIDE
Iraq Loans: A Reconstruction
The conclusion at the heart of the Government's corruption case against the Atlanta bank that lent billions to Iraq turns out to have been based on incomplete information and a flawed investigation.
Page 36.
Abrams and D'Amato Debate
In their second debate in the campaign for the Senate from New York, Attorney General Abrams and Senator D'Amato collided forcefully on several issues, and Mr.
D'Amato said this is his last campaign.
Page 51.
Angola to Vote Again
With final results showing that no one received a majority in the country's first democratic balloting, the two main rivals for the presidency will compete in a runoff.
Page 7.


Rita Kleinman, Paul Schietinger
Rita J. Kleinman, the daughter of Jean H. Kleinman of Stratford, Conn., and the late Charles K. Kleinman, was married yesterday to Paul S. Schietinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Schietinger Jr. of Bridgeport, Conn.
Msgr.
William F. Schultz officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bridgeport.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman took part in the ceremony.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2 Travel Section 5
Japan from morn (with seaweed and salty plums at 7) till night (in Tokyo's frenetic clubs).


Don't Fence Them In
To the Editor:
In "The Western Historians: Don't Fence Them In" (Sept. 20), Alan Brinkley writes that in the new histories the American West was a place where "bravery and success  [ coexisted ]  with oppression, greed and failure . . . and ecologically devastated landscapes  [ were ]  as characteristic of Western development as great ranches, rich farms and prosperous cities."


Elizabeth Mead, William Stowell
Elizabeth Wales Mead, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Mead of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to William Lackey Stowell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel C. Stowell of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill 2d performed the ceremony at Grace EpiscopalChurch in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Stowell, 29 years old, is a legal assistant at the Dreyfus Corporation in New York, a mutual-fund company where her mother, Mary-Chilton W. Mead, is a director of corporate communications.
The bride and her husband graduated from Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Keenan Powers &amp; Andrews.
The bride is a granddaughter of Dr.
George Mead, a composer in Brooklyn, and of the late Phyllis R. Mead, a former president of the Brooklyn Music School.


Fischer Wins a Fighting Endgame
Squeezing Boris Spassky in a hard-fought finish, Bobby Fischer won Game 21 of their exhibition match yesterday in Belgrade and went ahead with 8 victories to Spassky's 4.
Fischer needs just two more to gain the winner's $3.35 million share of the $5 million purse.
Spassky played a bold defense, breaking out in the center with an enticing pawn sacrifice to enhance the mobility of his pieces.
But despite all the difficulties, Fischer stubbornly hung on to triumph in an endgame.
After going two pawns ahead, he had to acquiesce in Spassky's pressure by giving both of them back to free his position for active operations.


New County Lineup For State Assembly
WESTCHESTER will have a new profile in the State Assembly next year, with at least three new faces in its seven-member delegation, down from nine, and a possible Democratic majority.
Republicans have long dominated the county delegation and now hold a 5-to-4 edge.
The changes stem from the redistricting that redraws political boundaries every 10 years to conform to census changes.
This year's changes were so severe in some cases that three incumbent Assemblymen -- the Democrats Gregory P. Young and Michael Spano and the Republican Henry W. Barnett -- decided not to seek re-election.


Massachusetts Campus Is Torn by Racial Strife
Two long posters now flank the cold lobby of Washington Tower, a 22-story dormitory on the southwest end of the University of Massachusetts's campus here.
"We, the undersigned, of Washington Tower, refuse to condone or accept any form of racial hatred," they state.
Below each is a waterfall of several hundred signatures scrawled in black ink, representing nearly every student who lives in the dorm, where a few weeks ago a black student was punched and later found human feces smeared outside his room.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; The Matter of Trust: Clinton's Big Burden
On Tuesday night Vice President Dan Quayle introduced into the language the phrase "to pull a Clinton," which he used to mean roughly "to lie, to distort, to waffle or to slide around the truth."
By Wednesday morning the phrase had already made its way from politics to the populace.
A trucker in Maryland was asked by a reporter if he had ever broken the regulations on hours driven without rest.
"No," said the trucker, and then caught himself.
"Well, I don't want to pull a Clinton here. Truth is, I have broken them sometimes."


Display Behavior
The tattooed in TriBeCa, at Coney Island Tattoo Festival, Oct. 11.


The Real Problem With Women and M.B.A.'s
To the Editor:
Regarding "For Women, Fewer M.B.A.'s" (Sept. 27), I searched in vain for mention and discussion of a main deterrent in a woman's quest for this degree: college counselors.


Making a Difference; And Here's a 'Mickey D' With Kente Cloth And Artists From Ellington to Jackson
One glance at the brightly colored African-print patterns on the walls and the faces of entertainers on the Apollo "Wall of Fame" tells you there is something different about Carole H. Riley's McDonald's in Harlem.
Then the mouthwatering scent of french fries and cheeseburgers, and the smell of grease quickly remind you that this is a "Mickey D" in Afro-centric clothing.


Lord Franks, Diplomat Who Led Marshall Plan Effort, Dies at 87
Oliver Shewell Franks, a British diplomat and academic who played a crucial role in putting the Marshall Plan for European recovery into effect after World War II, died on Thursday at his home in Oxford, England.
He was 87 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


And Then There Were Nine
To the Editor:
In her article on the Hollywood 10 and the blacklist, "Daughter of a Blacklist That Killed a Father"  [ Sept. 27 ] , Patricia Bosworth writes that "more than 250 actors, writers and directors were officially blacklisted, among them Edward Dmytryk, the director."


Latin American Poverty Still a Priority
After four days of ceremonies marking the arrival of Christianity in the Americas 500 years ago, Pope John Paul II departed Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic last week, leaving behind more than 300 bishops from all over Latin America.
They will remain until Oct. 28, taking stock and making plans in the part of the world where the Roman Catholic Church has its greatest number of adherents.
Both the Pope and the bishops admitted that Catholicism came to Latin America in a wave of conquest and enslavement -- although there was considerable hedging on just how closely the evangelization and the exploitation were linked.
Before 1968, it's unlikely there would have been any apology.
In that year, the Latin American Episcopal Conference met to apply the changes of the Second Vatican Council and called for a church that no longer identified with ruling elites but with the poor, including Indians and descendants of slaves.


Head of Police Says No.1 Goal Is Hiring Blacks
New York City's new Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, whose appointment was greeted warily by some black community leaders, said yesterday that the first and "most vital" item on his agenda was the recruitment of more black officers to the force.
To that end, Mr.
Kelly outlined a number of steps, including the revision of testing and screening procedures, a shorter waiting period for applicants to keep minority and poorer candidates from dropping out of the screening process, and an "all out" marketing campaign in black neighborhoods and among black groups.


Food-Service Training Aids Community
The calendar says it is October, but at the Best Ever Bake Shop in Yonkers it's already Thanksgiving.
"We're getting ready to make 5,000 sweet potato pies," said Charlie Williams, the bakery's owner.
"They're our biggest seller. We make them fresh from a recipe that has been in my wife's family, but we have to start cooking and peeling a mountain of potatoes well in advance. All our employees pitch in to produce the pies. It's a big job."


Ward H. Dennis, 54, for 15 Years General Studies Dean at Columbia
Dr.
Ward H. Dennis, Columbia University's senior dean and the head of its School of General Studies, died on Friday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 54 years old and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
He died of complications from a brain tumor, his family said.


A Carousel Comes Round


The Art of Beauty
The beauty industry is reviving the elegant tradition of commissioning artists to design and package its accessories.
"Artists reflect the temperature of the times," says Gilles Fuchs, president of Nina Ricci.
"I want to get away from functional, medical-looking shapes and pseudo-scientific attitudes, which are not the basis of a cosmetics line. Cosmetics have to perform, yes; but they also have to be beautiful. Our business is
metier d'art
creation. We never consider our products just products, but small works of art."


Six Centuries of the Bookbinder's Art
THE elegant craftsmanship of historical bookbinding shames today's best-selling books with their gaudy paper wrappers hiding bland, often flimsy binding.
Leather-bound books with decorative hand tooling, like the 33 volumes on display at the Englewood Public Library, turn private libraries into repositories of visual and tactile pleasures, not just storage spaces for the printed word.
Although medieval and Renaissance books have been exposed to centuries of dampness, temperature changes and infestations of bookworms, many are in far better condition than 19th- and 20th-century volumes whose pages and cardboard covers are crumbling.


Photographs as Drawings
Photography was a hit from the moment it appeared in its first practicable form.
This was the daguerreotype, which, unveiled in 1839, was all over the globe by 1846.
Daguerreotype portraits, silvered copper plates reflecting the faces -- perhaps the very souls -- of those who had looked into them, astounded society with their truth to nature.
The work of Paul Delaroche and other French portraitists had anticipated the trend to hyperrealism a decade or more before, but photography was a mechanical process open to all and as such it helped fan euphoria about scientific progress.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning found daguerreotypes superior to paintings; Emerson said they represented "the true republican style of painting" in that "the artist stands aside and lets you paint yourself." But while some related photography to painting, others, including its co-inventor, William Henry Fox Talbot, saw the medium as a form of drawing.


Hannah Arendt and the Nazis
To the Editor:
As one who participated in the important debate during the 1960's over Hannah Arendt's book "Eichmann in Jerusalem," I cannot let pass without critique -- as your reviewer, Richard A. Shweder, did -- some of the remarks cited from "Hannah Arendt -- Karl Jaspers: Correspondence, 1926-1969" (Sept. 20).


As Bush Defends AIDS Policy, Its Critics See Flaws
Since President Bush took office, Federal spending on AIDS has nearly doubled, and spending for research has increased 33 percent.
But Gov.
Bill Clinton contends that Mr.
Bush has virtually ignored the epidemic.
Magic Johnson, the basketball star, voiced a similar sentiment when he resigned from the National Commission on AIDS in September and complained that the Bush Administration had "utterly ignored" the panel's recommendations for more aggressive efforts to combat the disease.


Let Cone Decide For Himself
To the Sports Editor:
In "Will Cone Ask Winfield For Advice?" (The Times, Sept. 27), Dave Anderson ignores the tenets of social Darwinism in publicly trying to dissuade Dave Cone from joining the New York Yankees.
At age 29, Cone can decide for himself where he wants to play in 1993.
Further, there is hardly a Yankee fan who wouldn't want to see Cone in pinstripes next year.
Anderson's column is tantamount to interfering with baseball's natural selection process.
NEIL DWORKIN Norwalk, Conn.


Everything Into the Mix
IT'S not as unpronounceable as it looks.
Mxyplyzyk is MIX-ee-PLIZZ-ick, a three-week-old Greenwich Village shop that sells home furnishings, stationery, bath items and gifts that capture the contradictions of 90's tastes.
That first syllable says it all.
The store is an in-gathering of the sleek (birch veneer and steel chairs and tables by Sitcom, a California manufacturer; $150 to $295), the soft (panne velvet scarfs by Elizabeth Gillett, a New York designer; $50 to $130), the industrial (black plastic eating utensils by Stelton; five pieces for $9.95), the woodsy (decorative cylinders of birch bark; $12 for a 24-inch length), high design (Isamu Noguchi paper lamps; $99) and fun stuff (pajamas printed with oversized kitchen appliances; $60).


Congress Passes Bill to Widen Health-Care Access
A half-million people will get new access to health care under a bill passed by Congress to protect community health centers against lawsuits alleging medical malpractice.
The bill represents the most significant action by the 102d Congress to help people without health insurance.
More ambitious bills died amid partisan wrangling in this Presidential election year.


The Boss Never Pours
Suddenly, men in black suits and chrome watches are snapping "Let's have tea!" into their portable phones as they dash up Sloane Street.
Men who haven't tasted cream cakes since their nannies served up tea on Winnie-the-Pooh china are working out some of London's toughest deals to the lisp of piano music in grand hotel tearooms, where only hatted ladies in pearls used to go.


Ornamental Grasses Show Their Stripes
What a glorious time of year this is.
The trees are showing off their splendid fall colors.
The leafy canopies range from the bright reds to golden hues to several shades of bronze.
And when the hillsides are interspersed with the green of conifers, nothing can match nature's palette.
Even the asters and chrysanthemums remain in bloom.
And though most of the birds have gone, winter residents are hanging around to keep up their happy chatter.
The squirrels are especially busy making noises as they flick their tails and wonder where they will bury the nuts they are carrying in their mouths.
The farmers are happy.
Their grain fields are ripening and the ryes, sorghums, wheats and oats are coming in.
And the silos are getting filled with food for the herd.
And there is a harvest of ripening apples.


Presidential Poll for the Young


Pursuit of Happiness And Wildflowers
Doesn't our Declaration of Independence allow certain inalienable rights?
Among those, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness?
A right, i.e., to have a perfectly dandy pursuit of wildflowers? ("A 'Wild' Front Yard Draws Smiles and Scowls," Fair Haven Journal, Sept. 27.)
Butterfly weed is well named; columbines attract hummingbirds.
Deptford pinks are herbs that can be brewed.


The Secret Wendy Wasserstein
You feel as if you know Wendy Wasserstein when you meet her for the first time.
Slightly disheveled, a little overweight, hair in all directions, she has a smile that is warm and, above all, vulnerable.
She is a New York type -- the lovable, witty, anxious, 40-something single Jewish woman.
You like her instantly because she seems, well, just like her plays.
And like her columns in the now-defunct New York Woman magazine.
And like her book of essays, "Bachelor Girls." And like the persona she projects in her stand-up playwright appearances on talk shows, in travel articles and in the characters she creates for the stage.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Second Avenue will be closed between 14th Street to 34th Street, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Second Avenue street festival.


How Mets and Pirates Fell Out of the Picture
Toronto has ended the dominance of Oakland and Minnesota in the American League, but Western Division teams continue to rule the National League with an iron grip, and the question is why.
The answer is the Mets and the Pittsburgh Pirates.
The two teams have not been able to attain the plateau that seemed easily within their grasp; as a result, Western Division teams have won five consecutive pennants, matching the run the Athletics and the Twins had in the other league.


A Night at the Feelies
VIRTUAL WORLDS
A Journey in Hype and Hyperreality.
By Benjamin Woolley.
Illustrated. 274 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell. $19.95.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
MISSING MAY
By Cynthia Rylant. 89 pp. New York: Orchard Books. $12.95. (Ages 11 and up)


Q: The Economy. A: Incomplete.
The economy in this Presidential campaign is Topic A, B and C. Unemployment, stagnant wages and spiraling health care costs torment voters everywhere.
Yet the candidates, in their two debates so far, have responded mainly with snippets.
It's not that they don't have economic plans.
Indeed, each has a booklet outlining his answers to economic malaise.
But even these documents are complex, incomplete and, in places, internally inconsistent.
Tomorrow's third debate gives the candidates a last chance, face to face, to challenge and explain.


Giving Hate a Bad Name
WHITE JAZZ
By James Ellroy. 349 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


ZIP Code Roulette And Inefficiency
The problem of misaligned ZIP codes and community efforts to change Post Offices is much more serious than the simple cosmetic "people feel their community identity will be enhanced," as claimed by the Postal Service's Tom Gaynor  [ "Path to Status: Coveted ZIP Codes," Oct. 4 ] .
More than 50 percent of the mailing addresses in Nassau and Suffolk Counties have a different geographic name from the name of the city, village or hamlet where they are located.
Indeed, only one post office, Sea Cliff, ZIP code 11579, has an identical border to the same-named community, the Village of Sea Cliff in the Town of Oyster Bay.
The majority of the 300 plus communities on the Island are placed in a sort of geographic oblivion by being either wholly or partially placed into one or more differently named post office service areas.


Q and A
Visiting Death Valley
Q.
I would appreciate information regarding accommodations and restaurants in Death Valley.
When is the best time to visit? -- Albert Kilberg, Baltimore


Use of Heroin Off, But Not Cocaine
APPARENTLY fearful of AIDS, Long Islanders who use drugs are beginning to reject heroin, the drug they associate the most with the disease, even as they continue to embrace cocaine.
Drug-treatment agencies report that the number of Islanders entering treatment for cocaine addiction, an important measure of use, is at a record high.
But the number seeking treatment for heroin addiction is not rising, and among some groups is declining, despite expansions in the methadone program.


A Show That Explores Catholic Identity
In "Catholicism," at Progressive Culture Works here, there are artists who would probably score higher than Sinead O'Connor on a Richter scale of sacrilege.
But they will have to settle for the reaction of visitors willing to climb four floors in the Lorillard Building.
The block-sized pile at 111 First Street has seen more than tobacco or art in its century-long existence, and at some point its owners evidently obtained a great buy in janitor-red paint.
This they lavished on the portico, inner doors and stair railings.


Megan O'Brien, Stuart W. Decker
Margrett Shaw O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan B. O'Brien of Middletown, Del., was married yesterday to Stuart William Decker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Decker of East Grand Rapids, Mich.
The Rev.
Edith Tieman performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Complete Fly Fisher resort in Wise River, Mont.
Mrs.
Decker, 29 years old, is known as Megan.
She is the assistant manager at the Complete Fly Fisher.
Her husband, a sculptor, is a fishing guide there.


Youngsters Vote in a Presidential Poll
At Mike's Barber Shop here, the price of a haircut invariably includes a freewheeling, good-humored debate on politics and national affairs.
Regular customers expect it, and some customers are drawn by it.
Now 49-year-old Michael Sutlovich Jr. has transformed his basement shop here into a continuing civics lesson for those customers whose votes don't count -- not yet, at least.


With 2 Nobels, What Makes St. Lucia So Special?
When Derek Walcott, the poet and playwright, won the Nobel Prize for Literature this month, some may have been tempted to exclaim that it was hardly fair for a Caribbean island barely 25 miles long to have produced two laureates in just 13 years.
Only in 1979, Sir Arthur Lewis, another of the 150,000 citizens of the island of St.
Lucia, whose rudimentary economy is based mostly on banana exports, was awarded a Nobel Prize in Economics.


A Sarajevo Hospital Works In 'Horror Beyond Anything'
Outside the Kosevo hospital a full moon was shining, shedding a cold white light on the freshly buried war dead in the cemetery across the road.
It was barely 7 P.M., and the moon and the lights at nursing stations were the only illumination in the crowded wards that house the most grievously wounded victims of the Sarajevo siege.
In a cubicle off a third-floor ward, a short walk from the center island where amputees' beds had been wheeled as protection from the Serbian gun positions in the mountains, Dr.
Mufid Lazovic sat with his head in his hands.
In passionate, often overwrought bursts, he talked of his bitter experiences working as a surgeon on legions of people wounded in the six-month siege.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Sept. 27 about a directory of nude beaches misstated the address of N Editions.
It is Post Office Box 132, Oshkosh, Wis. 54907.


Home on the Range
Riding the Montana range with George Kahrl, one of the rising generation of organic-beef growers, I am conscious of the land, the way it rolls flat and dry and lonesome as an abandoned river bottom.
The plains inch up to foothills that are occasionally seamed by brush-lined creeks and straggly fences.
But these demarcations, along with our two horses and a grazing herd of 145 cows (each with a calf), are only passing through, like the wind or a spatter of rain.
I adjust my world view accordingly.
And for a moment I understand the taste for a big, juicy steak.


Keith Richards: Stones Icon, Rock Survivor
It's somewhere past midnight in a recording studio on lower Broadway, and Keith Richards is smoking.
All around him the lights have been lowered for atmosphere.
Every time he takes a drag, the tip of his cigarette glows red like a beacon.
Mr.
Richards, the longtime rhythm guitarist for the legendary Rolling Stones, stands behind a microphone, preparing to do a vocal track for his second solo album, "Main Offender."
He takes another drag, then attempts to clear his throat.
This simple-seeming task proves no mean feat.
He's got decades' worth of nicotine down there, and one single harrumph isn't about to do the trick.
The throat-clearing turns into a hacking cough and Mr.
Richards winds up laughing.
He straightens up and looks into the control booth for a cue, but the engineer isn't quite ready.
So he lights up another cigarette.


For Bermuda Gold Cup, They Only Need Invitations for the Parties
The invitation-only format that defines the world's match-racing circuit leaves little room for up-and-coming sailors.
Not so with the Gold Cup, a regatta in Bermuda that opens its fleet to a mix of top-ranked sailors and relative amateurs.
The Gold Cup's racing plan allows 16 unseeded skippers to enter the event, each for a fee of $1,200.


'Pops Spectacular' for U.N. 50th Fete
It was President Franklin Delano Roosevelt who coined the term United Nations to describe the countries fighting the Axis, and on New Year's Day, 50 years ago, 26 countries signed a "Declaration by the United Nations" pledging unity in their war efforts and promising not to sign separate peace accords.
It was in this spirit of cooperation in 1942 that the Soviet composer Dmitri Shostakovich wrote the music and the American songwriter Harold Rome the lyrics for a stirring anthem called "The United Nations." A recording of it by Igor Gorin was made, but gradually the song passed into obscurity.


OCT. 11-17: Cairo Earthquake; Buildings Fall Easily, Bureaucracy's Barriers Don't As Families Seek Shelter
As Aktham Ismail Hamouda was pulled alive from a collapsed 14-story apartment building on Friday in the northern Cairo suburb of Heliopolis, he clutched the hands of his wife and 3-year-old daughter, both dead.
The rescue was surely one of the last from the earthquake that shook Cairo and environs on Monday, leaving at least 520 people dead and 4,000 injured.


Perspectives: Shopping Centers; Stores Pick Up the Construction Slack
IN the normal pattern of growth, housing comes first and the stores follow.
Normality is prevailing in the western reaches of the North Shore of Staten Island.
On a flat 10 acres off Forest Avenue where the Weissglass family once ran a dairy, the developer Sanford Nalitt has started to build a strip shopping center called Forest Plaza.
Its largest store will be a 52,000-square-foot A.&amp;P.
In addition there will be 110,000 square feet for other stores, nearly half of it spoken for already, said Mr.
Nalitt.
Separating the stores from the avenue will be an unlandcaped stretch of 3.7 acres where 660 cars will be able to park.


Miss Whiting And Gregory Roll
Katherine Grant Ursula Whiting, the daughter of Charles and Catherine Whiting of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gregory Fabian Roll, a son of Roland and Joyce Roll of Forest Hills, Queens.
Betty St.C.
Hardy, a justice of the peace in New Canaan, Conn., officiated at Waveny House, a historic home there.
Ms.
Whiting, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the advertising manager at Alpha Lyracom Space Communications, a telecommunications company in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Smith College.


Julia Denlinger And Dean Raab
Julia Patricia Denlinger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sutherland W. G. Denlinger of Newtown, Conn., was married last evening to Capt.
Franklin Dean Raab of the Army, a son of Arlene B. Kairys of Potomac, Md., and Steven L. Raab of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
Patricia M. Hames, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Meeting House in Newtown.
Rabbi Nathaniel D. Benjamin took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Raab, 27 years old, is a lawyer with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's Office of Federal Operations in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
She received a law degree from the Dickinson School of Law, as did her husband.


Pamela S. Frankel, Jonathan A. Stein
Pamela Suzanne Frankel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven R. Frankel of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there last evening to Jonathan Adam Stein, the son of Dr.
Jeffrey Stein of Harrison, N.Y., and Beth Holland Queener of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Beth Singer performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Stein, 25 years old, is a social worker at Intermediate School 52 in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Whitman &amp; Ransom.


Mary A. Hazinski And C. J. Hawke
Mary Angela Hazinski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Hazinski Jr. of Holmdel, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher John Hawke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger J. Hawke of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
William Bausch performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Colts Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Hawke, 27 years old, is to become an associate next month at the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary and has a law degree from Fordham University.
Her husband, 27 and an Amherst College graduate, is studying law at Fordham


Wall Street; Just as in '87, a Split in Opinion
Investors looking for a reason to sell stocks in the months before the October 1987 stock market crash got to choose from some gems.
The price-to-earnings ratio of the market was at a pricey 23 times earnings, and contrarians turned bearish on hearing investment newsletter writers hooting and hollering that stocks could go nowhere but up.
Bulls, as it happened, could bolster their case too.
When the Dow was levitating at a record 2,722 in August 1987, technical analysts offered soothing assurances that their indicators proved all was well.
"Looking at the 30 Dow charts shows just how solid the technical underpinnings of the market truly are," a technical analyst told Barron's in the Oct. 12, 1987, issue.
Buy stocks and get rich.
Case closed.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
The images transmitted by Sally Mann's eye and camera are undeniably striking.
You look and you look again; this photographer is anything but bland.
But as far as controversy goes, I'm willing to bet it's not the nudity of Mann's children that people find troubling -- a 7-year-old's nipples are about as suggestive as a back molar -- but what's on their faces: they're mean.


Update; Congregation in Rockaways To Keep Synagogue Open
For several years now, Derech Emunoh, an 87-year-old synagogue on the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens, has seemed on the verge of extinction as its congregation has shrunk to about 40 members.
So bleak were the prospects for the seaside synagogue that recently the president, Robert Wein, said the congregation would consider shutting down for good.
But last week he reported that after discussing the matter, the congregants had decided to try to continue.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Sept. 92
Aug. 92
Sept. 91
Rents
180.3
-0.6
+4.7
Homeowner's costs
179.0
+0.1
+3.9
Fuel and utilities
109.3
-0.6
+3.4
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.22
8.08
9.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.24
5.25
6.72
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.04
7.96
8.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.09
5.15
6.62
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.10
7.97
8.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.92
4.95
6.78
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.37
8.16
9.11
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.81
5.86
7.28
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.09
3.02
5.36
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.58
7.58
9.10
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Democrats' Hopes Rise, Republicans' Grow Heavy
Three-fourths of the way through the debates that were supposed to begin President Bush's final rally, Democrats can barely contain their euphoria.
And Republicans, ever more anxious, remain clinging to the hope of a major break in the final two weeks, and the hope that their President can seize it.
Gov.
Bill Clinton has begun warning against complacency, the ritualistic closing appeal of a front-runner.
But his travel schedule indicates the extent of his campaign's aspirations these days.
Among the states the Democratic nominee is expected to visit after the next debate on Monday night are historically Republican strongholds like Nevada and Wyoming, which his aides present as part of a game plan to keep the Republicans pinned down and on the defensive to the very end.
Favorable Signs
"These are states that we think we have a legitimate shot of winning," said David Wilhelm, manager for the Clinton campaign.
"At this point in the campaign you're not trying to fake somebody out."


The Executive Life; In Hollywood, Only the Studio Jet Will Do
Hollywood may be feeling the recession, but not when it comes to travel perks.
The big studios are making progress in the battle against escalating production and marketing costs, but as far as air travel goes, it's strictly status quo.
Take the most conspicuous luxury in the studio travel arsenal, the corporate jet.
The Sony Corporation boasts an entire aviation division, which makes its international fleet of corporate jets available to all divisions, says Sony spokesman Bob Zito.
"We have two Falcons based on the West Coast."


OCT. 11-17: Political Prodding Suspected; State Department Rushed To Search Clinton Records
The State Department said last week that it had violated its own regulations by taking a routine request from news organizations for Bill Clinton's consular records and giving the search undue urgency.
A State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, initially defended the department's response, saying that journalists had wanted a timely answer to requests for Mr.
Clinton's visa, passport, draft and citizenship papers.
The Government, which receives more than 4,000 such requests for information a year, typically responds on a first-come, first-served basis.
The next day, Mr.
Boucher said that "low-level" State Department officials had erred by expediting the request, which is rarely done.


For Blue Jays' Morris, It Was Feast or Famine With His Forkball
It is the nastiest pitch, the split-finger fastball, loaded with last-second movement and menace.
Miss even slightly with it, though, and the pitch can be cruelest on the man who throws it.
Jack Morris was one of the pitch's first and most passionate practitioners.
He has thrown it for more than a decade -- Morris even refers to it by its original name, the forkball -- and his total of 237 career triumphs are only the most out-sized testament to its enduring deadliness.


The Executive Computer; Ever Expanding, Microsoft Readies a Network Windows
The Microsoft Corporation, hoping to build on the broad acceptance of its Windows operating system, is about to introduce Windows for Workgroups, a version for business networks, especially of those of the smaller variety.
Price information and other details will not be released until Microsoft formally introduces the product on Oct. 27, but the program was already the topic of much speculation at the Networld computer networking conference here last week.
Industry people expect the program to sell for about $250 per user, , while owners of Windows 3.1 will be able to buy the network version for about $100.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 3  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 154,000
70 East 10th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 925-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, south exposure; maintenance $638, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper East Side 450,000
1435 Lexington Avenue (93d St.)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $1,333, 34% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Upper West Side 282,000
175 West 93d Street  (West Wind)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $936, 66% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-A.J. Clarke)  West Village 1.05 million
69 Bank Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 4,200-sq.-ft. duplex, penthouse condo; elevator, Italian marble floors, 2,200-sq.-ft. terrace, 2 fireplaces; common charge $1,208, taxes $2,500 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  West Village 710,000
61 Perry Street  2-family, 3-story, 1828 Federal town house and 2-story carriage house; 4 bedrooms, 4 baths, 4 fireplaces, artist studio, rear garden in town house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, skylights in carriage house; 25-by-95-ft. lot; taxes $7,700 (Broker: Herbert H. Kleigerman Associates)  BRONX  Parkchester 33,000
2059 St.
Raymond Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar condo; entry foyer, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $215, taxes $1,280 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Williamsbridge 165,000
2944 Pearsall Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, remodeled kitchen, storage attic, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 25-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,412 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 242,000
124 Kane Street  4-family, 4-story brick house; 2 bedrooms in 3 units; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; full basement, 22-by-87-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Ditmas Park 150,000
416 Marlborough Road  2-family detached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, fireplace, 1 bath in each; 40-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,375 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope 405,000
454 7th Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; dining area, fireplace; 18-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty)  QUEENS  College Point 195,000
8-05 119th Street  2-family detached house; porch in second-floor unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in both units; finished attic, full basement, 36-by-84-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Corona 153,000
110-05 Fautell Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, attached, 1-car garage, 20-by-95-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Rosebank 221,500
31 Hyland Boulevard  (Ocean View)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,312-sq.-ft. condo in a 4-year-old building; part-time doorman, dining area, whirlpool in master bath, 2 terraces, health club, harbor view; common charge $292, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)  Sunnyside 270,000
5 Little Clove Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached Victorian; dining room, den, skylight, 1-car garage, 130-by-95-ft. lot; taxes $1,070 (Broker: Pearl Foreman Real Estate)


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; Perot's No Anti-Semite
To the Editor:
"Why Perot?" by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 2) casts Ross Perot in an undeserved negative light.
Mr.
Lewis's use of The New Republic and Vanity Fair as sources compounds the felony.


Rental-Car Fleets Cost More for '93
Each fall, two things traditionally take place in the car rental business: fares dip from their summertime peak and the rental companies buy new fleets.
This year, prices have largely stayed put.
And the the prices of those new cars have gone up sharply, meaning that the companies are likely to pass the increases along in higher rental rates.
"The cost of vehicles was raised this year 25 to 30 percent," said Gary Paxton, president and chief executive officer of Dollar Rent a Car, adding that vehicles are his company's largest expense.
Rental companies are paying 25 to 45 percent more for cars than they did for the 1992 fleet, according to Joseph Russo, a vice president at Hertz.
"The price of renting this summer was 8 to 12 percent higher than last," and he estimates that a raise of at least another 15 percent is going to be necessary.


What the Camera Sees When No One's Looking
The millions of Americans who are following the Presidential campaign on television can be forgiven for believing that the entire spectacle somehow makes sense.
But viewers of "Feed," a widely praised new documentary at the Film Forum, ought to know better.
"Feed," about last February's New Hampshire primary, is cinema verite at its most verite: there are no actors, no narration and no sets.
There is not much logic, either, which Kevin Rafferty and James Ridgeway, who co-produced and directed the film, say is much as it should be.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; Humphrey in Leningrad
To the Editor:
"Mr. Bush's Campaign Mode: Nasty" (editorial, Oct. 9) gets it right.
Translate President Bush's absurd smear into plain talk, and it suggests that Gov.
Bill Clinton was cozying up to the K.G.B. on a student tour in Moscow 23 years ago, hatching some sinister plot.


Medical Center Seeks Hospital Partners
FIGHTING rising costs and competition from hospitals in the New York City area and also trying to address pressing new public health concerns, the Westchester County Medical Center here is seeking affiliations with other hospitals.
The move, administrators say, may be the only way some smaller health-care institutions in the region will be able to survive.
"It is an idea whose time has finally come, because hospitals are really feeling the pressure these days," said Westchester's Hospitals Commissioner, Mack L. Carter Jr., who is behind the drive to forge such alliances with four or more regional health-care institutions.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Clifton 145,000
79 Paterson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; family room, formal dining room, full basement; taxes $2,562.
Iselin 139,000
119 Sonora Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; deck, new roof; taxes $2,578.
Mahwah 395,000
74 Dodge Court  4-bedroom, 7-year-old colonial; 2-full baths, 2 half-baths, fireplace, deck, underground sprinkler; taxes $4,431.
Metuchen 110,000
40 Kentor Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room with sliding doors to deck; taxes $2,850.
Piscataway 117,500
143 Summers Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; corner property, finished basement, recreation room; taxes $2,410.
Ramsey 191,500
7 Lincoln Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old split level; cedar closets, fireplace, h/w floors; taxes $3,704.
OTHER AREAS Vernon, Conn. 166,500
22 Rosewood Drive  3-bedroom, 2- bath, 36-year-old ranch; built-in china cupboard, oak floors, on cul-de-sac, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,831.
South Salem, N.Y. 145,000
242A Hemlock Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old Cape Cod; living room, dining room, porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $3,236.
Lindenhurst, L.I. 145,000
133 West Alhambra  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 80-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $4,400.


Sisters in All Ways
Spiderwoman Theater has been engaging and confounding audiences for nearly two decades with its rough-hewn theater pieces.
Boisterously funny yet intensely serious, the work mixes story telling, music and dance as it delves into social issues.
In "Power Pipes," which opens on Wednesday as part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Spiderwoman examines ways that American Indians, particularly women, can find their way back to their spiritual heritage.
Founded in 1975 as a women's theater group and named after the Hopi goddess of creation, the troupe is still composed of women.
But it has committed itself to performances as deeply rooted in Indian culture as in feminism.
"Power Pipes," for example, touches on the changing relationship between Indian men and women.


Peace. Love. Fashion.
Some New Yorkers leading the style parade this fall are wearing icons from the hippie era: bell-bottom pants, Indian fringe jackets and tie-died shirts and scarves.
It is a curious turn of events, occurring just as the celebrated European designers are trumpeting a similar revival for next spring.
The generation of New Yorkers too young to remember the fashion revolution born in swinging London in the 1960's should take note: some days the streets of midtown Manhattan recall Saturdays on Carnaby Street and the King's Road in London when they were the shopping meccas of the youthquake.


CRIME/MYSTERY: IN SHORT -- FICTION
THE WHITECHAPEL HORRORS By Edward B. Hanna. Caroll &amp; Graf, $19.95.


Lessie A. Gerhold And John B. Lepp
William Gerhold of Little Hocking, Ohio, and Ruth Gerhold of Marietta, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter Lessie Anne Gerhold to John Benjamin Lepp, the son of Stephen Lepp and Maxine Lepp, both of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gerhold, 28 years old, is a paralegal with the New York law firm of Mayer, Brown &amp; Platt.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the chairman of the art department at Marietta College.
Her mother is a special-education teacher in Marietta.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Mary Higgins Clark; From a Life in New Jersey, Best-Selling Mysteries
FOR Mary Higgins Clark, the world of New Jersey is a constant source of writerly inspiration.
She has transformed her surroundings and the events of her life -- from a warning by a 5-year-old neighbor to a break-in at her own home -- into mystery novels that have caught the nation's fancy.
In an interview in her white Georgian house here, she traced what she called "my humble beginnings" -- "how my father died in his sleep when I was 10 and how I went to secretarial school when I would much have preferred to study writing." She spoke of "the fragility of life" as she told of her husband's death in 1964, when she was 36 years old with five children.


From the Comics to a Screen Near You
The movie "Batman Returns" may not have lived up to expectations -- criticially or commercially -- but that hasn't dampened Hollywood's interest in the comics.
At least four dozen adaptations of comics are currently in production or development for nonanimated films.
"It's hard to find comic characters that Hollywood
isn't
interested in," says Pam Rutt, publicity director of Marvel Comics. Indeed, film makers have optioned the rights to such Marvel characters as Spiderman, Daredevil, Dr. Strange, the Incredible Hulk, X-Men, Ghost Rider, Thor and Blade the Vampire Hunter.


Ornamental Grasses Show Their Stripes
What a glorious time of year this is.
The trees are showing off their splendid fall colors.
The leafy canopies range from the bright reds to golden hues to several shades of bronze.
And when the hillsides are interspersed with the green of conifers, nothing can match nature's palette.
Even the asters and chrysanthemums remain in bloom.
And though most of the birds have gone, winter residents are hanging around to keep up their happy chatter.
The squirrels are especially busy making noises as they flick their tails and wonder where they will bury the nuts they are carrying in their mouths.
The farmers are happy.
Their grain fields are ripening and the ryes, sorghums, wheats and oats are coming in.
And the silos are getting filled with food for the herd.
And there is a harvest of ripening apples.


POSTINGS: 200,000 Sq. Ft. in Danbury; Shopping Center Pays Off
In this recessionary economy, most shopping center developers are gun shy.
Indeed, the International Council of Shopping Centers reported only 552 shopping centers under construction last year, compared with 1,008 the year before.
Against that backdrop, building a 200,000-square-foot center in Danbury, Conn., is a gambler's move.
But it looks like the Conroy Development Company of Greenwich and Ceruzzi Properties of Westport, joint developers of the new center, have won their bet.
They got four big operations to lease the entire space.


Testing Rote, Not Reasoning
The standardized test, that much-maligned American practice, just took another hit.
A report last week on math and science tests concluded that the most widely used tests drive teachers to emphasize memorization over reasoning, and worsen the substandard education that many minority students receive.


Two Blockbusters For the 90's
It might almost be called the battle of the blockbusters.
With much of the Museum of Modern Art taken up by its splendid Matisse exhibition and the Guggenheim Museum nearly filled to the brim with a cacophonous survey of the Russian avant-garde, the museological equivalents of Godzilla and King Kong, or Goya's snarling giants, are looming over Manhattan's cultural skyline.
The coincidence of two big shows is a little surprising, because over the past few years the blockbuster has often seemed like a concept whose time has gone.
With the 80's art boom fading and the recession tightening budgets everywhere, it looked as if museums were going to settle in and cultivate their gardens, mounting exhibitions that used their own collections in new and revealing ways.


A Budding Scandal, in Brief: A Primer on the 'B.N.L. Affair'
It is called "Iraqgate" and "the B.N.L. affair," and it could have the makings of a major scandal.
But what is it?
It began with charges by Congressional Democrats that the Bush Administration was wrong to try to curry favor with President Saddam Hussein before he invaded Kuwait.
If the United States had been tougher earlier, some said, the United States and its allies might never have had to go to war.


Germany
To the Editor: In the July 19 article on the Swabian Alb area in Germany John Dornberg should have indicated that there is a lack of guidance for an American tourist with little knowledge of German.
When I was there this summer I drove to the area and found a tourist bureau in Rottweil that had very limited information available.
All tours were in German only.
CONNIE MACPHERSON  Venice, Fla.


Pet Charms
WHAT: Seven expensive-looking but rather affordable (about $25 each) lucky charms designed by Todd Oldham and Tom Bonauro, proceeds from the sale of which go entirely to two organizations devoted to helping people with AIDS keep their pets as long as they can.
The groups, Pet Owners With AIDS Resource Service and Purchase Against Willful Speciesism, are best known by their acronyms, Powars and Paws.


Jewish Themes Gaining In Youngsters' Books
A LONELY widow shares her Passover seder with a friendly black neighbor; a young girl goes to Friday night services with her sophisticated aunt; an Algerian Jewish boy learns that faith can bring miracles.
These stories are told in children's books that are among a fast-growing category on publishers' lists: Judaica, or literature pertaining to things Jewish.
From illustrated Bible stories for the youngest children to contemporary fiction in which the teen-age characters just happen to be Jewish, books about Judaism, or the cultural experiences of Jews, just can't seem to be published fast enough.


A la Carte; Culinary Blending of Jamaican and Chinese Tastes
SOON after immigrants settle in this country, their restaurants follow.
The first such eating places to be established are modest and usually in the centers of the immigrants' new neighborhoods.
As the communities prosper, restaurants gentrify and move outward.
The three-month-old Calabash International Restaurant in Baldwin is part of that second wave.
The sign outside says, "West Indian and American."


Mary Fratto, Douglas Schaenen
Mary Elizabeth Fratto, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth P. Fratto of Holmdel, N.J., was married yesterday to Douglas Kingan Schaenen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Schaenen of Madison, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Cassels, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Schaenen, 30 years old, is a vice president at Wang Associates Health Communications, a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of Arizona in Tucson.
Her father owns Cambridge Opinion Studies, a marketing research concern in Holmdel.


Boring Journal; (And That's Not a Warning to Readers)
These are the things that Boring people care about: What's happening at the firehouse tonight.
Who is sending mail to whom.
Where Rocky, the lost German shepherd, may have fled to.
They do not care that outsiders walk into their Post Office nearly every day and demand to know if their town is really boring.
They are used to it, and they take it with humor, they say, because they like life in this rural town of 450 people, about 20 miles north of Baltimore.


A Night on the Town in Tokyo
IF by day modern Tokyo seems as open and familiar as any major city on the globe, late at night this many-faced metropolis can feel oddly foreign to a visitor, like a club whose members are too polite to tell outsiders that they don't really belong.
And then, it may just be a matter of which clubs you try.
Beyond the breathless shopping marathon on the Ginza, and the yakitori bars that always seem to close too early, lies another Tokyo: ear-splitting, miniskirted, rocking to everything from reggae to jazz.
It starts late and goes all night, giving new meaning to the phrase Land of the Rising Sun.


Oregonian Endorses Clinton
The Portland Oregonian, the oldest daily newspaper published west of the Mississippi, endorsed a Democrat for the first time in its 142-year history, when it called for the election of Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Sunday's Oregonian called him "controlled, organized, coherent -- a doer."


Making a Difference; Supercomputer Maverick
When she founded the Thinking Machines Corporation here in 1983, Sheryl L. Handler was an unlikely candidate to become a major figure in the highly technical field of supercomputers.
Ms.
Handler had spent the past dozen years running her own economic development consulting firm and while she had a doctorate from M.I.T. it was in urban planning, not computer science.
But Ms.
Handler, 45 years old, has spent most of her professional life ignoring preconceived notions about business.
In Thinking Machines, the country's second-largest supercomputer maker, behind Cray Research, she has built an offbeat but disciplined organization.


BEST SELLERS: October 18, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)
2
3
21
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
3
4
5
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
4
1
8
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
5 *
2
32
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
5
14
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
7
7
10
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
6
8
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
9
1
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
10
1
LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains; a sequel to the 1984 novel "Cold Sassy Tree."
11
1
THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.) Book Four of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
12 *
14
2
THE SILKEN WEB, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $16.95.) Kathleen Haley faces a difficult choice: marriage to a secure well-to-do man or to a passionate old flame.
13
10
8
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The story of Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton and her spouse.
14
13
4
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran has to contend with a series of crimes in Scotland.
15
9
4
THE LEGACY, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $15.95.) A fantasy tale about a spider queen's war to stop a band of elves in their quest for peace and security.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the radio talk show host.
2
5
2
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
3
21
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
4
2
7
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
5
6
4
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
6
1
THE SENATOR, by Richard E. Burke with William and Marilyn Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The recollections of a man who served as an aide to Edward M. Kennedy for 10 years.
7
4
18
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
8
8
10
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
9
9
7
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10 *
11
11
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918.
11
10
16
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
12
1
FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL, by Derrick Bell. (Basic Books, $20.) A law professor argues that racism is an integral, permanent and irradicable component of our society.
13
16
2
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
14
7
19
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
15
3
KISSINGER, by Walter Isaacson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the former national security adviser and Secretary of State.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
2
2
14
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
3
3
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
4
5
46
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
33
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE CHANGE: Women, Aging and the Menopause, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) The author of the classic "Female Eunuch" struggles grandly with practically everything -- historical, medical, psychological, metaphysical -- that concerns the dreaded event, and finds it in the end a liberating occasion.
GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Mr.
Gleick, who knows how to portray scientists and dramatize emerging ideas, takes on one of the greatest of physicists, the pioneer of quantum electrodynamics.
ENGLISH MUSIC, by Peter Ackroyd. (Knopf, $23.) It's metafiction, but never fear, it works as a fine novel in which a boy with strange powers meets culture heroes of the past, real and fictional.
IN MEMORY OF JUNIOR, by Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $16.95.) Death is much funnier than usual in this larky novel about a dying couple and most of their loony relatives.
BRITONS: Forging the Nation 1707-1837, by Linda Colley. (Yale University, $35.) A historian's ambitious survey of the ideas and events that led the Scottish, Welsh and English subjects of one crown to regard themselves as a single people, the British nation.
THROUGH THE IVORY GATE, by Rita Dove. (Pantheon, $21.) This happy first novel by a Pulitzer Prize winner for poetry deals with a young black musician and actress who contemplates in tranquillity the strategies that have enabled her life so far.
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE, by Edward O. Wilson. (Belknap/ Harvard University, $29.95.) The distinguished scientist who made sociobiology famous warns humanity that it has become far too powerful for its own good and will soon regret, morally and economically, its devastation of nonhuman forms of life.


Liberalism Was Their Undoing
IF I AM NOT FOR MYSELF . . .
The Liberal Betrayal of the Jews.
By Ruth R. Wisse. 225 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


No Headline
Tax Deductions on Rental  Question: I own a co-op apartment in the city.
It is my only real estate holding.
If I were to rent it and move somewhere else, would I have to declare the rent as income? . . .
Christopher Iorio, Manhattan.
Answer: Yes.
The Federal tax code requires that you add any rent received as income on your personal income tax return.
You can, however, deduct the property taxes and mortgage interest you pay on the apartment.
Because the apartment is in a co-op you could also deduct the portion of your maintenance representing your share of the co-op's mortgage interest and property taxes.


'Actors as Artists'
NAMES: Jim McMullan (above, left), who played Senator Dowling in "Dallas" and was in the film "Downhill Racer," and Dick Gautier, who played Conrad Birdie in the original Broadway production of "Bye Bye Birdie" and Hymie, the robot, in "Get Smart."
CURRENT ACTIVITY: Co-authors of "Actors as Artists" (Tuttle, $40), a photo book about actors and their paintings and sculpture.
Included are Candice Bergen, Piper Laurie, Eve Plumb, Anthony Quinn and Billy Dee Williams.


Technology; 'What If . . .' Software For Manufacturers
COMPAQ Computer was about to phase out one of its personal computer models in 1990 when someone realized it had underestimated demand.
Enter Cal Monteith, Compaq's manager of master scheduling and production control in Houston.
Could he build 10,000 more PC's?
In the past, such unexpected requests would have forced Mr.
Monteith to rely mostly on gut instinct.
Were there enough parts and plant capacity to handle the sudden change?
This time, however, Mr.
Monteith had powerful software from an obscure Canadian company, Carp Systems International.


Streetscapes: 565 Broadway; The Right Result For Wrong Reasons
THE new cornice at the nine-story 565 Broadway is a relief from the bare cement that it replaces, but the story behind it has a lot to do with cash and little to do with good intentions.
A five-story marble palazzo at the southwest corner of Prince and Broadway, designed by John Kellum, was put up in 1860 by John A. May.


Absolute Necessities
Dream theorists say that the image of a house in a dream represents a kind of psychic snapshot of one's heart; in waking life, one carries the same sort of intimate symbols in one's suitcase.
An Indonesian sarong, for instance, or the unmarked sheets of a virgin legal pad can offer strangers in strange lands tiny reassurance - totems, if you will - of home.
Herewith 10 examples.
Lypsinka needs sleep as mush as she needs applause." Seiji Ozawa, conductor: "Besides my baton, my most indispensable item is a special Chinese jasmine tea with jasmine blossoms in it.
Before a performance, it's a ritual that I have to have this kind of tea because it's energizing and soothing at the same time." Louise Bourgeois, sculptor: "What I need, and what I panic about if I don't have it, is a pencil and a pad for the writing of my diary.
I write every day.
Very seriously.
The fact is that I don't read my diary, but I am compulsive about having it." Martha Stewart, entertainment author and designer: "My cellular phone.
Ninety percent of the time I'm on the phone." Arnold Scassi, designer: "Well, I always bring a very thin navy blue, crew-neck wool seater that is made for me in Capri.
And then there's my impluse item, which I think you have to have when you travel because your mood will change and you'll want to wear something fun.
Anyway, that's my red patent-leather shoes, loafers, you know, the slip-ons.
They cheer up a whole outfit." Gregory Hines, actor, dancer: "My most indispensable item is my Davidoff portable cigar humidor." Mark Morris, choreographer and dancer: "I always have an Indonesian sarong.
If I'm on the airplane and I'm cold I can drape it around my shoulders.
If I'm in the theater or a studio and the floor is dirty, I can sit on it.
And if I bought some really expensive, fragile little item, I could wrap it in the sarong to pack it and bring it home.
Stuff like that."


Abductions 'Traumatize' Chinese in Philippines
When the children in some Chinese-Filipino families here head off for school in the morning, they are handed cellular phones along with their lunch boxes and are reminded to call home every hour.
"My mom would have a heart attack if I didn't call," said one 10-year-old Manila boy, pulling a cellular phone from his pocket.
Other Chinese-Filipino children in the Philippine capital go nowhere these days without a chauffeured car and a brawny bodyguard -- a team of guards, if their parents have the money.
Several Manila schools with ethnic Chinese students are guarded by armed patrols with shoot-to-kill orders.


Sarah B. Hood, Robert Salomon 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Hood of Wayne, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Birney Hood to Robert S. Salomon 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salomon Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Hood is a freelance photographer in Washington.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father retired after serving as the director of public relations for the National Symphony, the Cleveland Orchestra and the Philadelphia Orchestra.


MOSCOW IS SELLING WEAPONS TO CHINA, U.S. OFFICIALS SAY
In a move that is undercutting efforts to stem the spread of arms, Russia is selling missile-guidance technology, rocket engines and other advanced weapons systems to China, its onetime adversary, American officials say.
The exports to Beijing worry Bush Administration officials, who fear that a main reason the Chinese are acquiring the technology is to develop new weapons to sell to the third world.


While One House Rises From Oakland's Ashes, Another Relives the Horror
This is the tale of two houses, both reduced to ash and memory by last year's firestorm and both rebuilt in time to commemorate that October day when whole neighborhoods in the Oakland Hills were incinerated.
One of them, high in a canyon where the fire began and roared hot as a crematory, is just about ready for occupancy, the pride and joy of its owners, James and Gillian Servais, who run a construction company here and lost six houses besides their own in the blaze.
Mr.
Servais offers giddy tours of his new home these days, inviting friends and strangers alike to visit this weekend and celebrate the return of life to the scorched ridge.


European Unity: Reaffirming Respect for Diversity
The European Community summit meeting here Friday was more an exercise in public relations than hardball diplomacy, an attempt to sell skeptical parliaments and doubting publics on a more limited vision of European unity, one that will take into account separate national identities.
But by conceding that the building of Europe had often been left to a remote bureaucracy in Brussels that few voters in Britain, France, Italy, Germany or other countries understand, the leaders may well have marked a turning point -- away from the idea of a "United States of Europe" that was in the minds of the community's founders 35 years ago.


The Spells of a Bright Bequia Morning
MOUNTAINS DENSE WITH CEDARS' GREEN GROWTH RISE out of an indigo sea and stretch toward a sky that is more brightness than color.
Beaches, fine grained and golden, lean into black cliffs festooned with vines and determined orchids.
Bequia, the largest (seven square miles) of the Grenadine Islands, is a natural beauty, afloat in a time warp nine miles south of bustling St.
Vincent.
Its self-sufficient population of fishermen, boat builders and whalers and their families face the sea from tidy, gingerbread-trimmed stucco houses built into the hills and painted to match the boats bobbing on moorings below.
Tangerine with blue trim.
Blue with pink trim.
"We have a tradition of building beautiful things. That's our style," explains Noel Ollivierre, a taxi driver who comes from a long line of boat builders.
Life here is held steady by a foundation of continuity, custom and pride safeguarded by isolation.


Hungary
To the Editor: Having relatives in the village of Horvatnadalja, which is just outside Kormend in western Hungary, I found Alexandra Shelley's piece on the Orseg region ("The Orseg: Guardian of Hungary's Past," Sept. 27) a fine and accurate portrayal of this historic and tradition-bound area.
While Germans and Austrians would be familiar with this region, to most Westerners it is unknown.
I traveled there in 1969 and again in 1978.
Since the region is so close to the Austrian border, in 1969 I was only permitted to visit certain areas after giving my itinerary to the local police authorities.
You just couldn't travel freely.
Nine years later I found that travel restrictions easier and Hungarians more forthcoming in conversation.
The experience of your writer in 1992 tells me that things have come a long way from '69.


Sam Goldwyn's Little Studio That Could
In 1992, when huge conglomerates own movie studios, theater chains, cable channels, television stations, book publishers, video cassette companies and theme parks, mid-size independent movie companies are an endangered species.
Amid the bleached bones of their competitors, only three such entities -- the Samuel Goldwyn Company, New Line and Miramax -- are thriving.
Smaller than New Line, larger than Miramax, Goldwyn -- which can trace its ancestry to the earliest days of Hollywood -- is driven by one goal.
"The most important thing," says 66-year-old Sam Goldwyn Jr., "is still to be here 10 years from now. The most important thing is simply to survive."


What's Up on Esiason?
After a series of ineffective performances, it was inevitable that Bengals quarterback BOOMER ESIASON would become the subject of trade talks.
There has been quite a lot of it as a matter of fact, but so far the talk seems confined to fans and radio talk-show hosts.
Bengals officials say the talk is just that.
"That is totally speculation, without any basis whatsoever" said General Manager MIKE BROWN.


The Films Are Alive With Music
For some of us of a certain age, the songs are buried in preconscious life.
They are known without ever having been taught.
Songs like "Whistle While You Work" or "Give a Little Whistle," "Zip-a-Dee-Doo-Dah" or "Bibbidi-Bobbidi-Boo," "Lavender Blue" or "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" For others, the memories may be less distant -- of "Chim Chim Cher-ee" or "Beauty and the Beast."
Now that videotapes and laser disks are commonplace, there is not even a need for memory; the songs are easily and always available.
Many have become an indelible part of American musical culture; some, like "It's a Small World," have been translated into other languages.
All were created by the Disney studios and are the aural counterparts to images of Mickey and Company.
They are being celebrated by Walt Disney Records in a new set of recordings, "The Music of Disney: A Legacy in Song," containing 78 Disney songs.


First 'Smart' Highways Set for 1993
A federal transportation act signed by President Bush on Oct. 7 is propelling the state into the era of the so-called smart highway.
Supplementing state-sponsored projects already on the drawing board, the act sets aside $26.2 million in Federal funds for the creation of Intelligent Vehicle/Highway Systems to speed the flow of traffic in what is one of the country's most heavily traveled states.
All told, officials expect to spend $160 million in state and Federal funds on smart highway systems over the next five years.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
As an African-American woman, I take offense at Alvin F. Poussaint's assertion that black women "oppress" black men when they object to black men dating white women (Letters, Sept. 27, in response to Bebe Moore Campbell's Hers column "Brothers and Sisters," Aug. 23).


Selling Sex and (Oh, Yes) a Record
Madonna's new album, "Erotica," contains tough, propulsive dance music tarted up with some smutty jokes and sweetened with fleeting glimpses of hard-bitten tenderness.
As urban dance-pop goes, it is an up-to-the-minute fashion statement, short on melody and long on crunching beats, cool in attitude but steamy with sexual bravado.
Even if the record were a dud -- which it isn't -- it wouldn't matter terribly much.
For the album, which will be released on Tuesday, is only one part of a multimedia Madonna blitz that is already unstoppable.


Ornamental Grasses Show Their Stripes
What a glorious time of year this is.
The trees are showing off their splendid fall colors.
The leafy canopies range from the bright reds to golden hues to several shades of bronze.
And when the hillsides are interspersed with the green of conifers, nothing can match nature's palette.
Even the asters and chrysanthemums remain in bloom.
And though most of the birds have gone, winter residents are hanging around to keep up their happy chatter.
The squirrels are especially busy making noises as they flick their tails and wonder where they will bury the nuts they are carrying in their mouths.
The farmers are happy.
Their grain fields are ripening and the ryes, sorghums, wheats and oats are coming in.
And the silos are getting filled with food for the herd.
And there is a harvest of ripening apples.


After Thinking Big, La Scala Settles For a One-Stop Tour
The New York visit of the Teatro Alla Scala is on again.
The company's performances of the Verdi Requiem at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday and Friday evenings were originally meant to have been part of a more extensive tour, which would have involved fully staged opera productions as well as concerts.
Then, because of the shifting winds of Italian politics, fluctuations in both Italian and American currencies, and the broader economic worries that have beset the world, the tour nearly didn't happen at all.


Curtain Up on Winterthur's New Set
After a 41-year run as one of the most celebrated Americana shows, the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum has revised its script with a new annex.
And for the first time since the museum opened in 1951, the focus is on objects, not the decorated interiors of the Henry du Pont mansion, that giant stage set of 196 period rooms filled with art treasures from the Colonial to the Victorian periods.
Pseudo-classical in style, the two-story wing, the main floor of which opened last weekend, adjoins the sprawling du Pont mansion, an idiosyncratic architectural conception with stucco walls, red tile roof, dormers and tower.
Winterthur's castlelike character and glorious gardens evolved after 1927, when du Pont inherited the 983-acre estate of rolling hills in the Brandywine Valley.


Wall Street; From Overseas, a Hint of Sunshine on Wall Street?
Foreign investors the world over have earned a reputation for a lack of astuteness.
They generally know less about any market than do the locals, and are thus most likely to buy and sell at exactly the wrong time.
So the good news for the United States stock market now, on the fifth anniversary of the 1987 crash, may be that foreigners are not very positive on America.


Did the Caribs Eat the Arawaks?
To the Editor:
Peter S. Prescott faults Jay Parini for political correctness in his novel "Bay of Arrows" (Sept. 20) because Mr.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


William Klein, Impolite Photographer
In the 1950's, a few photographers took to the streets to record the sullen electricity and rank contradictions of urban life with a new urgency.
A lot of photography's rules got broken in the process, and William Klein broke more of them, and earlier, than almost anyone else.
He did not frame right.
He came in too close.
He courted blur, high contrast, graininess and streaks of light, and he treated his subject matter as if it were grist for the tabloid mill.
He did not give a fig for a perfect print but preserved his mistakes as if they were masterstrokes.
Others were experimenting along these lines; Klein played a major role in codifying a new outlook.
He began to photograph in 1954 at the age of 26, virtually gave it up in the mid-60's to make films, was rediscovered at the end of the 70's, and decided to take up photography once more.
He still works at breaking rules, though it is much harder to find rules to break today.
A retrospective at the Howard Greenberg Gallery (through Saturday), with 85 pictures and a catalogue, touches on every phase of his photography, including his edgy, witty fashion work for Vogue in the 50's and 60's and his somewhat less vital color work.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Sally Mann has created a hermetic world controlled by Mom.
We are told that her children are fine actors, collaborators with Mom in a sophisticated artifice.
I left the show at the Houk Friedman Gallery last spring dispirited by this intimate view of childhood.
So rarely does Mann script gentleness unmarred by a sense of menace or erotic innuendo.
It is difficult to recall a Mann image informed by humor or joy.
I wish that her considerable talents as a technician and stylist were matched by a generous heart.


Giving the Bus A Second Look
ON the campaign trail, Lyndon Johnson used to drop in on awed communities in Texas in a helicopter.
Harry Truman made the whistle stop a political legend.
And now Bill Clinton and Al Gore are roaming the country in sleek, modern buses, to the delight of a tour bus industry that says it hasn't had such publicity for its product in years.
Meanwhile, despite the prolonged decline of intercity bus transportation, there are signs of revival in some areas of the country, where new buses are operating on heavily traveled routes offering comfort that did not exist previously at prices that are well within reach of people who can't afford the train or the plane.


The Advantages of Having the Store Cut Plywood
Plywood is often better than solid lumber for repairs and improvements, because it is generally less expensive, stronger and requires less time and labor.
But for many amateurs the difficulty of choosing and transporting plywood, and of cutting it with ordinary tools outweighs its advantages.
When selecting plywood, be aware of its different grades.
Printed guides detailing the characteristics of each grade and how to read the grading stamps on all plywood sheets are usually available where plywood is sold.
But because most dealers stock just a few grades, discussing your project with the store is generally the fastest way to buy suitable plywood.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- New Hampshire; Clinton Leads in New Hampshire, a G.O.P. Bastion
Four years ago, George Bush scratched out a pivotal victory over Senator Bob Dole of Kansas in the New Hampshire primary and went on to triumph in November, carrying the state with 63 percent of the vote against a regional rival.
"Thank you, New Hampshire!" he exulted on election night.


Addressing Abortion Rights
The National Abortion Rights Action League has undertaken a targeted independent spending campaign of voter registration and identification in New York State aimed at defeating Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
This 30-second commercial, to be broadcast on cable stations in Rochester, in Westchester and Rockland Counties and on Long Island, is part of that effort.


World Series; Atlanta Captures World Series Opener


Easy-to-Cook Lentils as a Good Source of Fiber
Of all the varieties of fiber-rich dried beans, lentils are by far the easiest to cook.
They belong on the pantry shelf along with rice and pasta to use regularly for salads, side dishes and soups and to bolster casseroles.
There are many kinds of lentils on the market, the most common being the fairly flat brown variety.
There are also orange lentils in the same shape.
French lentils are dark green, smaller and rounder.
These are excellent for salads because they tend to hold their shape better.
The lentils from France come from an area called Le Puy, near Gascony in the southwest.


At Work; Mapping Offshore Migration of Jobs
When he set out to document the emigration of employment from the heartland and shores of the United States, it never occurred to Charles Kernaghan, executive director of a union-sponsored research group, that there wasn't someone out there collecting the information he needed.
Surely, he figured, there were professors or think-tank wonks who decorated their offices with push-pin maps of plant closings and tables of jobs lost.
The data weren't available, Mr.
Kernaghan says, at least not centrally and systematically.
And what was there could not answer the fundamental question: Why do American companies go offshore?
So, after spending several months doing more traditional forms of research in archives and libraries, Mr.
Kernaghan and his colleagues, Barbara Briggs and Jack McKay, formed a bogus company.
Posing as officers of an environmentally correct manufacturing company, they explored the shadowy networks of doing business as a foreigner in Central America and the Caribbean and made the improbable discovery that, advertently or inadvertently, Government programs run through the United States Agency for International Development may be encouraging American companies to go offshore.
They estimate the cost to taxpayers at more than $800 million.


Bush's Gamble
I was a Bush-watcher long before I thought it would ever be useful and may be able to pinpoint the time he was seized by his inordinate fear of running without solid support from the far right.
In the 1970 midterm elections, President Nixon sent his most sagacious political aide, Bryce N. Harlow, and two of his speech writers, Pat Buchanan and me, to help Vice President Spiro Agnew barnstorm the country to help Republican candidates defeat liberal Democrats.


A Reminder to Disarm
Ross Perot and Bill Clinton are right to remind George Bush that he has not yet rid the world of Russia's most dangerous nuclear weapons.
Given the disarray in Russia, merely reaching agreement to cut nuclear arms is not enough; it's necessary to begin disarming.
To their credit, President Bush and President Boris Yeltsin of Russia made a commitment in mid-June to make still deeper cuts than the Start treaty.
The commitment would ban all land-based multi-warhead missiles and eliminate all silos for firing the dreaded Russian SS-18's, which carry 10 warheads.
It would reduce the warhead total on each side to between 3,000 and 3,500, down from today's levels of 11,000-plus.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the organizing of a two-day boycott of Eastern District High School in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, misstated the timing of the Board of Education's agreement to parents' demands.
The board's offer to take steps to ease overcrowding and improve security at the school was made on Oct. 4, the evening before the boycott began, though after it was called.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BRISTOL HORROR SHOW
The Witch's Dungeon in Bristol opens for its annual Halloween horror show on Friday, continuing nightly from 7 to 10 through Nov. 1.
So scary are the 13 exhibits in the dungeon's maze that children under 6 years old are advised to stay away.
Life-size replicas of Boris Karloff as Frankenstein's monster, Bela Lugosi as Dracula, Lon Chaney as the Phantom of the Opera and other film favorites who loved to be hated will seem to come alive while a sound track by Vincent Price and Mark Hamill provides a narration.


BENEFITS
Benefit for Family Theater
MONDAY -- Theaterworks/USA, which has been commissioning musicals and plays geared to families for 32 years, will hold a benefit at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 677-5959.


Under Close Scrutiny
To the Editor:
I read with interest Herbert Muschamp's essay on Eastern State Penitentiary  [ "In Philadelphia, a Showcase of Abandoned Hopes," Oct. 4 ] .
The piece, however, ignored the empirical observations and conclusions of Harriet Martineau, by far the most astute and methodologically sophisticated foreigner to visit the noted prison.
Unlike Tocqueville or Dickens, Martineau arranged to interview the inmates in their cells -- unchaperoned.


Packing by the Book
IN the "Odyssey," that primal traveler's tale, Telemachus, setting out to search for his father, Odysseus, orders the old slave Eurycleia to pack him 12 jars of sweet wine and 20 measures of barley in well-sewn leather bags.
Imagine the list James Joyce could have written for Stephen Dedalus,
his
Telemachus, setting out for Paris.
Actually, given his working method of filling in canvas well outside the frame of his tale, Joyce probably did make up such a list, but except for the "new second-hand clothes" Stephen's mother puts in order for him we do not know what was on it.


High-Tech Postmarks With a Message
COLLECTORS save the darnedest things.
Once in a great while, all that stuff in old shoe boxes comes to be worth a bit of money.
The latest case: the sprayed-on postmarks that the United States Postal Service began using in August 1989 in Stamford, Conn., and which are now used in about 200 post offices.
These postmarks, typically identifying the site where mail was sorted, are not cancellations, which are intended to deface stamps so they cannot be re-used.


On Sunday; Bush's Support With Builders Reveals Cracks
It takes all kinds of people to build a house. It takes all kinds to elect a President.
Starting at the foundation is John Sudano, a concrete worker here, who smooths the freshly poured cement for the new Hamlet luxury houses.
Mr.
Sudano says: "I'm one of the few lucky ones. I'm working." Half the 60,000 unionized construction workers on Long Island are jobless.
This is one of a handful of new complexes being built in a suburban region of 3 million people.
Mr.
Sudano did not vote in 1988, but will this time, he says.
Because of the economy, he won't vote for President George Bush.
"That's definite. Ross Perot is for me."


What About Family Feeling?
To the Sports Editor:
John Mackey offered a players' union view on football free agency ("Litigation Throwing Football for a Loss," The Times, Oct. 4) and offered the comforting thought that "free agency doesn't hurt anyone."
I am old enough to remember those golden days in baseball when "our team" was a bunch of players recruited from sandlots, apprenticed in minor leagues and finally brought up to the big leagues when ready.
The same players suited up year after year and were a known and loved group.
One or two occasional trades spiced the situation but, in effect, there was stability and continuity and a family feeling that made rooting for the home team a beautiful expression.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Letters column on Sept. 13 rendered a letter about Barbara Walters incorrectly.
The writer, Richard E. Vatz, professor of rhetoric and mass communication at Towson (Md.) State University, wrote, "Walters simply cannot -- or will not -- pursue a point." He did not say she "cannot -- and will not." The writer informed The Times of the error on Sept. 17, and this correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


Driver Is Charged in Crash That Killed Three
A man who the police said was driving under the influence of drugs on Friday night hit one car and then sped off and hit three others, killing two women and an infant and injuring several other people as his car careered through South Ozone Park, Queens, the police said yesterday.
Peter Gallo, 32 years old, of 115-32 149th Avenue in South Ozone Park, was arrested shortly after the accident at 7:30 P.M. in his car, which had stopped on Rockaway Boulevard.
The police said Mr.
Gallo had been using PCP, or "angel dust," and was carrying a small amount of the drug in his car, a 1986 Chevrolet Celebrity.


Wagner Runner Makes Ground Game Count
Wagner 42, Marist 7
Chris Purdy, who carried only four times for 37 yards, scored three touchdowns on runs of 4, 3 and 2 yards as Wagner crushed Marist, 42-7, yesterday on Staten Island to remain undefeated in the Liberty Conference.


Rutgers, Thin in the Ranks, Has No Mercy for Army
Battered and bruised after successive losses to Penn State and Syracuse, Rutgers needed a breather.
And the Scarlet Knights got one today as they crushed Army, 45-10, at Giants Stadium before a crowd of 22,164 spectators.
Although Rutgers has played at a generally higher level of the game than Army over the years, the series has remained competitive.
Until last season, when they lost here, 14-12, the Cadets had beaten Rutgers three consecutive times.


Arkady Returns to the Big Potato
RED SQUARE
By Martin Cruz Smith. 418 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


Sound Bytes; Investing in the New Nomads
L.
John Doerr is a partner in the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers, which has offices in San Francisco and Palo Alto, Calif.
Kleiner Perkins has invested about $25 million in computer industry startups in the past four years, including positions in the GO Corporation, the Slate Corporation, Pen Magic, Cellular Data and EO.
The lure, in each case, is that the company is working on a new generation of handheld "nomadic" computers and software.
Question: What excites you the most about the industry today?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 18, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
38
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
4
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
27
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
5
4
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
6
3
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $12.50.) The romance of a countess and a British soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
7
4
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
8
4
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
9
8
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
10
1
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
11
18
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
12
38
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
13
14
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
14
1
THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $5.99.) Book Three of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
15
4
FAMILY MAN, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The plight of a woman who falls in love with her employer, known as the toughest of bosses.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
26
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
2
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The Democratic candidates detail their program for "changing America."
4
1
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
8
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
6
9
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
7
1
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
8 *
74
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9 *
467
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
10
66
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
62
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
110
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
91
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1993. (Yankee Publishing, $3.95.) The 201st annual edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


3 Jockeys in a Race to the Finish
Belmont Park ends its autumn meeting tomorrow, and the best race in the house may be the one for the jockeys' championship.
Going into the final weekend, Jerry Bailey was leading Julie Krone by half a dozen winners, with Chris Antley riding at Krone's heels in a photo finish for second place.
But the race takes a twist at that point.
Both Bailey and Krone went out of town for major assignments this weekend: Bailey riding yesterday in Kentucky at Keeneland and today in Florida at Calder while Krone was spending both days at Laurel in Maryland.


Cash Machines
To the Editor: Regarding the use of Plus system's A.T.M. cards in Australia (Letters on Travel, Sept. 6), readers may be interested in certain problems I experienced early this year.
I attempted to use my card in four cities at three banks that were listed in the Plus directory -- Cairns, Adelaide, Alice Springs and Melbourne.
In all these cities, the A.T.M. indicated it would accept Plus; it worked in none of them.


State Department Revises System Of Advisories
The State Department is revising the way it informs the public about potential concerns for Americans traveling abroad.
The old system of Travel Advisories, produced by the department's Bureau of Consular Affairs, had three categories, in descending order of seriousness: Warnings, Cautions and Notices.
The new system will have two, Warnings and Consular Information Sheets.
The Travel Warning category recommends that Americans avoid visiting certain countries.
Consular Information Sheets will contain information that was included under Cautions, which alerted travelers to take care because of potential security or health risks, and Travel Notices, which pointed out inconveniences and difficult situations, such as unusual driving or currency regulations.


Scary Monsters
My 3-year-old daughter has been thinking about witches a lot lately, witches and monsters and ghosts and all the other things that may be hiding in the dark, behind the closet door.
She plays out her worries with a large menagerie of brightly colored little plastic people. ("Are you a witch?" she says in a high, squeaky voice to the yellow person in her left hand. "No, I'm a ghost and I'm going to get you," she answers in her lowest growly voice.)


True Britt
CONTENTS UNDER PRESSURE
By Edna Buchanan. 277 pp. New York: Hyperion. $21.95.


When Mastery of U.S. Media Does Not Come Trippingly
Maybe it's something in the air, but American media companies have proved especially irksome to foreign buyers.
Some newcomers, like Sony, Matsushita and Hachette, snapped up sizable media properties here in the late 1980's and ran into unforeseen snags.
Bertelsmann seemed like a surer bet.
The $9 billion German media combine, No. 2 in the world after Time Warner, had all the appropriate stuff when it got into American media in a big way in the 1980's.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Fifth Congressional District election misidentified an organization involved in the campaign.
It is Clean Up Congress, not Change Congress.


Many Companies Try to Simplify Pricing
To attract harried but value-conscious consumers, more American companies are adopting a marketing strategy that drops the quick sale in favor of low prices year round.
To the buyer, it seems to signal an end to haggling and shopping about for the best price; to the seller it may mean steady customers.
So far, and despite the skepticism of some critics, the approach is building a following among companies ranging from computer makers to car dealerships to hotels.
In the process, they are creating what many marketing experts and economists say is a noteworthy shift in how goods and services are bought and sold.


Bonnie J. Blake, William Jenkins
Bonnie Jean Blake, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Blake of Osterville, Mass., was married yesterday to William Kinsey Jenkins, a son of Mary Jenkins of Hingham, Mass., and the late Joseph K. Jenkins.
The Rev.
John A. Perry officiated at Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville, Mass.
Mrs.
Jenkins, 32 years old, is the executive director of the American Horse Shows Association in New York, the national governing body for American equestrian sports.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.


Storm Warning
To the Editor:
The Brooklyn Museum's retrospective overlooked a movie related to the blacklist and the McCarthy era: "Storm Center," a 1956 film about book-burning and guilt by association.
In it, Bette Davis played a middle-aged, small-town librarian who refused to remove a pro-Communist book from the public library; she was fired by the City Council and blacklisted by the community.


INQUIRY IS URGED ON LEAKS BY JURY
The Federal judge who approved a plea agreement in the Rocky Flats bomb factory pollution case has asked the Justice Department for "an appropriate and immediate investigation" of whether grand jury secrecy was breached.
Since the plea agreement was completed, in June, several grand jurors have told The New York Times and have been quoted by other news organizations as saying that a majority of them favored more extensive indictments but were blocked by the United States Attorney, Michael Norton.


A Graveyard Stroll Brings the Past to Life
From ghoulies and ghosties and long-leggety beasties and things that go bump in the night, Good Lord, deliver us.
THE old Cornish prayer just might cross the mind of someone taking a cemetery tour by full moonlight on a late October evening in Farmington.


A 'Broadway Bound' By a New Ensemble
The night Kate Jerome did the fox trot with George Raft at the Primrose Ballroom provides the groundwork for one of Neil Simon's most revealing monologues.
It is, as well, the turning point and the payoff of "Broadway Bound," the third part of his autobiographical trilogy.
Coming near the end of the play, though it is signaled from the beginning, the set piece hands over to an actress a capital moment.
In the Blooming Grove Theater Ensemble production, Alberta Huseman seizes it to apply a touch, just a touch, of shading onto an overly austere reading of a character who is not the forbidding, one-dimensional matriarch Mrs.
Huseman makes her out to be.
Until then, the actress could have applied the very same technique to the role of a drill sergeant.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Copiague 120,000
280 Vespucci Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Levittown 146,000
58 Azalea Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Lindenhurst 145,000
133 West Alhambra  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement; taxes $4,400.
Oakdale 182,500
42 Handsome Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, skylights, 1-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,100.
Old Brookville 850,000
98 Pound Hollow Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 11-year-old contemporary; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces, 3-car garage, barn, paddocks, 2 acres; taxes $9,600.
Sayville 89,990
45 Easy Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old ranch; basement, detached 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
OTHER AREAS Vernon, Conn. 166,500
22 Rosewood Drive  3-bedroom, 2- bath, 36-year-old ranch; built-in china cupboard, oak floors, on cul-de-sac, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,831.
South Salem, N.Y. 145,000
242A Hemlock Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $3,236.
Clifton, N.J. 145,000
79 Paterson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; family room, formal dining room, full basement; taxes $2,562.


Commercial Property: Foreign Tenants in Manhattan; Diplomatic Offices, Once Unwelcome, Now Courted
WITH more Americans traveling to Spain and more Spaniards coming to New York on business or as tourists, the midtown offices of the Consulate of Spain faced overcrowding.
So earlier this year, with its lease about to expire, its senior diplomats started looking for additional space.
And a few weeks ago they signed a $5 million, 15-year agreement that gives them the 30th floor and part of the 31st floor at 150 East 58th Street.
With a total of 12,500 square feet, the new lease will provide a third more space than in the past.


'This City of Dreams,' a Family Drama
For community allegiance, the Passage Theater Company is unbeatable.
After a recent production in a local steel factory, the six-year-old group is back in the Mill Hill Playhouse with a new work set in the inner city where Walter Allen Bennett Jr., the playwright, was born.
Now with "This City of Dreams" -- a resonant title -- the Passage is establishing a link to other theaters in the state.
For Mr.
Bennett's play has evolved from a series of staged readings, one at the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey in Madison, into a co-production with Essex County College in Newark, where the play is to move when the local run is concluded.


Elizabeth McCain, Alexander Mucelli
Elizabeth Dale McCain, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. McCain Jr. of Fairfield, Conn., was married on Friday to Alexander Louis Mucelli, the son of Dr.
Louis A. Mucelli of New York and Tonia J. Mucelli of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Alida Schuchert performed the ceremony at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Church in Fairfield.
Mrs.
Mucelli, 29 years old, is the human resources manager at the Loral Corporation, an electronics company in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College, as did her husband.
Her father is a vice president of the Intersec Research Corporation, a financial consulting company in Stamford, Conn.


Susan M. Parkes, Edward Cirignano
Susan Marie Parkes and Edward Thomas Cirignano were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert B. O'Connor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Blessed Sacrament.
Mrs.
Parkes-Cirignano, 28 years old, is the publicity manager and the promotion coordinator for The Ladies' Home Journal in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James C. Parkes 2d of New York.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of medicine at Columbia University and a senior attending physician in orthopedics at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.


Looking Back


Unexpected Finds; UNITED STATES
IN THIS COUNTRY Spanish food is essentially defined by gazpacho and paella.
But in a year when so much attention has been focused on Spain, its earthy, vibrant and sometimes exotic cuisine deserves greater recognition.
At Solera, an 86-seat restaurant in midtown Manhattan that opened in 1991, Spain is suggested by tile accents and there is a sunny, glassed-in porch, but there is no gazpacho and the paellas, one with seafood and the other vegetarian, while commendable, are definitely beside the point.
This is a place where you can nibble olives and sauteed almonds with a glass of fine, dry manzanilla while perusing a menu that interprets Spanish food with contemporary flair.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Historian Who . . .
MONICA RANDALL of Oyster Bay is a historian.
"That is one step away from being a nun," she said.
"I am not your 20th-century woman. And I was getting obscene phone calls. Historians don't get obscene phone calls."
The calls were being made, Miss Randall said, because people assumed that she was the role model for Susan Stanhope Sutter, the lusty history-loving wife in the best-selling "Gold Coast" by Nelson DeMille.


Long Waiting Lists For Organs Make Ethical Calls Tough
A young woman is in a coma, near death from liver failure.
Only a transplant can save her.
But no human liver is available.
So her doctors try to buy time by transplanting a pig's liver into her body.
Then, 32 hours later, a human liver is found.
It is intended for a patient at the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center, but the U.C.L.A. doctors agree to give the organ to the woman, recognizing her desperate situation.
Her doctors rush to transplant it, but they are too late.


Steinbeck Apolitical?
To the Editor:
It was with disbelief that I read Jay Parini's article  [ "Of Bindlestiffs, Bad Times, Mice and Men," Sept. 27 ]  about the latest film version of John Steinbeck's "Of Mice and Men" and his remark that Steinbeck was "curiously apolitical."


Glamour Boy
"MY God, what's happening to the world!"
Nolan Miller is quite serious.
"The magic!" he adds. "The glamour! The star quality! It doesn't exist anymore!"


In Looking at Rams, Giants See Themselves
They win a game and lose a game.
At times, their offense can do nothing right, and minutes later it looks like a world-beater.
At one moment their defense is fired up, and moments later it cannot stop anything.
That could be a summary of the Giants' season and explain their 2-3 record.
It is also the story of the Los Angeles Rams, who are 2-4, so the game here Sunday afternoon between the Giants and the Rams will be a battle of two teams trying to get well.


Rodman and Daly Talk
DENNIS RODMAN, who seems to have been in an emotional turmoil since Coach CHUCK DALY left the Pistons in May, showed up at the Pistons' first exhibition game Friday night, not to join his teamates in the game, but to talk things over at halftime with Daly, who coached the Nets to a 115-87 victory.
After a 30-minute chat that delayed the start of the second half, Daly said it may be a while before Rodman is ready to resume his career.
"I'd like to see him play another game in the N.B.A., but I don't know if it will be real soon," Daly said later.
"After our talk, hopefully it will be pretty soon."


OCT. 11-17: Spy's Sentence Stands; White House Is Last Chance As Court Refuses Pollard
The Supreme Court spoke last week on the punishment of the convicted spy Jonathan J. Pollard, but his supporters are hoping it is not the last word.
Without comment, the Justices declined to review the life sentence of Mr.
Pollard, the former Navy intelligence analyst who pleaded guilty in 1986 to spying for Israel.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Leading in the Homestretch, Clinton's Campaign Grows More Confident
Late Friday night, Gov.
Bill Clinton climbed onto his chartered campaign plane to find his staff and a dozen reporters crowded into an aisle, watching a tape of a mock debate that had been televised on "Saturday Night Live."
Relaxed and energized after a day of campaigning in Virginia and Louisiana, Mr.
Clinton laughed along with his traveling entourage as comedians Dana Carvey and Phil Hartman ridiculed the three candidates for President.
He laughed especially hard at a sequence that portrayed him as a bead-wearing hippy defending himself against accusations that he evaded the draft.


Perot Buys More Ads and Plans Appearances
Ross Perot has begun to step up his unorthodox campaign for the Presidency, buying more television time for advertisements and contemplating some traditional campaign appearances.
Mr.
Perot's aides said today that while the Dallas businessman would continue to rely heavily on television commercials as his primary means of reaching voters, he was also planning some live campaign appearances once the Presidential debates have ended on Monday, the Reuters news agency reported.


The Advantages of Having the Store Cut Plywood
Plywood is often better than solid lumber for repairs and improvements, because it is generally less expensive, stronger and requires less time and labor.
But for many amateurs the difficulty of choosing and transporting plywood, and of cutting it with ordinary tools outweighs its advantages.
When selecting plywood, be aware of its different grades.
Printed guides detailing the characteristics of each grade and how to read the grading stamps on all plywood sheets are usually available where plywood is sold.
But because most dealers stock just a few grades, discussing your project with the store is generally the fastest way to buy suitable plywood.


SHOE GARNISH
I once thought of becoming an advertising copywriter, so I can appreciate that John Cadley, in his About Men column "Shoe Garnish" (Sept. 13), has entertainingly written the complete textbook on copywriting.


Albany Democrats Hope Clinton's Coattails Will Help Them Take Back Senate
The calendar may say 1992.
But for Democrats who have been the minority in the New York State Senate for almost all of this century, the battle cry is that this election could be 1964 all over again.
That was the year when the long coattails of a Democratic Presidential candidate helped the party to a stunning victory, wresting control of the Senate from the Republicans.
Today, back in the minority, the Democrats are focusing on several races around the state in a bid to pick up the five seats they need to take control of the 61-member chamber -- the Republicans' sole remaining bastion of power in state government.


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; His Own Man
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis asks, "Why are we paying attention to Ross Perot?" (column, Oct. 2).
We are paying attention to Ross Perot for one reason only: he has enough money at his disposal to be a credible candidate.


Amy Fisher Case: Parable or Aberration?; How Shooting Lives On
EVERY day, it seems, some new development puts the Amy Fisher case -- and its convoluted allegations of underage sex, covertly made videotapes and a single .25-caliber gunshot -- back in the headlines and back on the tabloid-style television programs.
The shooting, it turns out, was only the beginning.
As almost everyone who has passed a newsstand or watched a local television newscast in the last four months probably knows, the police say that at about 11:30 A.M. on May 19 the doorbell rang in Mary Jo Buttafuoco's white split-level house on Adams Road West, near the waterfront in Massapequa.


A Graveyard Stroll Brings the Past to Life
From ghoulies and ghosties and long-leggety beasties and things that go bump in the night, Good Lord, deliver us.
THE old Cornish prayer just might cross the mind of someone taking a cemetery tour by full moonlight on a late October evening in Farmington.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the Justice Department's appointment of a prosecutor in the bank fraud case involving loans to Iraq described the loans incorrectly.
There have been allegations that some loans used to finance Iraq's weapons program were guaranteed by an American farm credit program, but it has never been proved that those credits "were apparently used for arms."


False Charges By Woman Culminate In Her Arrest
A homeless woman who had accused 13 men of rape, robbery and larceny over the last six years was arrested yesterday and charged with making up the crimes, the transit police said.
One of the accused men received a 90-day jail term, the transit police said.


3d Term Is Last, D'Amato Insists
In last night's debate, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato acknowledged the nation's anti-incumbent fervor, saying, "I think we have come to a point where term limitations are necessary" in public office.
Afterward, he said that this philosophy applied to him.
Mr.
D'Amato told The Associated Press that "three terms was more than enough" for senators and that "this will be the last time I run for public office." Asked if that meant he would not run for Governor in 1994, he replied: "Yes, absolutely. That's my pledge."


Fiber Artist Weaves Worlds of Spiritual Energy and Light
Elusive as spider webs in sunlight, four ethereal net installations constitute a 10-year retrospective exhibition of work by Rebecca Medel at the Neuberger Museum here.
Although these environmental installations totally occupy a large gallery, their presence seems to add neither volume nor weight, but rather a breathtaking spiritual energy.
It is not accidental that this 5,000-square-foot interior space seems appropriate for the exhibition, entitled "Transcendental Fiber Constructs." "When I first walked through the galleries, I thought of Rebecca Medel right away," said Lucinda Gedeon, who has directed the museum since 1991.
She had been introduced to the work of Ms.
Medel in a group exhibition called "Craft Today: The Poetry of the Physical" when it was installed in 1987 at the Phoenix Art Museum in Arizona.
Although unfamiliar with fiber art as a genre, Ms.
Gedeon said, she was "swept away by the fragility and strength of Rebecca's work."


Quaint Hotels With Modern Plumbing
DEFEND AND BETRAY
By Anne Perry. 385 pp. New York: Fawcett Columbine. $18.
THE SNAKE, THE CROCODILE AND THE DOG
By Elizabeth Peters. 340 pp. New York: Warner Books. $19.95.
THE HIGHWAYMAN AND MR. DICKENS
An Account of the Strange Events of the Medusa Murders.
By William J. Palmer. 273 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.


Public &amp; Private; They the People
The big winner in the second Presidential debate was the audience.
I'm not just talking about the people who asked the candidates the questions in that studio in Virginia, although as a journalist I feel an obligation to say a few things about them, none of which are particularly flattering to my trade.
They asked better questions than we have cooked up in other such forums.


Strike Zone; Debating 'Character' to the Bitter End
It has been said that a man never discloses his own character so clearly as when he describes another's.
Most Americans are so frantic about the economy that they are turning a deaf ear to Republican attacks on Bill Clinton's character.
But the President and the Governor are still locked in a tendentious tango on the issue of Presidential character -- one that is highly revealing about their respective strengths and weaknesses as leaders.


Lisa Ann Levy And David Miller
Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Levy of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Ann Levy to David Samuel Miller, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Miller of Stony Brook, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levy, 29 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, as is her fiance.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received a J.D. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a psychiatrist at the Westchester County Medical Center in New Rochelle.


Anne-Marie Lund, Christopher Kagy
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Lund Jr. of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Anne-Marie Lund, and Christopher Carver Kagy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Merle D. Kagy of Tiffin, Ohio.


Making a Difference; Keeping an Eye on Prescription Cards
Sometimes a company's product can be so good that it might be bad.
Just ask Elizabeth Dichter, senior vice president at PCS Health Systems Inc.
PCS markets prescription cards that allow millions of people with private or government health plans to obtain medicine at little or no cost.


POSTINGS: $1 Million Restoration; Depainting a Cast-Iron Landmark
Twenty layers of paint -- the latest brown and tan -- will be removed from Gilsey House, a 40-unit co-op with ground-floor commercial space at 1200 Broadway and 29th Street.
As part of a $1 million restoration over the next six to eight months, the eight-story Second Empire cast-iron landmark, now wrapped in scaffolding, will regain its once creamy white elegance.


Bliss It Was
To be alive and in SoHo on Oct. 10, a beautiful Saturday in the art season.


In Queens Shopping District, Crowds of Young Bring Fear
The steel gates roll down over storefronts in the afternoon, as merchants warily watch raucous bands of high school students sweep through the shopping district in Jamaica, Queens.
It was like that for much of last week and the week before after gangs of teen-agers overran 19 businesses, smashing windows and display cases and grabbing gold jewelry, radios, VCR's and televisions, the Jamaica Chamber of Commerce said.


Niagara Copters Prompt Concerns
A fatal collision between two sightseeing helicopters over Niagara Falls late last month has underscored concerns in both Canada and the United States that the flights should be banned or greatly restricted.
Three passengers from New York City and the pilot died when one of the helicopters, owned by an American company, crashed on a hillside following the mid-air collision Sept. 29.
The other helicopter, owned by a Canadian firm, landed a mile away and all on board escaped serious injury.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Edward de Grazia correctly asserts that Sally Mann's photographs deserve protection under the First Amendment.
However, Mann herself engages in censorship when she attempts to limit access to "Immediate Family" in her hometown by asking bookstores not to sell it and libraries to restrict its use, citing possible "teasing" of her children as the justification.
Mann's contradictory attitude regarding who may or may not view her work underscores the complexity of the issues raised by the publication of her photographs.
CONNIE NYHAN
Pacific Palisades, Calif.


Judy Joanne Leo, M. G. Bongiorno
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Leo of South Yarmouth, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judy Joanne Leo to Michael Gerald Bongiorno, a son of Mrs.
Anthony Bongiorno of Nahant, Mass., and the late Mr.
Bongiorno.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Leo, 24 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She is the manager of the Canal Street branch of the Bank of Boston.
Her father is the principal of Everett (Mass.) High School.


Corrections
A map on Oct. 4 with an article about cheese in Switzerland located Affoltern im Emmental incorrectly.
The town is eight miles northwest of Bern; the town south of Zurich and labeled Affoltern is Affoltern am Albis.
The map also referred incorrectly to the town 20 miles south-southeast of Bern.
It is Olten.


Adrienne Thomas and Steven Harper
STEVEN HARPER wooed Adrienne Thomas with flowers, chocolates, teddy bears, poems, photo copies of his hands, singing telegrams and three engagement rings.
"He was like the guy you always wanted to have," Ms.
Thomas said, "the one who pulls out your chair, even in a fast-food restaurant."
For their wedding on Oct. 10, about 450 guests, many of them wearing hats decorated with gold sequins and feathers or African fabrics, gathered inside the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem.
"We wanted everything to be in a Harlem setting," said the bride's sister, Demetria Thomas, who was described by many as the boss of the wedding.
"Our roots, our church, our school, our friends are in Harlem. It only makes sense we would have the wedding here."


Was the State Lottery Too Much of a Gamble?
It's Friday, a Lotto drawing day, and people are scurrying in and out of pharmacies, delicatessens and other stores across this city to buy chances at a $4.2 million jackpot.
"For the poor working man, this is the only way he can be a millionaire," said Richard Hughes, a retired postal worker who plays twice a week, $5 at a time, at a convenience store here.
In 20 years, he has won only once, $50 from a fistful of instant-lottery games he gave his wife for Valentine's Day.


Laugh Lines


How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton; On the Train to Moscow
To the Editor:
I have no connection with Bill Clinton, but I was on that very same tour to Moscow he took.
It was completely innocuous: 10 days between autumn and winter semesters: London-Warsaw-Vilnius-Leningrad-Moscow-Berlin-London, by train all the way for less than $:100.
It was run by a student travel agency on Shaftesbury Avenue in London, whose owners became friends of mine by chance 10 years later.
There was nothing political about them or the tour.
It was the cheapest trip available to Eastern Europe at that time of year.


OCT. 11-17: Spy's Sentence Stands; White House Is Last Chance As Court Refuses Pollard
The Supreme Court spoke last week on the punishment of the convicted spy Jonathan J. Pollard, but his supporters are hoping it is not the last word.
Without comment, the Justices declined to review the life sentence of Mr.
Pollard, the former Navy intelligence analyst who pleaded guilty in 1986 to spying for Israel.


Deals and Discounts
EUROPEAN HOTELS The Pullman-Sofitel group has set Winter Sale prices good from Nov. 17 through Jan. 31 at 48 of its hotels, which are mostly in France but also in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Switzerland.
Major cities in the program include Vienna, Brussels, Paris, Amsterdam, Florence, Rome, Venice and Geneva.
Rates are $129 a room nightly at 22 "gold category" hotels, and $109 a room at 26 "silver" hotels.
A couple of the hotels have blackout periods around the holidays.
Rates are for single or double occupancy and include service and tax except for city tax.
Prepayment must be made in full to guarantee the rate in dollars; refunds will be made only if a reservation is canceled at least three days in advance.
Call (800) 221-4542.
NEW ZEALAND TOURS Mount Cook Line is offering round-trip flights from Los Angeles or San Francisco to New Zealand at no extra charge to travelers on some departures of its 15-day New Zealand Mystique escorted tour.
The tour goes to Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Milford Sound, Queenstown, Mount Cook, Wellington and Rotorua, priced at $2,289 for departures in November and March, $2,488 in January and $1,949 in April through July.
Prices are for each of two people sharing a room.
The company also offers a fly-drive to New Zealand ranging from $1,151 to $1,621 for round-trip air fare from the West Coast, six days use of a Budget rental car and five nights' accommodation in motor inns, depending on the date and type of car. (From New York, add $260 round trip for air fare to the West Coast.) Call (800) 345-3504.


Excerpts From the Debate Between New York's Senate Candidates
Following are excerpts from the senatorial debate last night broadcast from WRGB-TV in Schenectady, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Abortion Rights
MODERATOR While polls say the economy ranks as No. 1 on voters' minds, perhaps the most volatile subject you face is abortion.
Senator D'Amato is on the Right to Life line but recently voted against the Bush abortion gag order.
Mr.
Abrams is a vocal supporter of a woman's right to choose.
First, clearly state your stand on abortion and then tell us why you think you're right.
. . .


Women's Progress Stalled? Just Not So
You've heard it often: The 1980's were the backlash years, when Ronald Reagan and George Bush trashed affirmative action, feminism went out of fashion and the news media convinced women that they couldn't have it all.
The implication is that women's economic progress stalled.
Widely accepted though it may be, that last assumption is mostly wrong.
A fresh body of research -- mostly by a new generation of female economists who've mined a mountain of unexplored data -- shows compellingly that women were big economic winners in the 1980's expansion and that their gains are likely to keep coming in the 1990's regardless of who is in the White House.


The Advantages of Having the Store Cut Plywood
Plywood is often better than solid lumber for repairs and improvements, because it is generally less expensive, stronger and requires less time and labor.
But for many amateurs the difficulty of choosing and transporting plywood, and of cutting it with ordinary tools outweighs its advantages.
When selecting plywood, be aware of its different grades.
Printed guides detailing the characteristics of each grade and how to read the grading stamps on all plywood sheets are usually available where plywood is sold.
But because most dealers stock just a few grades, discussing your project with the store is generally the fastest way to buy suitable plywood.


Easy-to-Cook Lentils as a Good Source of Fiber
Of all the varieties of fiber-rich dried beans, lentils are by far the easiest to cook.
They belong on the pantry shelf along with rice and pasta to use regularly for salads, side dishes and soups and to bolster casseroles.
There are many kinds of lentils on the market, the most common being the fairly flat brown variety.
There are also orange lentils in the same shape.
French lentils are dark green, smaller and rounder.
These are excellent for salads because they tend to hold their shape better.
The lentils from France come from an area called Le Puy, near Gascony in the southwest.


Sports of The Times; The Goalie Who Just Wants to Improve
IT all began for Manon Rheaume the way it begins for most goaltenders, with older brothers.
The gang would be out on the ice in Lac-Beauport in Quebec and everybody wanted to be a sharpshooter like Pierre Larouche or Mike Bossy, and somebody would point to the youngest skater and say, "You play goal."
So she became a goaltender, good enough to play for Canadian national teams, women's teams.
Now she is very far from home, training with a men's professional team, and she does not think of herself as a gimmick.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Haddam, Conn. 152,000
67 Hayden Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 23-year-old cape cod; tiled foyer, bay window, walk-in closets, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,580.
Meriden, Conn. 135,000
38 Surrey Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 21-year-old raised ranch; two fireplaces, formal dining room, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,184.
Vernon, Conn. 166,500
22 Rosewood Drive  3-bedroom, 2- bath, 36-year-old ranch; built-in china cupboard, oak floors, on cul-de-sac, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,831.
Hartsdale, N.Y. 250,000
75 Harvard Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Norman Tudor; fireplace, dining room, maid's room, family room, new roof; taxes $5,538.
South Salem, N.Y. 145,000
242A Hemlock Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old Cape Cod; living room, dining room, porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $3,236.
Yonkers, N.Y. 193,000
380 Bronxville Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 64-year-old English Tudor; fireplace, sitting area, dining room, full basement; taxes $2,387.
OTHER AREAS Lindenhurst, L.I. 145,000
133 West Alhambra  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 80-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $4,400.
Oakdale, L.I. 182,500
42 Handsome Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, skylights, 1-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,100.
Iselin, N.J. 139,000
119 Sonora Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; deck, new roof; taxes $2,578.


Willy Brandt Is Remembered By the High and the Common
Political leaders from around the world joined Germans in bidding farewell today to Willy Brandt, eulogizing the former West German Chancellor as a pragmatic idealist whose visionary policies helped change the face of Europe.
"The life of a great man has ended," said President Richard von Weizsacker in a speech before Mr.
Brandt's flag-draped coffin.
"He embodied an era. He reconciled Germans with themselves. He changed Germans' relationship to the world, and the world's relationship to Germany. By doing so, he shaped the history of our century."


High School Football Report
C.H.S.F.L.
OFFENSIVE FIREPOWER: Chris Mayo rushed for three touchdowns and 116 yards on 9 carries as MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL (4-1) overpowered STEPINAC (0-5), 46-8.
The Mounties' specialty teams blocked a punt and returned one for a touchdown.
Mount St.
Michael's running backs rushed for 356 yards on 34 carriers.
Long Island POWERHOUSE OFFENSES: All-county runner Brian Barlitz (27 carries for 255 yards) rushed for two touchdowns and Jamie Lynch (3 of 7 for 89 yards) threw for two others as ISLIP (3-1) rolled over WESTHAMPTON (2-2), 28-6.
Pat Hack (9 tackles, 3 sacks) led the Buccaneers' defense.
Westhampton's all-purpose back, Brad McGill, totaled 274 yards of offense and recorded 9 tackles and one sack while playing defensive end.  . . .
Peter Murphy (11 carries for 150 yards) scored four times as GARDEN CITY (4-0) trounced HEWLETT (3-1), 35-0.
Murphy scored on rushes of 18, 26, 59 and 21 yards.
The Trojans' defense, led by Matt Karwelies (three sacks), held Hewlett's offense to minus 5 yards.
It was Garden City's 24th consecutive victory, one shy of Nassau County's consecutive victory mark. . . .
Larry Watts (6 of 15 for 184 yards) threw for three touchdowns and Kalyn Jones rushed for three others as HEMPSTEAD (3-1) routed EAST MEADOW (1-3), 36-0. . . .
Anthony Picone rushed for two touchdowns on 19 carries for 192 yards as LYNBROOK (4-0) crushed LEVITTOWN (2-2), 26-7.


Carol Chickering, Mark Bleeke
Carol Sladen Chickering, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Chickering of Birmingham, Mich., was married yesterday to Mark Wilfred Bleeke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Bleeke of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.


The Advantages of Having the Store Cut Plywood
Plywood is often better than solid lumber for repairs and improvements, because it is generally less expensive, stronger and requires less time and labor.
But for many amateurs the difficulty of choosing and transporting plywood, and of cutting it with ordinary tools outweighs its advantages.
When selecting plywood, be aware of its different grades.
Printed guides detailing the characteristics of each grade and how to read the grading stamps on all plywood sheets are usually available where plywood is sold.
But because most dealers stock just a few grades, discussing your project with the store is generally the fastest way to buy suitable plywood.


Unexpected Finds; Italy
LIKE ALMOST EVeryone else in the world, the people of Palermo, Sicily, are confronting the 90's with considerably less money in their pockets.
But they may be eating better.
Some of the overpriced restaurants are closing, and the caviar and smoked salmon that dominated menus during the 80's are losing ground to the cheaper local ingredients on which Sicily's glorious tradition of good food is founded.
Given this trend toward culinary austerity, it was pleasing but not altogether startling to discover Macco, a trattoria that opened about a year ago at 85 Via Benedetto Gravina, just a few blocks from the central Piazza Politeama.
The choice of name is revealing: macco is a dish as old as the Roman Empire, a puree of dried fava beans that kept the Sicilian peasantry alive for centuries.


It's as Rare as an Eagle: B.C. Conquers Penn State
Penn State's hopes for a national championship, severely punctured by Miami last week, were extinguished by a revved-up Boston College team this afternoon as the undefeated Eagles handed the Lions a 35-32 defeat at Beaver Stadium.
The Boston College victory, in the finale of a series that began in 1949, marked the first time in 10 attempts that the Eagles had defeated Penn State here.
In addition, it was only the second victory by Boston College in the 21 games between the schools.


Is Schrager Heading South?
Arata Isozaki, the architect who designed the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and the Guggenheim's new downtown branch, is now drawing up plans for a residential hotel in South Miami Beach.
"It's the only piece of property that's directly on the Ocean in the Art Deco district," said one of the hotel's investors, Peter Brant, a newsprint manufacturer and the owner of Interview magazine.
"It's very sympathetic with the area's architecture. It has kind of a 50's look to it, as well. There will be a swimming pool on the roof.


From Heydays to Gray Days
All of a sudden, tennis, the sport lately preoccupied with raiding cradles in search of its next superstars, is taking its cue from golf and shining a trendy spotlight on the geriatric generation.
"People are joking that professional tennis is now a cradle to grave enterprise," said Mark Miles, head of the ATP Tour, "but it's actually kind of true."


No Cure for Denis Leary
Denis Leary's muse is the television set.
It sings to him.
On a late Friday afternoon, that lazy time of the day and week when, to him as a teen-ager, it had seemed there was nothing in the world better to do than sit and watch television, Mr.
Leary, now twice that age, was doing just that.
He lounged on a sofa, wearing a dark green rugby-cut shirt and black jeans, a Marlboro 100 fired up in the ashtray in front of him.
His good buddy, a lanky guitarist by the name of Adam Roth, lounged next to him.
Both men are in their mid-30's, but their humor is exquisitely juvenile.
Like a cathode-zonked, punk-rock-educated Laurel and Hardy, the pair processed images off the screen into a dry, obnoxious running commentary.
Mr.
Roth, who manned the remote control, zapped the set to MTV.
A video by the triple-million-selling Seattle grunge band Pearl Jam came on.
"I'm not crazy about Pearl Jam," Mr.
Roth complained.
"They don't have any melodies."


Jann Stanley, Peter Moorhead
Jann Stanley and Peter Parke Custis Moorhead were married in White Plains yesterday.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard performed the ceremony at the Community Unitarian Church.
Mrs.
Moorhead, 29 years old, is the director of business and legal affairs at Winterland Productions, a concert merchandising company in San Francisco.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from Columbia University.


Teacher Recovering From Gunshot Wound
A first-year teacher who was shot on Friday said yesterday that she believed violence was widespread in some New York City schools but that she never imagined it could take place in her Brooklyn high school.
Speaking from her bed at Brookdale Hospital, Barbara Mendez, 23 years old, said she had been excited about starting as a machine-shop teacher at Transit Technical High School in East New York.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 4 about Trento, Italy, referred incorrectly to two restaurants.
Osteria a Le Due Spade offers a meal that stresses seasonal vegetables, but not a vegetarian meal, and Ca' dei Mercanti's five dining rooms have differing decors, but not differing menus.


Catharina Tao, Eric Milostan
Catharina Tao, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chia-Hwa Tao of Plainsboro, N.J., was married yesterday to Eric Russell Milostan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Milostan of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
John A. Kamas officiated at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Milostan is an associate vice president of Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and has an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Filming in Hollywood North. Way North.
In Los Angeles, says Stephanie Kerley, a Hollywood-based costume designer, she can drop garments off at the dry cleaners at 3 A.M. and retrieve them by 7 A.M.
Here on location, in this small town in the stark and sparsely populated corner of Vermont known as the Northeast Kingdom, there are no all-night cleaners.
There are no color Xerox machines, either, a lack that bedevils the production designer, David Wasco.
"In fact," he says, "there's almost no Xeroxing at all." What's more, fax machines are at a premium.
Not even the movie's director has a car phone, because the technology doesn't work here in the mountains.
And the actor Rip Torn, foraging for a meal one night, landed at Pizza Hut, where he was told ("and they sounded proud of it") they don't use garlic.


Mutual Funds; Risks of Using Levers to Lift Yields
To satisfy yield-starved investors, more and more closed-end bond funds are essentially reinvesting borrowed money to squeeze out a higher return.
Such leverage works fine at times like these -- when interest rates are falling and there's a yawning gap between short- and long-term rates -- and can mean perhaps four or five extra percentage points in a fund's yield.
But investors may be in for a nasty shock when rates finally kick up.


Terreri Has Banner Night In Shutting Out the Flyers
The Devils never allowed any second chances to Eric Lindros and the Flyers in front of Chris Terreri tonight as they scored a 2-0 victory that avenged an earlier loss in Philadelphia.
"It makes it easy when the team clears things up in front and you don't have to worry about rebounds," said Terreri.
"We just played a solid defensive game."


SURFACING
SYMBOL --
Saxophone pin:
to wear on a lapel to indicate support for Gov. Bill Clinton.  HOME --
Microwave clothes dryer:
Scientists in California are producing prototypes especially good for delicate fabrics.
FITNESS --
Running shoes with taillights:
Colored heel lights flash when you hit the ground, by L.A. Gear.  DRINK --
Beer-of-the-month club:
To sample the output of various microbreweries, call (800) 854-BEER. WORD --
"Glocalize":
When Japanese managers try to blend Japanese and American management philosophies at their plants in the United States.


Georgia Has Baseball, Baseball on Its Mind
The accents are, well, kind of funny to Northern ears, car bumpers are adorned with decals of a flag that is not the ol' Red, White and Blue, and baseball has traditionally taken a back seat to the real sport of choice.
But never fear.
Atlanta, about to play host to its second World Series in two years, has adjusted well.


Guatemalan Indian Wins Nobel Peace Prize


Redford Lands the Big One
Here are two things I never thought I'd say: I like a movie about fly fishing, and Robert Redford has directed one of the most ambitious, accomplished films of the year.
"A River Runs Through It," Mr.
Redford's beautiful and deeply felt new movie, puts him in an entirely new category as a film maker.
The earlier films he directed, "Ordinary People" (1980) and "The Milagro Beanfield War" (1988), were competent but never hinted that there was a genuine artistic vision behind them.
Now they seem like apprentice work for "A River Runs Through It," a film whose subtlety and grace disguise the fact that this is an artistically risky project.


Not Leader of All Zulus
To the Editor:
In "Pique and Prejudice in South Africa" (editorial, Sept. 30), you misidentify Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi as "leader of South Africa's seven million Zulus." He is not.


Blue Jays Give the Braves a Taste of Their Own Medicine
Francisco Cabrera, meet Ed Sprague.
Cabrera was the Atlanta Braves' unexpected young hero in their stunning seventh-game victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates that catapulted them into the World Series.
Sprague became Toronto's unexpected young hero tonight when he slugged a two-run home run against Jeff Reardon in the ninth inning.


Serbs' Heavy New Artillery Attack Deprives Sarajevo of Its Flour Mill
Sarajevo appeared to have lost the use of its only flour mill today after heavy artillery attacks, a potentially serious blow to a city where many of the 400,000 residents have survived for months on a diet consisting mostly of bread and pasta.
A huge yellow cloud -- presumably grain and flour -- burst from the mill at midmorning, after Serbian tank, anti-aircraft and artillery guns opened fire at targets across the city.
Officials at the mill said that essential machinery and a number of silos had been destroyed, and that supplies for the city's last major bakery would be exhausted within 36 hours.


Ms. Schneider, Mr. Schmidt
Jennifer Schneider, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Schneider of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Mill Valley, Calif., to Christopher Schmidt, the son of Harold Schmidt of Tiburon, Calif., and Maureen Overton of Hemet, Calif.
Rabbi Natan Segal performed the ceremony at the Mountain Home Inn.
Mrs.
Schmidt, 29 years old, graduated from Oberlin College.
Her father operates a public relations company in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Rona Schneider, edits Imprint, the journal of the American Historical Print Collectors Society.


Sports of The Times: World Series; Some Hits and Runs, But Short on Sleep
DADDY, Daddy, who won the World Series game last night?"
"I don't know, kids, I can't stay awake that late, either."


Changes at the Top Of 2 Small Agencies
Two small, creatively focused New York agencies, Ahern &amp; Heussner and Mad Dogs and Englishmen, are making changes involving their top executives.
Ahern &amp; Heussner is being renamed Ahern New York since the departure of George Heussner, executive vice president and creative director, who was bought out by Paul Ahern, the shop's president.


INSIDE
Murder's Younger Face
A study finds a huge increase in the number of youths charged in homicide cases, and suggests a new epidemic of murder is ahead.
Page A8.
Politics and Breast Cancer


Guy Named Mo Helps the Redskins Go
The Philadelphia Eagles stormed into R.F.K.
Stadium today with the league's most ferocious defense, but the Washington Redskins hit 'em high and hit 'em low.
And one of the Redskins' biggest hitters was a guy named Mo.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.89 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.02 percent.


Aqua Buoy Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Penn State Falls to 5th Spot in 'Big East'
If Penn State were a member of the Big East Conference, rather than a team joining the Big Ten next season, the Nittany Lions would have a 2-2 league record and be tied for fifth place with Virginia Tech.
There can be some satisfaction in that fantasy for old rivals of Penn State, whose intransigence was viewed as delaying the formation of an Eastern football conference.


First Commonwealth reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Magazines' Slump May Be Ending
Even on this island of rosy beaches and brilliant bougainvillea, more than 700 magazine executives attending the American Magazine Conference are finding their greatest pleasure in signs that one of the most dismal periods in magazine publishing may finally be coming to an end.
Circulation is strong.
Advertising pages have exceeded last year's levels every month since January.
And sudden announcements about magazine deaths have dropped sharply.


Seeds of Murder Epidemic: Teen-Age Boys With Guns
A new study has found that while the number of adults arrested for murder has declined since 1985, there has been a stunning increase in the number of boys under 18 charged with homicide.
"Murder is plunging to a much younger age group," said James Alan Fox, dean of Northeastern University's College of Criminal Justice and a co-author of the report.
"What is so dangerous about this is that a 15-year-old with a gun in his hand is a much more volatile individual than a 40-year-old or even an 18-year-old," Mr.
Fox said.


Giants Point Fingers, Right at Themselves
He is getting older by the week, sometimes slower with each play.
Lawrence Taylor always seemed to be catching up today, chasing someone from behind, climbing back to his feet.
There are fewer and fewer big plays left in him.
Taylor knows it, and so he didn't point an accusing finger late today, even though it would have been appropriate and understandable.
He just pointed at himself.


It's a Bird! It's a Plane! No, It's an Expensive Hobby.


Horton Interception Puts Cowboys on Top
Cowboys 17, Chiefs 10
IRVING, Tex., Oct. 18 (AP) -- Safety Ray Horton was demoted but not disheartened.
It's a good thing, because his interception today put the Dallas Cowboys back into the division lead.
Horton's pickoff with 3 minutes 27 seconds left in the game helped Dallas stopped a late Kansas City threat and preserved a 17-10 victory over the Chiefs.


Environment One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elizabeth L. Pugh, Steven Gortmaker
Dr.
Elizabeth Louise Pugh, a psychiatrist in Cambridge, Mass., was married there yesterday to Steven Lawrence Gortmaker, a senior lecturer at the Harvard School of Public Health.
The Rev.
Preston B. Hannibal performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Memorial Church on the campus of Harvard University.
Mrs.
Gortmaker, 38 years old, is also a staff psychiatrist at Tewksbury (Mass.) Hospital.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund W. Pugh Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of Avon Products in New York.


Mubarak Asks Calm After Quake Victims Riot
President Hosni Mubarak called for calm and trust in the Government today after crowds left homeless by the earthquake last Monday rioted to protest a lack of aid.
"We should be patient," the President said.
"Marches and loud voices will not prevent us from proceeding along the road drawn by the state to solve the problem."


Link Weighed in Attacks at 2 Queens Homes
Six to eight men wearing baseball caps identifying them as Federal drug agents invaded a home in Queens on Saturday night, beat three women, shot a man in the leg and sexually abused an 11-year-old girl before fleeing with cash and jewelry, the police said yesterday.
Investigators were trying to determine whether the incident was related to a similar attack that took place several hours later, when four men wearing unmarked baseball caps with bandannas tied over their faces entered another home in a Queens neighborhood about five miles away.
In that incident, the intruders shot a man in the leg and sexually abused his wife and their 10-year-old daughter.
The men escaped with jewelry and $5,000 in cash.


FMS Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jean Hua, W. M. Buchband
Jean Hua, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven C. S. Hua of Mountainside, N.J., was married yesterday in Basking Ridge, N.J., to William Mark Buchband, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Peter Buchband of Glen Head, L.I.
Judge Stephen A. Stripp of the United States Bankruptcy Court for New Jersey performed the ceremony at the Basking Ridge Country Club.
Mrs.
Buchband, 25 years old, is an associate at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, a New York investment management firm.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.


Toll of the Dead (15 in a Week) Makes Israel Nervous
The Israeli Army sealed off part of the West Bank today as the Government wrestled with a sudden surge of killings that has raised fears of a full-blown revival of the Palestinian uprising.
The past week has been the deadliest in the three months that Yitzhak Rabin has been Prime Minister, handing him the dual task of putting an end to the violence and of cooling Israeli tempers, which have led to revenge attacks against Arabs entering Israel from the occupied territories.


Victoria Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; While Perot's Economic Plans Are Detailed, Other Positions Remain Vague
When it comes to slashing the Federal deficit and spurring the economy, Ross Perot has cooked up a meaty stew of specific tax increases, spending cuts and tax incentives.
But when he moves into the noneconomic areas of public policy, he serves up ideas that might evoke a cry from a past Presidential election: Where's the beef?
As specific and as bold as Mr.
Perot has been on the economy and the deficit in his book, "United We Stand," and in his two 30-minute television presentations, his positions on issues like education, governmental reform, crime and health care have tended to be either vague, not completely worked through, of dubious constitutionality or devoid of any suggestion of how much they might cost or who would pay.
Some issues, including affirmative action and gun control, have not been addressed at all.


Promoting a Line of Jeans And Helping the Homeless
CAN an apparel company lose its blues by urging shoppers to do the same?
In an elaborate new advertising and promotional program with the theme "Lose Your Blues," the Perry Ellis Group will ask consumers to visit department stores in 30 markets across the country and donate clean used pairs of jeans to help clothe the homeless.
For those who find altruism less than its own reward, the donated pants can be exchanged for free T-shirts (while, as the saying goes, supplies last).


CHRONICLE
People who pass by the windows at Barneys New York are looking at much more than clothes these days: many are trying to identify the 100 or so caricatures now lining the walls of the storefront.
Day and night, people cluster around the windows, staring in and yelling out things like, "That's Queen Elizabeth -- I just know it!"


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected for the week beginning today:
Acordia Inc., Indianapolis, an initial public offering of 4.8 million common shares, with 3.8 million in the U.S. and Canada.
First Boston Corp.
Alliance Worldwide Dollar Government Fund, 4 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.


Effective Lobbying Increases U.S. Funds for Breast Cancer Research
A combination of effective lobbying and growing Congressional interest in issues of special concern to women has resulted in the most generous Federal financing yet for research into breast cancer.
Before Congress adjourned two weeks ago, it approved a budget of more than $400 million for breast cancer research for the fiscal year that began in October.
This is an almost threefold increase from the $158 million budgeted last year for the disease, which strikes one in every eight American women and kills 46,000 a year.
Record Number of Proposals
Breast cancer research will receive more Federal funds than research into any other kind of cancer; in second place is prostate cancer research, at $39 million.
By comparison, the Federal budget for AIDS research is about $1.2 billion in 1993.
Congress also adopted new standards for mammography, a procedure for detecting tumors in the breast.


Corby Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hancock Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comptronix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


State Street Boston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Net Worth Of Senator At $60,000
While questions about Alfonse M. D'Amato's aggressive -- and highly successful -- political fund-raising have followed him throughout his Senate career, his personal finances appear almost routine.
With a reported net worth of about $60,000 and two home mortgages, he is among neither the richest nor the poorest members of Congress.
A law-school graduate, Mr.
D'Amato has been on government payrolls for his entire adult life.
With the help of the Nassau County Republican machine, he rose from clerk in the County Attorney's office to presiding Supervisor in the Town of Hempstead before he was elected to the Senate in 1980.


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST NEW YORK IS BACK ON TV, IN SPIRIT ANYWAY
What's now hot on television are the gritty streets and the grittier characters of New York City.
Never before have so many series been set in New York in a single season -- but with a twist.
Most of these shows with New York settings are actually filmed on Los Angeles studio lots because New York (which really means Manhattan to TV executives) is considered simply too expensive.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


5 Years After Crash, A Different Market
Five years ago today, the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 508 points, or 22.6 percent, leaving panic and disorder in its wake.
Since then, the face of Wall Street has been indelibly changed.
Brokerage firms have collapsed; 50,000 securities industry workers have lost their jobs, and the era of easy confidence in the market died.


Incremental Differences Of Abrams and D'Amato
IF Robert Abrams beats Alfonse M. D'Amato on Nov. 3, it will be by two inches.
All the debate over the debates, the disparities in fund-raising and ideology and the questions of ethics notwithstanding, one calculation is likely to determine the outcome of the race for United States Senator from New York: How far Mr.
Abrams's name is from Bill Clinton's on the ballot.


Banknorth Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Pop
Everything about Alison Kraus's show at the Bottom Line on Wednesday night was delicate.
Ms.
Kraus, a championship fiddler who mixes bluegrass and folk, sings with a tiny, almost birdlike voice.
Her group, Union Station, backed her on mandolin, banjo, guitar and bass, moving slowly and gracefully through the arrangements as if scared of breaking something.
Ms.
Kraus is a neotraditionalist, but unlike earlier bluegrass neotraditionalists, she veers away from instrumental virtuosity, and jazz, usually the hidden agenda in bluegrass neotrads, never showed up.
Instead she patched together a style that mixed bluegrass and folk and a bit of country.
And like a good traditionalist, she and the band sang songs that they probably had no personal experience with.
Whether it was about doing time in jail, or looking out of boxcar doors, she was mining romantic American rural conceits that, as the success of modern country singers like Garth Brooks and Mary-Chapin Carpenter reflect, are now no longer either essential or shared.


Kinark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BancTec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Stalled world trade talks could move ahead "in a matter of days," trade ministers said after a meeting in Ontario.
They provided no details but said they thought a compromise in the dispute over farm subsidies would come when U.S.
Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan and his European counterpart, Ray MacSharry, meet this week.  [ Page D1. ]
The joke making the rounds among Chinese intellectuals is this: "Under the leadership of the Communist Party, we're advancing from socialism to capitalism." Yet Deng Xiaoping, the 88-year-old senior leader, has no intention of creating the kind of democratic capitalist society that exists in the West.  [ A1. ]


Disney Animation Art Fetches High Prices
Animation art from the Walt Disney movie "Beauty and the Beast" was auctioned on Saturday in Los Angeles for a total of $1.25 million, almost double the presale expectations of the auctioneer, Sotheby's of New York.
Although Sotheby's advertised the sale by the studio as "the only opportunity collectors will have to buy production artwork," half of each piece of animation art auctioned was not used to make the movie.
The film was animated by computer.


Mr. Perot Presents Some Beef
Ross Perot's advertising blitz over the weekend was cause for admiration, regret and frustration.
Admiration because he gave viewers a high-minded seminar on America's fiscal problems, and because he offered a serious and mostly honest program to address those problems.
Regret because Mr.
Perot's ideas would surely have challenged his opponents and elevated the tone of the campaign -- if only he had presented them earlier and not cravenly quit the race in July when his candidacy had credibility.


ANB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Health Plan Covers All Americans
To the Editor:
"The Bush-Clinton Health Reform" (editorial, Oct. 10) finally recognizes that Gov.
Bill Clinton has long embraced the principle of competition in delivery of health care.
But you continue to ignore enormous differences between the reform proposal advanced by Governor Clinton and that of President Bush.


Bad Back? Davis Is Remedy
When Pat Riley talks about Hubert Davis, he speaks with restraint.
Davis is a rookie.
Coaches are always wary of rookies.
Even talented rookies like Davis can look better than they really are, especially during the National Basketball Association's exhibition season.
But Riley likes what he sees, so far.
Everyone knew that the Knicks' 6-foot-5-inch rookie guard from North Carolina could shoot.
But Davis has shown he can handle the ball.
And he has shown that while he is a nice guy off the court, he will not back down while he is on it.


X-Rite Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vice-Presidential Candidates Remember the Past and Salute the Future


Sandra Stone, Christopher Haas
Sandra Ann Stone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Stone of Fort Lee, N.J., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Christopher James Haas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert D. Haas of Virginia Beach, Va.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House.
Mrs.
Haas, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a J.D. from the New York Law School.
Her father is a special limited partner at Cowen &amp; Company, a New York investment bank.


Dance in Review
'Night Journey'
Martha Graham Dance Company  City Center
"Night Journey," Martha Graham's 1947 re-interpretation of the story of Oedipus and Jocasta, not only has some of the greatest choreography she ever produced but also serves as a model of artistic collaboration.


D.R. Horton reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fall Is in the Air, Finally


All Is Forgiven as Harbaugh Has a Career Day for Bears
Bears 31, Bucs 14
CHICAGO (AP) -- Chicago Coach Mike Ditka let Jim Harbaugh go out and play today, and his quarterback responded by passing for a career-high 304 yards in the Bears' 31-14 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The game's highlight was Harbaugh's 83-yard touchdown pass to Anthony Morgan in the third quarter.


Drew Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


O'Connor Is Back on the Job After Illness


WORLD SERIES: GAME 2
GAME 2 Toronto . . . 5 Atlanta . . . 4 SportsMonday, Page C1.


First Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; High-Stakes Debate on the Future of I.B.M.
On Wall Street, I.B.M. isn't just a company -- it's a religion with at least two rival theologies.
One holds that the company is trapped in a cycle of inevitable decline, the other that I.B.M. is going through a wrenching transition but retains enormous strengths and the ability to come back.
The two views on the International Business Machines Corporation are so fervently held partly because the two camps are at odds not only about a pillar of corporate America, but also about the future of the computer industry and about a giant company's ability to change its culture and habits.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Going Their Own Way, Candidates Ignore Bush
More than at any time since 1964, Republican candidates across the nation are putting distance between themselves and their party's Presidential ticket.
They usually explain their failure to mention President Bush, appear with him, or use his picture in their fliers as something dictated by their discerning constituents, who differentiate between Presidential and other races and want the candidates to campaign on their own.
But at bottom there is a basic political fear of going down with Mr.
Bush as Republicans did 28 years ago with Barry Goldwater and as Democrats did with Jimmy Carter in 1980.


WORLD SERIES: Analysis; Cone Does His Best Work With Bat
Perhaps Toronto was getting used to not having the first half of its one-two pitching punch land on target in the post-season.
But then David Cone followed up Jack Morris's rocky World Series outing with a shaky performance of his own tonight in Game 2 against Atlanta.
If Ed Sprague had not provided some home-run heroics, Toronto would be in a very big hole in this Series, largely because the Blue Jays' vaunted rotation suddenly looks so vulnerable.
Cone could not do what he managed to do in the American League playoffs, when he stopped the bleeding immediately in wake of a Morris loss in Game 1 against Oakland.
Because he could not, his team nearly fell back two games to none in the Series.
When Sprague hit a two-run pinch-hit homer in the top of the ninth against Atlanta reliever Jeff Reardon, Cone was spared defeat by way of a 5-4 Toronto victory.


Calvin Klein Buys Ad in Gay Magazine
Calvin Klein Inc., in its initial foray into advertising in media aimed at homosexuals, has bought a full-page advertisement in the winter issue of Out magazine, scheduled for publication on Dec. 1.
Neil Kraft, Klein's senior vice president and director of advertising and creative services in New York, said the ad would be one in the company's current series for Calvin Klein jeans and underwear, which present the young rap singer Marky Mark in bare-chested poses.


For Baseball, the Worst of Times May Come After the Best of Seven
October heroics have a way of wiping from memory even the most rancorous disputes that can tarnish a baseball season.
But this year more than most, public and private battles over such issues as Japanese ownership, the powers of the commissioner, National League realignment and escalating economic problems have detracted from developments on the field.
Baseball reached the showcase part of its calendar with the start of the World Series on Saturday night in Atlanta.
But once the Braves and the Toronto Blue Jays conclude the Series in the next week, the business side of baseball's dual personality will again take the forefront, coloring the public image of the game and perhaps altering significantly the way it is administered.


Rangers Shuffle And Still Struggle
If this was not major seismic activity, it was a distinct shift in the fault lines.
Roger Neilson dressed Randy Gilhen and Tie Domi, two of his mixers-and-bangers, for the first time this season.
The Ranger coach moved Phil Bourque to defense, pairing him with Jay Wells to shake the lethargy out of his early-season lineup.


Economic Memo; Administration Is Playing Blame Game on Recession
In unceremoniously announcing last week that it would dump its three top economic policy makers, the White House tried to lay the blame for the worst four years of growth since the Great Depression on the President's lieutenants.
But economists, Democratic and Republican, liberal and conservative, pin a large chunk of responsibility for the prolonged slump on President Bush and on another set of advisers, his political team, for ducking the tough, politically unpopular decisions that would help restore the economy's health.


Clinton Health Plan Covers All Americans; Outcome Analysis
To the Editor:
Unlike any other line item on the corporate (or Federal) budget, health care is an unknown for even the most sophisticated buyer.
We just do not know what we get for our $800 billion.
We do know we spend more than any other country for health care, yet lag behind many industrialized countries in many measures of the health of our people.
Any and all attempts at cost control will be futile until and unless we have some idea what treatments work for what diagnoses.


Game 21
Here are the moves and two positions from Game 21 of the match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky.
The game was completed too late for some editions yesterday.
SICILIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Fischer
Spassky
1
e4
c5
2
Nf3
Nc6
3
d4
cd
4
Nd4
e6
5
Nb5
d6
6
c4
Nf6
7
N5c3
Be7
8
g3
O-O
9
Bg2
a6
10
O-O
Rb8
11
Na3
Qc7
12
Be3
Bd7
13
Rc1
Ne5
14
h3
Rfc8
15
f4
Ng6
16
Qd2
Be8
17
Rfd1
b6
18
Qf2
h6
19
Kh2
Qa7
20
Qe2
Qc7
21
Bf3
Bc6
22
Nab1
Qb7
23
Nd2
b5
24
cb
ab
25
b4
Qa8
26
Rc2
d5
27
e5
Ne4
28
Be4
de
29
Bc5
Bc5
30
bc
Rd8
31
Re1
Ne7
32
Nce4
Nf5
33
Nb3
Nd4
34
Nd4
Rd4
35
Nd6
Qa4
36
f5
Ra8
37
Rb2
Qa3
38
fe
fe
39
Nb5
Bb5
40
Qb5
Rd3
41
Rg2
Qc3
42
Ree2
Ra3
43
Rc2
Qe5
44
Rce2
Re3
45
Re3
Re3
46
a4
Rc3
47
c6
Qd6
48
c7
Rc7
49
Qb8
Kh7
50
a5
h5
51
h4
Qc5
52
a6
Rf7
53
Qb1
Kh6
54
Qa2
Re7
55
Qd2
Kg6
56
Re2
Kh7
57
Qc2
Qc2
58
Rc2
Kg6
59
Ra2
Ra7
60
Ra5
e5
61
Kg2
Kf6
62
Kf2
Ke6
63
Ke3
Kf5
64
Kf3
g6
65
Ra3
g5
66
hg
Kg5
67
Ke4
Resigns


World Economies


Judith Karlen, Julius Bram
Judith Ann Karlen and Julius Bram were married yesterday in Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Michael Abraham performed the ceremony at Embassy Hall, a catering hall.
Mrs.
Bram, 52 years old, is a corporate recruiter with Success Unlimited in Westport.
She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Gerald Karlen of Hollywood, Fla., and the late Esther Karlen.


The Talk of Hollywood; Agents in Hollywood Toast a Merger And Hope for the Best
By 9:45 this morning, an unusual parade of Land Rovers, BMW's, Mercedeses and Jaguars was shattering the Sunday silence on El Camino Drive in Beverly Hills.
Agents -- dozens and dozens of them -- were parking in and around a black marble-and-glass fortress, the William Morris Agency.


Guatemalan to Fight On With Nobel as Trumpet
All of the dancing was over and most of the meetings with diplomats; the telephone had stopped ringing from places like London and Boston and Buenos Aires -- for the first moment, anyway, since Rigoberta Menchu won the Nobel Peace Prize.
But as the 33-year-old Quiche Indian woman sat in a quiet patio today, secluded from the chatter of the Indian widows whose modest center in the Guatemalan capital had become her temporary home, she was concerned that the attention might not last.
"Guatemala has been very much silenced," she said.
"All around the world."


Review/Music; The Man Who Moved Rock Into a New Era
It looked like a benefit concert, kin to Live Aid or Farm Aid.
For nearly four hours on Friday night at Madison Square Garden, stars of various magnitudes played one or two songs each before an audience of 18,200 people, whose tickets had cost $80 or $150.
Television cameras swooped on cranes over the stage for a telecast in 68 countries, along with pay-per-view cable outlets in the United States, while rock radio stations across America broadcast the music. (The pay-per-view telecast is to be repeated tomorrow night at 9 P.M.)
In fact, Columbia Records Celebrates the Music of Bob Dylan (or "Bobfest," as Neil Young called it during the show) was only a benefit for its producers, World Concert Network, and its performers.
But by the end of the show, when Mr.
Dylan himself arrived on stage -- and sang, in "It's Alright Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)," "Money doesn't talk, it swears" -- Bobfest had reminded a good part of the world how many remarkable songs and strategies Mr.
Dylan had contributed to rock.


Essay; The Patsy Prosecutor
In a last-ditch maneuver to block an independent investigation into Iraqgate, Attorney General William Barr has hired a so-called "special" counsel.
But the man lending his good reputation to this subterfuge can be fired by the very Attorney General he is supposed to investigate.
Why does the Coverup-General resist independent investigation?
Because he knows where it may lead: to Dick Thornburgh, James Baker, Clayton Yeutter, Brent Scowcroft and himself.
He vainly hopes to be able to head it off, or at least be able to use the threat of firing to negotiate a deal.


WORLD SERIES: Notebook; Flag, If Not Jays, Was Upended
Major league baseball paid tribute to Canada before Game 2 of the World Series tonight, but Canadians were not exactly thrilled.
Their flag was displayed upside down.
The faux pas occurred when a United States Marine color guard from Atlanta presented the colors just a few yards from baseball officials gathered in the ground-level field box.


Russians to Release A Million Recordings In Broadcast Archive
An archive of more than a million audio and video recordings, including concert and radio performances by many of the former Soviet Union's most renowned musicians and by Western artists and ensembles who toured there, is to be made available for the first time to American, European and Asian recording companies.
The tapes are part of the library of Ostankino, the Russian State Television and Radio Company, formerly known as Gosteleradio.
Except for a few recordings that were released by the state-run Melodiya record label and licensed abroad, the recordings have never been heard in the West.
The library offers a detailed look at the history of the country's musical life from the 1930's to the present.
Among the tapes are recordings of Dmitri Shostakovich playing his own piano music; at least 60 hours of performances by Mstislav Rostropovich, both as a cellist and as a conductor, and hundreds of hours of performances by the pianists Emil Gilels, Sviatoslav Richter and Lazar Berman; the violinists David Oistrakh, Leonid Kogan and Gidon Kremer, and the conductors Yevgeny Svetlanov, Gennady Rozhdestvensky, Yuri Temirkanov, Kirill Kondrashin and Rudolf Barshai.


A Leaner but Not So Mean Wall St.
Take a short stroll down Wall Street and the differences are as tangible as the cold, hard facade of the New York Stock Exchange: Less crowded.
Less frantic.
And, somehow, much more under control.
Since that Monday five years ago today, when the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 508 points, or 22.6 percent, the face of Wall Street has been indelibly changed.
Much of the jolting upheaval brought on by the crash has been exceedingly painful: 50,000 securities industry workers lost their jobs, brokerage firms collapsed and the era of easy confidence in the market died.


Canonie Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


At the Debates, the Candidates Aren't the Only Ones With Frayed Nerves
Although the candidates' performances are the ones most scrutinized in the political debates, perhaps the toughest job has been the moderator's.
For the people who presided at the first three debates, the experience has been a bit like pitching in the World Series: intense and somewhat intimidating.
"Fun is not a word that leaps to mind," said Jim Lehrer, co-anchor of the PBS "MacNeil/Lehrer News hour." Mr.
Lehrer moderated the first Presidential debate, which used the traditional news conference format.
He will fill the same role tonight at 7 in East Lansing, Mich., with a format that will also include a freer interchange among the candidates.


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Vendors Shouldn't Have Any Sidewalk Privileges
To the Editor:
The congestion created by sidewalk vending of printed materials on major New York City thoroughfares, which you discuss in "Bookstores' Growing Rival: Bargains on the Curb" (The Media Business, Oct. 5), contributes to a sense of disorder that discourages retail trade and tourism, and encourages corporate flight.


Clinton Health Plan Covers All Americans; Not Like Appliances
To the Editor:
You have repeatedly proclaimed managed competition the panacea of America's health care problems, as in "Unhealthy Price Controls" (editorial, Sept. 26).
Unfortunately, the needs of many patients cannot be met under a managed competition scenario.
People are not like small appliances, able to be shifted from one repairman to another without appreciable harm or inconvenience.


D'Amato Reiterates Pledge Not to Run for Office Again
Yesterday, a day after declaring that his current re-election campaign would be his last bid for public office, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said that he would not run again because he was tired of people ascribing "petty partisan political motives" to his actions.
But some of his own Republican supporters said they thought Mr.
D'Amato was mostly sick of having his ethics questioned.


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mark Hawkins, 82, Humorist-Essayist Of the Human Race
Mark F. Hawkins, a humorist whose essays on human foibles spanned 50 years, died on Oct. 7 at the California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 82 years old and lived in San Francisco.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Irwin Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grand Forks Journal; Sect That Fled Czarist Russia Looks Homeward
The Hoodikoff family was at lunch after the Sunday prayer meeting at the Doukhobor community center in this town surrounded by crags of the Cascade Mountains 450 miles east of Vancouver.
Vassily Hoodikoff, 89 years old, born in Yakutsk, Siberia, while his parents were in exile under Czar Nicholas II, sat with his wife, Nastya, their son, Walter, his wife, Nina, a grandchild, Natalie Hoodikoff Strukoff, and her husband, Paul Strukoff.


Valero Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Craftmade International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Planters Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Could it be that Dr.
RUTH WESTHEIMER, the psychotherapist who has made her name dispensing advice on sex, is acquiring a new persona?
Yes indeed, she said the other day, talking about herself in the third person.
"She has been bitten by a bug and has a passion in her belly about doing documentaries."
Dr.
Ruth, as she is known, is the producer of a documentary called "Surviving Salvation: The Ethiopian Jewish Family in Transition," that is to be shown on PBS stations on Sunday.


Fruit of the Loom Moves to Burnett
Fruit of the Loom Inc. has dismissed its longtime agency, Grey Advertising Inc. in New York, and moved the estimated $25 million account of its flagship Fruit of the Loom brand to Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, which earlier this year was awarded the assignment to introduce the brand in Mexico.
Among Grey's creations in 42 years on the account were the "Fruit of the Loom guys," actors who appeared in a long-running campaign dressed as the apples, grapes and other fruit in the brand's logo.
The agency also helped develop products like a recently introduced line of ribbed white underwear for men.


Woeful Giants Make Rams Look Tough
Good Giants?
Bad Giants?
How about awful Giants, for they were really awful today in an unexpected 38-17 rout by the Los Angeles Rams.
The Giants' offense accomplished little against the lowest-rated rushing defense in the National Football League, but compared with the defense, the offense looked good.
The defense got no pass rush.
Its tackling was shoddy, a season-long problem.
It made all-Pros out of Jim Everett, the Rams' beleaguered quarterback, and Cleveland Gary, their journeyman runner.


In Northwest, Free-for-All Elections
Near the end of an otherwise ordinary debate here recently, Representative Rod Chandler, the Republican candidate for the open United States Senate seat in Washington, did something extraordinary: He started singing.
"Dang me, dang me, they ought to take a rope and hang me," Mr.
Chandler, a five-term Congressman given to somber statements and cautious policy utterances, started in.
"Hang me from the highest treeeeeeee, woman would you weep for me."


Review/Television; Players, Witting and Not, in a Game of Chance
In the early 1980's, Christopher Hampton was invited by the Mark Taper Forum to write a play having something to do with Los Angeles.
He brought in "Tales From Hollywood," a portrait of exiles from Nazi Germany who ended up in Hollywood in the 1930's and 40's.
That play, judiciously trimmed by 50 minutes to two hours, now serves brilliantly to open -- at 9 tonight on Channel 13 -- a new season of public television's "American Playhouse."
Best known perhaps for his play "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," which became the award-winning film "Dangerous Liaisons," Mr.
Hampton uses "Tales From Hollywood" to explore, at first almost offhandedly, the workings of chance in human events and private lives.
In hindsight, after the true horrors of the Nazi regime are revealed, it will become, as Mr.
Hampton's hero says, "chance in its most brutal guise."


Anna Johnstone, 79, a Designer Of Costumes for Films and Plays
Anna Johnstone Robinson, who designed the costumes for many major films and Broadway shows and was nominated for Academy Awards for "The Godfather" and "Ragtime," died on Friday at the Kimball Farms nursing home in Lenox, Mass.
She was 79 years old and lived in the Bronx and Canaan, N.Y.
She died after a long illness whose nature was not disclosed, a funeral home spokesman said.
Mrs.
Robinson, who worked under her maiden name, Anna Hill Johnstone, designed the costumes for more than 60 films.
Tricks of the Trade
Her movies included "Serpico," "The Wiz," "On the Waterfront," "East of Eden," "America, America," "Prince of the City," "The Verdict," "Running on Empty," "Baby Doll," "Edge of the City," "Dog Day Afternoon" and "A Face in the Crowd."


Student Newspaper Finds Bottom Line Is a Hard One
SADDLED with a $7,700 debt and the weight of a nearly 60-year tradition, the staff of this community's high school newspaper is learning the hard way that even a free press can be expensive.
The Westfield Hi's Eye is one of only a handful of high school newspapers in the country that is published weekly, a distinction compounded by the fact that the paper is entirely student-managed and receives no money from the local school board.


Sports of the Times: World Series; Toronto's Baseball Story And Its New, Wonderful Tale
BABE RUTH hit his first salaried homer there.
Sparky Anderson, Dick Williams, Chuck Dressen and Tony Lazzeri managed there.
Carl Hubbell, Charlie Gehringer, Ralph Kiner and Elston Howard played there.
Jack Kent Cooke had a phone from his owner's box to the dugout there.
The San Francisco Giants almost moved there.
When baseball's National League was organized more than a century ago, its founder, A. G. Spalding, suggested there be a team there.
Tomorrow night, the World Series will resume there.


Amax Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rev. Timothy Sheehan, Ex-U.S. Drug Agent, 53
The Rev.
Timothy G. Sheehan, a Federal drug enforcement agent who became a priest and later managed the finances of the Diocese of Brooklyn, died on Saturday at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 53 years old and lived in the diocesan chancery residence in Brooklyn.
He died of lung cancer, said Msgr. Austin P. Bennett of the Diocese of Brooklyn.


Bell Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters in Business Day on Wednesday about the third-quarter earnings of the Polaroid Corporation misstated the effect of a patent-infringement settlement on Polaroid's results in the corresponding period of 1991.
Excluding the settlement with the Eastman Kodak Company, Polaroid would still have had a profit in the 1991 quarter.


Chinese Party Congress Replaces Nearly Half of Central Committee
The Communist Party replaced nearly half its Central Committee today, dismissing some hard-liners and generally choosing more educated and pragmatic members, as it closed a party congress dedicated to building a market economy.
While the weeklong 14th Communist Party Congress was generally a victory for change-minded leaders, it was not a clean sweep.
Some hard-liners were promoted, and many others managed to keep their jobs.


Integrated Device Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


1st Bancorp (Vincennes, Ind.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bailey Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Constar International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Concord Camera reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sally Ann Mintz and Anthony E. Mann
Sally Ann Mintz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul A. Mintz of Monroe, La., was married there yesterday to Anthony Edward Mann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Mann Jr. of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Rabbi David L. Kline performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Mintz, who is 30 years old, and keeping her name, is a freelance photographer in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the chairman of Sunbelt Manufacturing, a plastics manufacturer in Monroe, and chairman of Strauss Interests, a family-owned investment company there.


Trade Talk Progress Expected
The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, met here today with her counterparts from the European Community, Canada and Japan, then said she expected a breakthrough in stalled world trade talks "in a matter of days."
She and the other ministers offered no specific details to back up their optimism or information on how they might overcome the firm statements by France that it would offer no further compromises to break the stalemate.


Ashe Benefit Raises Money and Laughter
Looking gaunt but graceful, ARTHUR ASHE, the AIDS-stricken tennis legend and one of the founding fathers of the ATP Tour, was honored Saturday night in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., at a gala that also celebrated the 20th anniversary of the men's pro tour.
The event, attended by about 500 people, including some of Ashe's former rivals like ILIE NASTASE, FRED STOLLE, ROD LAVER and KEN ROSEWELL, raised $50,000 for Ashe's Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week:  MONDAY  Dana  Dial REIT Eastern Utilities Goodrich Lilly, Eli Merry Land Southern Co.
Zurn TUESDAY  Alltel American Cyanamid Bearings Black Hills Federal Nat.
Mortgage Fleming Gleason Hawaiian Electric Hexcel  Interpublic K Mart Loews Mellon Scana Scott Paper Southern Indiana Sundstrand Teco Energy Texas Industries Whirlpool WEDNESDAY  Alberto Culver Amcast Amer Business Products Baker Hughes Chaparral Steel Chase Manhattan Cincinnati G.&amp; E. Clorox Clore Crompton &amp; Knowles Dow Jones Fleet Financial Imcera Group Kollmorgen Minnesota P.&amp; L. Oakwood Homes Pacific Gas and Electric Panhandle Eastern Reliance Group  Republic N.Y.
Schwab Sherwin Williams Shopko Stores Zero THURSDAY  Avery Dennison Bay State Gas Delta Air Donnelley Empire District Electric Ethyl First Interstate Handy &amp; Harman  Health Care Property Iowa-Illinois Manor Care Morton International Parker Hannifin Pfizer  Potomac Electric Sequa Sonat Sotheby's Holdings FRIDAY  Ashland Coal Central Louisiana CMS Energy Ferro Harland Harris Nashua Nationwide Health Rohm &amp; Haas Signet Snap-On Tools Univar Uslico Wachovia SUNDAY  Louisiana-Pacific


Jazzing Up Lincoln Center
Jazz is the only musical art form to which the United States can lay exclusive claim, and New York City is its Mecca.
Yet even in New York, jazz has been shunted into bars and music clubs that are inaccessible to families, and to the young.
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts set out to change that last year when it created a jazz department, aiming to make jazz eventually a full partner of the Metropolitan Opera, the New York Philharmonic, the New York City Ballet and the Film Society.


Magazine Ads Push Computer Commercials Out of the Picture
When Apple Computer Inc. ran its eye-popping "1984" commercial introducing the Macintosh during the 1984 Super Bowl, the controversial Chiat/Day ad set off a buying frenzy.
When retail stores opened the next day, $6.5 million worth of Macintoshes were sold within four hours.
But changes in the market in the last several years have sharply altered the way in which personal computers are advertised today.


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Dance in Review
The Martha Graham Dance Company offered a slightly disappointing performance of "Night Journey" on Saturday evening, when three dancers stepped into roles for the first time during the company's weeklong season at City Center.
The dance depicts Jocasta's dying vision of her meeting of Oedipus, whom neither recognizes as her son, and their long, doomed marriage.
"Night Journey" does not look quite like other Graham ventures into mythology.
But Terese Capucilli and Kenneth Topping, who took on the roles of Jocasta and Oedipus, failed to give the piece the Graham feel of something etched in flesh and stone.
Given the challenging task of playing alluring lover to a son, Ms.
Capucilli made Jocasta a chill, lethal figure of a woman, scrambling to her destiny on fast-moving little feet yet an imposing figure of stillness.
Mr.
Topping was a handsome youth who claimed his lover boldly, with just the right appropriative swing of a leg over her reclining body.
But he was almost lyrically light in his portrayal.


Gaston's Move Turns Toronto Right-Side Up
In guiding the Toronto Blue Jays into their first World Series, Cito Gaston had developed a reputation as a patient manager best suited to the American League's designated-hitter philosophy that eliminates much of the strategic moves forced upon National League managers.
But in tonight's duel of pinch-hitters and relief pitchers, Gaston's right move at the right time made the difference: Ed Sprague's two-run ninth-inning homer for a 5-4 victory.


Latest Apple Bridges 2 Worlds
In his obsessive pursuit of a quarry known to pursuers simply as Bob W., the head of Apple Computer's portable computing division once sent a product manager to an industry trade show to surreptitiously videotape competitors' products.
Now, after a year of these and more traditional research methods, Apple believes it has come up with Bob W. -- an abbreviation for the "best of both worlds" computer combining attributes of portable and desktop machines.


Firstbank of Illinois Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Energy Conversion Devices reports earnings for Year to June 30


Jill Freeman, Charles Ward 3d
Jill Barbara Freeman, a daughter of Judith Katz of New York and the late Robert D. Freeman, was married in New York yesterday to Charles E. Ward 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Ward of Portsmouth, R.I.
The Rev.
Richard J. Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Manhattan Penthouse, a catering hall.
Mrs.
Ward, 36 years old, is a vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her stepfather, Alvin Katz, is a principal in the New York design firm of Luth &amp; Katz.
Her mother is an assistant to Lawrence Ratzkin, a graphics designer.


Paving a Long Road to a Fair Trial; Lawyers for the Poor Must Often Defend Themselves, Too
Ingrid Yurchenco was saying how glad she was that she had left the sales tags in the shirt and tie she bought at Kmart the other day.
Her client had made a plea bargain and would not be needing them for a trial, so she got her money back.
Funny story, one of many told over lunch at the Elks Club along with all the other war stories that members of the State Public Defenders Office, who defend indigent criminal defendants, have gathered over the years.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Americans Outdone by the English
Despite Nick Faldo's absence, three English golfers beat a threesome of famous Americans and rode that momentum to victory over Scotland yesterday to claim the Dunhill Cup international championship in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
The English downed the Scots -- Gordon Brand Jr., Colin Montgomerie and Sandy Lyle, who had beaten Australia in the semifinals -- to win the trophy for the second time.
It was the second time Scotland had made the final but it has never won in eight tournaments, all held at St Andrews.
For the Americans, only Tom Kite was a winner for the United States, which lost by 2-1 in the semifinals because David Gilford whipped Davis Love 3d and Steve Richardson edged Fred Couples.
The Americans were favored and disappointed.
"We just didn't play as well as we thought we would," Kite said.
"It just shows that over 18 holes any day, especially when you are the No. 1 seed, people are going to shoot at you." Love, a three-time winner this year on the PGA Tour, birdied the first hole, but struggled to make putts as Richardson swept past him to card a four-under-par 68 and to win by three shots.
Couples, the 1992 Masters champion, surrendered a two-stroke lead over Gilford and even tried a 40-yard putt from well off the 18th green.
Couples lost by a stroke despite shooting his third 70 of the tournament.
Kite, the United States Open champion, managed to beat Jamie Spence by a stroke with a par at the final hole after losing the rest of a four-stroke lead at the 17th. (AP) Huston Rallies: John Huston, who was trailing by three strokes with six holes to play, fired a final-round 10-under-par 62 yesterday to win the Disney Golf Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., with the best 72-hole total on the men's tour in four years.
Mark O'Meara was in second at 225 after posting a 69 yesterday.
Ted Schulz was third at 267 with a 71.
Huston, who plays out of Palm Harbor near Tampa, Fla., finished 26-under par at 262, one off the PGA Tour record, 27-under, established by Ben Hogan in 1945 and matched only once, by Mike Souchak in 1955.
The last player to finish a tournament 26-under was Chip Beck in 1988. (AP)


U.S. Sees Indication Makers of Telescope Hid Signs of Problem
Federal officials say a two-year inquiry has found evidence that the makers of the mirror for the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope hid important clues to the flaw that has crippled the most complex and costly scientific instrument ever put into space.
The makers of the eight-foot mirror deny any wrongdoing, saying the Government was fully informed of all data for judging whether the telescope's main light-gathering mirror had any imperfections.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  CAPITALIST HYBRID FOR CHINA?
Some people in China believe Communism has collapsed, and indeed there is little trace of it in Shanghai's markets.
Still, the nation's top leader may be more inclined to emulate the authoritarian capitalism of Taiwan or South Korea than the democratic capitalism of the West.
A1  The Communist Party replaced nearly half its leaders.
A7  ISRAEL SEALS PART OF WEST BANK  The Israeli Army sealed off part of the West Bank as the Government wrestled with a sudden surge of killings.
Many fear a full-blown revival of the Palestinian uprising.
A3  SARAJEVO LOSES PRECIOUS MILL  The besieged Bosnian capital appears to have lost the use of its only flour mill in artillery attacks.
It could be a serious blow to a city whose residents survive mainly on bread and pasta.
A5  WRESTLING WITH THE SPIRIT  A troubling question faces the Doukhobors of Canada, a pacifist sect whose forebears emigrated from Russia.
A mystic once spoke of a time when they would grow rich abroad, then realize they were losing their faith -- and return home.
A4  GUATEMALA'S OTHER FACE  In the years since her father, mother and brother were killed by security forces and she fled Guatemala, Rigoberta Menchu's life has been a crusade to end the silence about the army's abuses.
The Nobel Prize has brought her cause attention, but she fears it may not last.
A5  A geyser explosion injured scores in Colombia.
A5  Egypt's leader tries to soothe people left homeless by a quake.
A3  The United States says it may pool intelligence work with Russia.
A6  National A8-15, 18  NEW INTEREST IN VOTING  Around the nation, election officials say they are swamped by voter registration forms.
The trend is a sign that Americans have become invigorated by the Presidential race, and particularly by Perot's renewed candidacy.
A1  FINAL PREPARATIONS  As the Presidential candidates prepared for their final debate, Bush's campaign manager predicted a 'tough' Election Day victory and Clinton expressed confidence that he could handle any new attack on his character.
A1  NO COATTAILS EXPECTED  Republican candidates nationwide are distancing themselves from their party's Presidential ticket, to an extent not seen since 1964 and the disastrous race of Barry Goldwater.
Some nominees are even criticizing Bush publicly.
A10  What happens when Perot ventures into the public policy arena.
A11  The candidates' stands on spending for public works.
A12  The Medicaid program struggles in Clinton's own state.
A12  AN INSURANCE LOOPHOLE  Government investigators have documented growing networks of unregulated, offshore companies, often based in the Caribbean, that have sold hundreds of millions of dollars of insurance to Americans.
A1  INQUIRY ON SPACE TELESCOPE  Federal investigators say the makers of the mirror for the Hubble Space Telescope hid important clues to the flaw that has crippled the $1.5 billion instrument.
A1  CRIME AND ADOLESCENCE  A study has found a stunning increase in the number of boys under 18 charged in homicides, a figure that suggests the United States is on the verge of a vast new epidemic of murder.
A8  WHY A FACTORY CLOSED  When a clothing factory closed last year, the residents of a Tennessee town mourned the loss of 306 jobs.
Now they angrily say the factory was moved to El Salvador with Federal help, a complaint that has become an issue in the Presidential race.
A8  Senate races with a twist in the Northwest.
A9  Breast cancer research reaps the benefits of lobbying.
A15  A second Iran-contra trial for a former C.I.A. official.
A18  Metro Digest B1  NEW YORK'S ALLURE IN HOLLYWOOD  Television producers are increasingly turning to New York for inspiration in developing new programs, as they find that the city's ethnic diversity provides abundant fodder for story lines.
Most of the programs, though, are still filmed in Los Angeles studio lots because New York is simply too expensive.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  A retrospective of Bob Dylan songs.
C11  Music: Alison Kraus.
C13  Hollywood acquisition.
C11  Russia to issue a million audio and video recordings.
C11  A draw for Fischer and Spassky.
C13  Dance: In Review C12  Word and Image:  "Tales From Hollywood." C11  Moderating debates.
C16  Life of Richard Feynman.
C18  A WINTER OF DISCONTENT  The cheers will fade when the World Series ends.
But some of the shouting will continue, as baseball confronts a number of problems that could tear the game apart.
A1  Baseball: Blue Jays rally in the ninth.
C1  Toronto doesn't have to wait till next year.
C8  Basketball: Davis dazzles the Knicks.
C3  Columns: Anderson on history.
C8  Vecsey on World Series.
C9  Football: Giants lose to Rams.
C1  Redskins hold off Eagles.
C1  Who needs Penn State?
C2  Cowboys beat Chiefs.
C3  Hockey: Rangers win.
C2  Sports People C2  Obituaries B8  Rouben Ter-Arutunian, a designer for opera, theater and television  Carl T. Mitnick, a New Jersey home builder and philanthropist.
Anna Johnstone Robinson, costume designer for films and Broadway.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  Mr.
Perot presents some beef.
What the President knew.
Jazzing up Lincoln Center.
John MacKenzie: Thomas vs.
Hill.
Letters  William Safire: The patsy prosecutor.
Anthony Lewis: The Bush war.
Peter J. Steinberger: Skip tonight's debate.
Clinton Bailey: Rabin's best chance.


Accounts
*
Marion Merrell Dow, Kansas City, to the newly formed McCann Interactive division at McCann Healthcare, Chicago, to promote the pharmaceutical company's products on interactive media like Whittle Communications' Medical News Network.
Billings were not disclosed.


Joseph J. Ferro, 90, Ex-Buildings Official
Joseph J. Ferro, a former New York City Buildings Commissioner, died on Saturday at Astoria General Hospital in Queens.
He was 90 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


First Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Farmers Have Tough Year in the Pumpkin Patch
The elements have not been kind to this year's pumpkin crop.
Farmers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut say pumpkins are smaller, greener, fewer in number and more expensive this year because of an abundance of rain and cool temperatures throughout the summer.
"This is the worst year we've ever seen," said Verda Will, 62 years old, who along with her 67-year-old husband, Robert, runs Will's Cackleberry Castle in Camden, N.Y., a small community north of Oneida Lake.


Edging Into Madonna's Limelight
Coffee tables may never be the same.
Madonna's spicy $50 opus, "Sex," complete with a compact disk, arrives in stores on Wednesday.
The first run, 835,000 copies, is by far the largest first printing of such an expensive visual book, and a second run of 140,000 has already been ordered.


First City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Europe's Blitz on U.S. Earnings
As European currencies churned and heads of state squabbled a few weeks ago, the United States calmly stood back, an ocean away from the turmoil.
For America's largest manufacturers, however, the United States now seems like an unsafe haven from European recessions and currency woes.
Companies like Ford and I.B.M., which depend heavily on Europe, have begun reporting pinched profits and crimped sales.


Admiral in Scandal Supportive of Women
To the Editor:
"The Navy at Its Brassiest" (editorial, Oct. 1) is wrong to disregard the professional achievements of Rear Adm.
Duvall M. Williams Jr.'s 23-year naval career.
You vilify a person you know nothing about other than from one snapshot taken by a camera with a political agenda lens.


A Fast Pitch That Fell A Few Feet Too Short
The reputation on the mound was unquestioned.
Jeff Reardon's 357 saves are the most in the game's history.
In the World Series, though, reputation is hardly enough.
Quality is all, and Reardon tonight made perhaps the greatest sub-standard pitch of his life.
Reardon, whose once-overpowering fastball has lost velocity and who in his later years has been forced to get outs with tricks, tonight left a fastball dangerously low in the strike zone, and the game was left changed for good.
Ed Sprague's two-run shot in the ninth inning lifted the Blue Jays to a 5-4 triumph over the Braves in Game 2 of the World Series.


Clinton Health Plan Covers All Americans; Meets the Criteria
To the Editor:
In "Clinton Waffles on Health" (editorial, Sept. 27), you take issue with the Clinton health reform proposal for inadequate presentation of specifics.
The New England Journal of Medicine put forward on Sept. 9 a set of criteria by which it suggested proposals for health reform should be judged.
It also invited the candidates to express their views on this subject.


Lisa R. Furman, Eric S. Cott
Lisa Renee Furman and Eric Spencer Cott were married yesterday in New York.
Don Robert Johnson, a senior leader at the New York Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel.
Mrs.
Furman Cott, 30 years old, is an art therapist at the New York Foundling Hospital.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design and received a master's degree in art therapy from New York University.


No Headline
Anything that happens on the planet, short of Somalia, happens in New York.
You never have a believability problem in New York.
You can say there are pygmy serial killers and they're operating in New York and it would be believable." -- DICK WOLF, television producer.  [ B3:4. ]


First Indiana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Editorial Notebook; Thomas vs. Hill, a Year Later
In the year since Clarence Thomas became a Justice of the Supreme Court, the pain of his bitter confirmation fight seems to have become frozen in time.
The Justice and Anita Hill, who dramatically accused him of sexual harassment, remain opposed, and their supporters remain polarized.
The Justice predictably joined the Court's far-right flank.
What's changed is how unforgettable images of the confirmation battle have energized the political year of the woman.
Scarcely any new facts have emerged to help settle the swearing contest that split the Senate down the middle and caused heated arguments both across and within boundaries of race and sex.
Some public opinion polling, which strongly favored the nominee last year, now favors his accuser.
That hardly settles anything, but the shift in opinion reflects important developments.


Election Day Initiatives May Affect Bond Issues
In the tax-exempt bond market, traders and investors face political uncertainty even beyond the outcome of the Presidential election.
At the state and local level, there are numerous spending and taxing initiatives that could affect the credit outlook for the state and local governments, which would have a major impact on bonds.
There are also about $10 billion in bond issues on state and local ballots that are waiting for the thumbs-up or thumbs-down from the voters.


A Night on Patrol: What's Behind Police Tensions and Discontent
They hurtled up three steep flights of stairs, six police officers racing to answer a 911 call about a deranged man with a knife.
What they found in the small Brooklyn apartment was a skinny man sitting quietly, surrounded by frantic family members.
"We don't want him to get hurt -- he's real passive," a nephew said.
But when the officers suggested that the relatives should bring the man to a hospital themselves, the story changed.
"He's dangerous -- he's walking around with this," said a stepson, grabbing a large steak knife to demonstrate how the man had been threatening to kill Fidel Castro.


3,000 Foes of Iraq President Will Be Admitted to the U.S.
The United States has agreed to admit 3,000 Iraqi opponents of President Saddam Hussein who are living in refugee camps in Saudi Arabia, an American immigration spokesman said today.
The agreement was reported in The Washington Post and confirmed later by the spokesman, Duke Austin of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Mr.
Austin said the refugees are mostly Shiites who are afraid to return to their homes in Iraq while President Hussein remains in power.


Vitran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Dr.
ROBERT RUNCIE, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, has said he was about to dismiss his envoy, TERRY WAITE, when he was kidnapped in Lebanon, the Reuters news agency reported yesterday.
Mr.
Waite was seized by gunmen in January 1987 on a mission to free foreign hostages held in Lebanon and was released last November.
He resigned from the staff of the archbishop's office early this year to write his autobiography.


Progressive Bank Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
Sept.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Personal Income . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


What the President Knew
Asked once again whether he had known about "arms for hostages" before the Iran-contra scandal broke, President Bush said the other day: "Yes, and I've said so all along." He's given sworn testimony to that effect hundreds of times, he said.
That adds something incomprehensible to what had previously been merely incredible.
What Mr.
Bush had been saying "all along" was quite the opposite: that he was "out of the loop" of the hostage deals that became public late in 1986.
The contrary evidence was already overwhelming when Mr.
Bush made his latest, strange remark.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Arkansas Struggles to Deal With Rising Health-Care Costs for Poor
Even as Gov.
Bill Clinton promises a sweeping expansion of health-insurance programs in his Presidential campaign, his own state is cutting health-care benefits for poor people and payments to doctors in its Medicaid program.
To the Bush Administration, the moves reflect a basic incompatibility between what the Arkansas Governor advocates on the campaign trail and what he does as chief executive in Little Rock.


Northern States Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Bold Reap the Rewards As Other Investors    Panic
In the years since the 1987 crash, many investors have reached an important conclusion: a rapid fall in stock prices does not signal a crisis.
Instead, it provides an opportunity.
It was not always so.
In the 1970's, if prices plunged one week, they were more likely than not to keep going down for several weeks, although at a slower pace.
And in 1929, of course, the crash was merely a precursor of future large declines.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senator Pothole's Ultimate Race; Al D'Amato Runs as the Big Guy for All Those Little Guys
The Senator from New York was angry.
Outraged.
Shocked.
"You big baloney artists," he yelled across the Senate floor at his colleagues.
"I have to tell you the biggest bunch of hypocrites is right here, right here. You do not give a damn about the people, not a damn."
It could only have been the junior Senator, the scrappy one from Long Island.
Alfonse M. D'Amato's 15-hour filibuster earlier this month was passionate, indignant and, at times, maudlin -- somewhere between Jimmy Stewart taking on the capital and the final moments of the "Jerry Lewis Telethon." It was vintage D'Amato.


C. T. Mitnick, 87, Home Builder And Philanthropist in New Jersey
Carl T. Mitnick, a leading New Jersey home builder, housing industry official and philanthropist, died on Thursday at the Atlantic City Medical Center in Atlantic City.
He was 87 years old and lived in Ventnor, N.J.
The cause of death was undetermined, but he had had heart disease, his family said.


Dance in Review
Elisa King and Dancers
St. Clement's Church
Misery may be a large part of life, but it got very unrelieved-seeming in "Impressions," an evening of dance presented on Friday night by Elisa King and Dancers.
Ms.
King's new "Framework" started off promisingly enough with a strong stage picture of a cluster of men and women, one of whom stands alone, who gradually peel off on diagonal journeys across the stage.
They pause in their travels, throughout the piece, for duets and solos, some of them in rectangles of light toward the center of the stage.
Lost souls, they look increasingly stricken as they move to haunted music by Scott Killian that incorporates taped whispers and murmuring and enjoyably plain-spoken poetry by James Murphy, sung by an onstage soprano.


OFFSHORE INSURERS CREATING CONCERNS AMONG REGULATORS
Five months after the Los Angeles riots, hundreds of small merchants whose stores were burned or looted are still waiting for payments from their insurance companies, and Government officials say many of them will never see any of their money.
The problem: They are insured by unlicensed, off-shore insurance companies that sell policies worth no more than the paper they are written on.
Over the last two years, Congressional investigators, law enforcement agencies and state regulators have documented growing networks of such companies, often based in the Caribbean, that have sold hundreds of millions of dollars of insurance, from automobile to health to liability policies.
Frequently, they close up shop when a significant number of claims come in.
Their victims have ranged from poor immigrants to giant corporations to local governments.
Beyond the Law's Reach
In the United States, insurance companies are regulated at the state level, and at the heart of the problem, officials say, is that offshore insurers are often beyond the reach of state insurance departments, which find it extremely difficult to check their solvency or prosecute them.
The problem has set off a debate between state regulators and members of Congress over how, if at all, Washington should step in to license foreign insurers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; AMERICANS SIGN UP IN RECORD NUMBERS TO CAST A BALLOT
After months of dismissing the Presidential campaign with a mix of cynicism and apathy, Americans have become invigorated by the race, registering to vote in record numbers and clinging to every word of the debates and election coverage.
Throughout the country, election officials say they are swamped by voter registration forms -- most enrolling as Democrats -- as well as by requests for absentee ballots and by their quick return.


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


ChemTrak Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BancTexas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goodbye, Dime Call?; 25-Cent Toll Sought in Connecticut
When Andy Keleman was growing up in the 60's, his mother would regularly tell him, "When you go out, always take a dime for a phone call."
When Mr.
Keleman, a computer consultant from Ridgefield, used a pay phone at the railroad station here, the call still cost a dime.
But, under rate increases proposed last week by Southern New England Telephone, the 10-cent phone call in Connecticut would vanish after 39 years into the same nether world as the 5-cent ice-cream cone, the $1 movie ticket and 25-cents-a-gallon gasoline.


Bank South Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; The Bush War
"Friends, that war  [ Vietnam ]  began in earnest a quarter of a century ago; and surely the statute of limitations has been reached. . . . The final lesson of Vietnam is that no great nation can long afford to be sundered by a memory." -- President Bush, Inaugural Address, 1989


Books of The Times; Practical Man at Work in the Cosmos
Genius  The Life and Science of Richard Feynman  By James Gleick  Illustrated. 532 pages.
Pantheon. $27.50.
Late in his life, the physicist Richard Feynman (1918-1988) told a prospective biographer of his fear that he would be portrayed either as a bloodless intellectual or a bongo-playing clown.
In "Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman," James Gleick elaborates on both of these extremes.


Amsco International reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 27


A Day After a Hard Battle, Fischer and Spassky Draw
After their monumental struggle in the previous game, Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky shadowboxed to an early draw yesterday in Game 22 of their exhibition chess match in Belgrade.
The score remains: Fischer 8, Spassky 4.
If Fischer should win two more games, $3.35 million of the $5 million total purse would be his; Spassky would get the remainder.
One interesting offshoot of the match so far is how it may affect the players' standing on the international ratings list.
It is not certain that the International Chess Federation will rate the match, but if it does Fischer will lose 5 rating points for every draw and 15 points for each loss, gaining only 5 points for each victory.
This is because at the start of the match his rating (carried over from 1972) was so much higher than Spassky's.
Fischer's 8 victories net him 40 points, but he gives back 60 points for losing 4 and 50 points for drawing 10.
Thus, at this moment his rating has dropped 70 points, and Spassky's has gained by the same amount, as calculated by the United States Chess Federation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; On Eve of Last Candidate Debate, Bush Aide Predicts 'Tough' Race
As the Presidential candidates prepared for their final nationally televised debate tonight, President Bush's campaign manager yesterday predicted a Republican victory on Election Day but said it would "be tough," while Gov.
Bill Clinton expressed confidence that he could withstand any fresh attack on his character.
The President's efforts to turn the campaign dialogue to matters of character and trust have shown no signs of moving him out of second place in polls, and tonight's debate may be his last opportunity.


Anderson Gets 26, But the Nets Lose
The most important aspect of the Nets' preseason has been the hoped-for development of point guard Kenny Anderson.
Tonight at the Charlotte Coliseum, Anderson made the Nets feel good by scoring 26 points and adding 10 assists and 5 rebounds in New Jersey's 123-119 loss to the Charlotte Hornets.
Last season, Anderson was the seldom-used rookie from Georgia Tech who fell into disfavor with then Nets coach Bill Fitch.
The Nets are hoping that under new coach Chuck Daly, Anderson will begin to flourish.


The New China -- A Special Report.; Chinese Communism's Secret Aim: Capitalism
To listen to some Chinese, one of the best-kept secrets in the world is this: Here in the land of Mao, where red banners with propaganda slogans still dangle from tall buildings, Communism has collapsed.
It's quite a state secret, but some Chinese believe that's essentially what has happened.
Indeed, the joke making the rounds among Chinese intellectuals is this: "Under the leadership of the Communist Party, we're advancing from socialism to capitalism."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; A Fountain Of Youth For TV News Magazines
UNTIL this year, only age discrimination prevented the network's news magazine programs from being accepted as hits of equal stature with prime-time shows like "Roseanne" and "Cheers."
The audiences of these news programs were just too old to appeal to many television advertisers.


Russia Stumbles Blindly Into New Dawn
To the Editor:
A Russian like myself perceives the headline "Suddenly, 148 Million Capitalists" (editorial, Oct. 5), about Boris Yeltsin's issuing 10,000 ruble vouchers to every Russian adult and child, not even journalistic hyperbole, but a joke.


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Three's the Maximum for Villandry's Trainer
Andre Fabre, the French trainer who won the Arc de Triomphe two weeks ago and the All Along Stakes in Maryland on Saturday, extended his winning streak to New York yesterday when he won the $118,600 Long Island Handicap at Belmont Park with the 4-year-old filly Villandry.
A few minutes later, Fabre also finished first in the $1 million Rothmans International at Woodbine near Toronto with the 4-year-old colt Wiorno.
But the trainer's streak was interrupted when the stewards disqualified Wiorno for crowding and dropped him to third place while promoting the Irish horse Snurge to first.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Building and Rebuilding; While Bush Is Satisfied on Public Works Spending, Opponents Call for More
While Ross Perot and Gov.
Bill Clinton both call for increasing public works spending by tens of billions of dollars a year, President Bush insists that he has already done enough to expand Federal investment in what many economists call the foundation of the nation's economy: transportation routes, communications lines, waterworks and the like.
The Administration's commitment to cutting Federal spending and not raising taxes would lock into place the moderate rebuilding program put into effect during the first term.


Torchmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Times Appoints Style Editor
John Montorio, the deputy editor of the style department at The New York Times, has been appointed style editor.
His appointment, effective early next month, was announced by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor.
As style editor, Mr.
Montorio will head the staff that produces the Living and Home sections on Wednesday and Thursday, Styles of The Times on Sunday and coverage of life styles for all sections of the newspaper.
He succeeds Angela Dodson, who was recently appointed senior editor for administration.


TV Tunes In to New York, Hollywood Style
Forget those decadent "Dallas" and "Dynasty" and "Falcon Crest" rich people of the 1970's and 1980's on television.
Forget the never-never world of "Love Boat" and "Fantasy Island" and "Charlie's Angels." What's hot now, at least in television, are the gritty streets and the grittier characters of New York City.
Never before have so many television series been set in New York in a single season -- but with a twist.
Most of these shows with New York settings are actually filmed on Los Angeles studio lots because New York (which really means Manhattan to TV executives) is considered simply too expensive. 'Stories Can Be Richer'
Angela Lansbury, the star and executive producer of the venerable "Murder, She Wrote" on CBS, about a mystery writer in Maine who is now teaching part time at a school similar to New York University, said: "The New York locale just allows us to introduce a far wider ethnic diversity than Maine. We can use more black actors, more Latinos, more Asians. The stories can be richer. But we just can't afford to shoot in New York. Mayor Dinkins probably hates us!"


New Campaign For Mirabella
Mirabella magazine in New York will introduce a trade campaign that compares the woman's magazine with some better-known competitors.
The campaign, which will be supplemented by direct mail to advertisers, will begin later this month.


Bridge
If in doubt, it pays to believe the opponents.
If you suspect a psychic bid, the odds are that your suspicions are unfounded.
If you suspect a tricky falsecard, remember that most defenders play normally.
A case in point is the diagramed deal in a duplicate game played in April at the Grand Bridge Club in Franklin Square, L.I.
North and South were Carl Winston of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., and they climbed to the correct contract of seven no-trump.
This is a trifle better than seven diamonds because, as the sequel showed, it has a chance to survive a bad diamond split.


Oh, for the Joy of TV Replay
Now that it's gone, instant replay might not seem so bad to the Giants.
Today, it could have helped them.
An apparent third-quarter fumble by the Los Angeles Rams -- caused by Lamar McGriggs and recovered by Mark Collins -- was taken away by officials, and it could have taken away the Giants' momentum, too.


Workers Say U.S. Program Took Their Jobs
The west Tennessee hills are turning red, orange and gold, adding fall color to this ailing town where the most prosperous business is said to be the funeral parlor.
Life was never easy here, but it has been a whole lot harder since last year, when the town's biggest employer, a clothing factory, closed and took away 306 jobs from this town of 1,000 people.
But this is not just another recession story about discouraged workers.
Instead, it is a story about workers who say they are angry and feel betrayed because of what they have learned since the plant closed: that the Federal Government helped the company move to a new plant in El Salvador through a special subsidy program that is supposed to nurture capitalism in Central America.


Everett Whoops It Up for a Change
It was such an exhaustive victory for Los Angeles today that Flipper Anderson nearly returned an onside kick by the Giants for a touchdown.
"We had our coming out today," Rams quarterback Jim Everett said.


A Second Trial Begins Today For a Former C.I.A. Official
Clair E. George, once the chief of clandestine operations throughout the world for the Central Intelligence Agency, goes on trial for the second time in Federal Court here Monday.
He is charged with lying to Congress and investigators about his knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
George's first trial ended last August after the jurors said they were deadlocked and Judge Royce C. Lamberth declared a mistrial.
In interviews at the time of the mistrial, the jurors said that a majority of them were holding out for acquittal.


Elway Rallies Broncos Again
Broncos 27, Oilers 21
DENVER, Oct. 18 (AP) -- John Elway directed yet another fourth-quarter, game-winning drive today and rallied the Denver Broncos to a 27-21 victory over the Houston Oilers.
Denver went 80 yards in only 3 plays and 22 seconds, ending with fullback Reggie Rivers's 20-yard scoring run with 1 minute 34 seconds left.


2 Men Slain in Brooklyn Said to Have Ties to Mob
Two men were found shot to death early yesterday morning in a parked car in Brooklyn, and a police investigator said the victims appeared to have been affiliated with the Colombo organized-crime family.
Detective Sgt.
Tony Celano, who is directing the investigation, said Vincent DePippo, 42 years old, and Neil Mastro, 21, both of Brooklyn, were each shot once in the head and discovered dead about 2 A.M. in a car near the corner of Bay Seventh Street and Cropsey Avenue.
A motive for the killings has not been determined, he said.


Rouben Ter-Arutunian, 72, Dies; Designed City Ballet 'Nutcracker'
Rouben Ter-Arutunian, a prolific designer for dance, opera, theater and television, died on Saturday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
He died of lymphoma of the brain, said Dro Proudian, a friend and the executor of his will.


Anita M. Samuels, Cyril L. Caurthens
Anita Michelle Samuels, a daughter of Bernard and Ismay Samuels of Bayshore, L.I., was married yesterday to Cyril Leon Caurthens, a son of Cynthia Caurthens of New York.
The Rev.
W.
H.
Abernathy performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Armonk, N.Y.
Mrs.
Caurthens, 26 years old, is a member of the clerical news staff at The New York Times and a freelance writer.
Her father, who is retired, was a postal clerk in Long Island City, Queens, and her mother, also retired, was a chef at the New York Institute of Technology in Central Islip, L.I.


Deficits Bring More Splits, Less Progress
As if things were not bad enough for the states, counties and cities of the New York City region, the deep recession of the early 1990's is underscoring an unhappy lesson of government: When times are tough, partisan bickering only makes things worse.
"It takes difficult times to bring out the worst political cheap shots," said Robert W. Burchell, a fiscal-policy analyst at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Earlier this month, his state laid off 1,500 government workers in the aftermath of a heated partisan dispute and legal battle over lowering the state sales tax.


Lillian Speck, Paul Grossbard
Lillian DuPre Speck, the daughter of Theodore and Helen Speck of Weston, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul Morgan Grossbard, a son of Henry Grossbard of Piermont, N.Y., and the late Monica Grossbard.
The Rev.
Frank Hall, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Cobb's Mill Inn.
Rabbi Charles Davidson took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Grossbard, 23 years old, is a communications associate at the Regional Plan Association, a nonprofit research and planning organization in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College.
Her father is a senior vice president and a group creative director at Brouillard Communications, an advertising and public relations agency in New York.
Her mother is a business consultant in Weston.


Acclaim Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Time Warner Reports a Quarterly Profit
Time Warner Inc. reported yesterday that it had net income of $6 million for the third quarter as a result of gains in all its divisions, in contrast to a $62 million loss a year earlier.
It was the fourth consecutive quarter for which the media and entertainment giant had reported a profit since Time Inc. and Warner Communications completed their merger in 1990.


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.99
5.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.89
5.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.02
5.12
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.24
6.09
7.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.52
8.07
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.63
8.59
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.46
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SPX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins and Council Trying to Craft Compromise on Review Board
The Dinkins administration and City Council leaders are trying to hammer out a compromise on the last major sticking point in structuring an all-civilian board to review charges of police misconduct: who would appoint the board members.
The proposal, being discussed in private talks, would give the Mayor the power to appoint all the members, though he would be limited to choosing from nominees made by the Council and the Police Commissioner for 8 of the 13 appointments.


Saying What You Mean
MOST word-processing programs these days come with spelling checkers, which compare the words you have written with a dictionary-like list.
But unlike a real dictionary, most of them do not tell you what the word means, so it is possible to spell the wrong word correctly.
Instant Definitions Dictionary 3.0, from Wordscience of Walnut Creek, Calif., can prevent such embarrassing errors.
It is an add-on program for most character-based DOS word processors, which means it does not work with programs that produce letters as graphics, including programs specifically designed for Windows, although it will work with DOS programs that have been coaxed to work under Windows.


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chicago Plans Police Sweep Of Troubled Housing Area
Criticized as too slow in responding to the slaying of a 7-year-old boy by a sniper at a public housing development here last week, Mayor Richard M. Daley today announced a plan to sweep the projects of gangs and guns.
Holding aloft a sawed-off .22-caliber rifle confiscated at one development, he said, "You have to convince people that this is the most serious problem facing the nation: drugs and violence."


Victoria Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Business Scene; Low Inflation: Is It the Culprit?
"MAY I suggest: 'The Great Recession'?" wrote Jeff Connor, commissioner of the New Jersey Banking Department, in response to a recent Business Scene column that reported on the search for a label that adequately describes the economic slowdown.
The standard labels -- stagnation and recession -- fail to capture the hardship that many Americans say they are suffering.
"Silent depression," "depressed recession," and "cycle of cycles" were among the other names suggested by readers.
But for many, the real question is the source of the problems.
"I must say that a descriptive name for America's present economic difficulties seems far less important to me than a correct diagnosis of these difficulties," wrote Samuel M. Greenhouse of Boca Raton, Fla.
And among the numerous diagnoses, a new one is appearing that goes a long way toward explaining the national hardship.
It is the falling inflation rate.


Blockbuster Agrees to Buy Music Store Chain
The Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation is taking up music.
Faced with waning interest in video rentals and threatened by pay-per-view movies on cable television, the nation's largest video chain is expanding into the fast-growing but fiercely competitive business of retailing tapes and CD's.


Scientists Find Catchy Names Help Ideas Fly
MOST scientific names are dull and pedantic, and usually as impenetrable as the Latin in which Linnaeus named all species known to him.
But recently a strange whimsy has started to creep in among the sesquipedalian prose of scientific journals.
A few scientists are attaching catchy terms like "chaos" or "chaperone molecules" to the things they discover.
The trend may represent a slap at tradition, or perhaps a shrewd sense that a popular name can win a theory more attention and financing.


First Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gateway Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TNT Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Ipsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westinghouse Official Calms Fears of Market
A slide in the price of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's stock halted yesterday as the company issued a detailed statement asserting its solvency and describing its earnings prospects in optimistic terms.
The shares closed at $12.50 each, up 75 cents.
The statement, issued in the name of Paul E. Lego, the chairman of Westinghouse, elaborated on one put out at midday on Friday when the shares were selling as low as $10.
In the statement released yesterday, Mr.
Lego denounced rumors that losses in the company's troubled financial services unit might cause the parent to file for protection under Chapter 11 bankruptcy provisions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Dispute; Candidates Recount History in Their Own Way
In the 90 minutes of their final debate last night, the three major Presidential candidates offered voters opinions, facts, figures and history -- much of it contradictory -- on issues from civil rights to the war with Iraq.
Ross Perot, the independent, spent much time criticizing President Bush's policy toward Iraq before the war in the Persian Gulf.


Texas Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dominion Resources reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Leonard Zissu, 83, Copyright Specialist
Leonard Zissu, an authority on copyright law and a founding member of the Copyright Society of the U.S.A., died on Sunday at the Green Manor Nursing Home in Ghent, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and lived in Ancramdale, N.Y.
Mr. Zissu died of cancer, his wife, Joyce said.


Editorial Notebook; Albany's Secret Ways
State Senator Nancy Larraine Hoffman, a Democrat, has two traits her Syracuse-area constituents find endearing.
The same traits exasperate many of her colleagues in the clubby Republican-run New York State Senate: She's independent and outspoken.
After eight years in the Senate, she has emerged as the most vocal critic of the self-serving way the Legislature operates.
There's a lot to criticize, starting with the Legislature's bloated $168 million budget.
Unlike Congress, which at least provides a detailed breakdown, the leaders of the perk-ridden Assembly and Senate provide only a grudging outline to justify their legislative budget, the highest in the country.
The result, as Kevin Sack detailed recently in The New York Times Magazine, is a giant incumbency-protection machine, unaccountable to the taxpayers.


Behind the Filming of 'The Honeymoon Killers'
It was a love story with a difference.
She was a 200-pound nurse who only wanted to please her man.
He was a smooth-talking Spaniard who preyed on lonely women and relieved them of their cash.
Theirs was a passion destined for the electric chair, and for a chilling film, "The Honeymoon Killers," that the director Francois Truffaut once called "my favorite American film."
The movie, released in 1969 and erratically distributed ever since, opened on Friday for a two-week revival at the Film Forum in SoHo.


Johnson Adds to Total Of Games He'll Play
Magic Johnson is feeling so spry, he said today that he likely will buck doctor's orders and play several back-to-back games for the Lakers this season.
Johnson, infected with the virus that causes AIDS, originally planned to partake in 50 to 60 games after doctors advised him to avoid playing on consecutive nights in his comeback from a one-season absence.
But he easily withstood a bruising 10-day training camp in humid Honolulu and said he was more ambitious with that just completed.


Singling Out Blacks Where Few Are to Be Found; Amid Hills of Rural New York, Students From Inner City Find Not-So-Hearty Welcome
Derrick Forbes's first day at school was like a page torn from a journal of the old South.
The afternoon he arrived here from Brooklyn two years ago, the lanky, soft-spoken soccer player waited downtown for a bus.
When it arrived, Mr.
Forbes said, a police officer blocked his way, forcing him to wait until all the whites had climbed on.


Justice Moves Halfway
Attorney General William Barr has appointed an outside lawyer to bring order and credibility to the chaotic criminal investigation of American aid to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
It's a welcome half-measure of recognition that Mr.
Barr cannot responsibly investigate himself.
Given the disarray in Mr.
Barr's department and the explosive nature of the charges, it would have been better had he asked a court to appoint the outside investigator under the Independent Counsel Act.
But Mr.
Barr's own choice -- Frederick Lacey, an aggressive and talented former Federal prosecutor and retired judge -- appears qualified.


Just Trying to Be a Jet Named Dawkins
Since he suffered a broken leg in a car accident last December, wide receiver Dale Dawkins has not been allowed by the Jets to be himself.
Relegated to the Jets' practice squad, Dawkins has had to be satisfied by impersonating opponents' receivers.
A few weeks ago, before the Jets played the Los Angeles Rams, he was asked to be Flipper Anderson.
This week, as the Jets resume practice after a bye week, Dawkins will be playing someone else again.


27% Increase In Rates Sought By Blue Cross
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the largest health insurance company in New York State, said yesterday that it had applied for a 27.8 percent rate increase for 1.3 million of its small-group and individual customers in the New York City, Hudson Valley and Albany areas.
Empire, which received a 14.2 percent rate increase for those same customers in April, said it desperately needed the increase to begin to rebuild its reserves, which have fallen to below $50 million.
Under state law, the company said, it is required to have at least $510 million in reserves, which it needs on hand in case of unanticipated insurance claims.


BELL LABORATORIES HIRES 27 RUSSIAN RESEARCH SCIENTISTS
A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories, in its second such venture, said yesterday that it had hired 27 more Russian scientists, this time from St.
Petersburg.
The scientists, working under a one-year contract from Bell Labs, are from the A. F. Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute.
They will conduct fundamental research into semiconductor physics and semiconductor lasers.
As the Russian economy collapses and government subsidies disappear from huge scientific enterprises, many Western companies, including those in the United States, have become concerned that Russian scientific work would founder for want of paychecks.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Media Business page yesterday with an article about Callaway Editions Inc., which is producing the Madonna book "Sex," reversed the identifications.
Charles Melcher, the publisher, was on the left, and Nicholas Callaway was on the right.


French Try To Delay Trade Deal
France sought to damp hopes today of an early breakthrough in long-stalled world trade liberalization talks, arguing that the Bush Administration was in no position to close a deal before the Presidential election on Nov. 3.
"I don't feel that today the Americans have the capacity to make useful proposals in this area" because of uncertainty over the outcome of the elections, the Finance Minister of France, Michel Sapin, told reporters while attending a European Community meeting in Luxembourg.


New Type Of Monkey Is Found
A POCKET-SIZED monkey with a koala-like face has been discovered in a remote part of the Amazon, the latest evidence that the world's largest rain forest has yet to give up all of its secrets, a biologist says.
The monkey, which has a hint of zebra stripes, is a previously unknown species, and its discovery "shows how poorly we still know an area like the Amazon," said the biologist, Dr.
Russell Mittermeier of Conservation International.
The environmental group, based in Washington, conducts research projects aimed at preserving biological diversity.


In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All; Why Powell's Right
To the Editor:
"At Least: Slow the Slaughter" (editorial, Oct. 4) recommends that the Bush Administration send United States soldiers (in airplanes, but soldiers nonetheless) to intervene in a situation in which this country's interests are not spelled out.
This is what Gen.
Colin Powell criticizes.
Whether we send 10 or 10,000 soldiers to a foreign country, it is tantamount to a declaration of war.
The Constitution is specific about Congress's responsibility in this area.
It was Congress's loss of nerve and refusal to demand a clear statement of purposes and American interests that got us into the Vietnam mess.


Dinkins Pledges 4-Year Corporate Tax Freeze
Saying he wanted to make the city more hospitable to business, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday promised to freeze New York City's general corporate tax for the next four years.
Although Mr.
Dinkins already assumed in the city's financial plan covering the next three years that there would be no rise in corporate taxes, his pledge yesterday to freeze the current rate of 8.85 percent for four years carried a far greater commitment and was meant to send a soothing message to a jittery business community, mayoral aides said.


People
*
Amy Hilliard-Jones was named senior vice president and director of integrated marketing services at Burrell Communications Group, Chicago.
She had been director of market development at the Pillsbury Company, Minneapolis.


Universal Health Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glitches and Big Sales As New Phone System Has Broadway Debut
Telephone saboteurs.
Busy signals.
Predatory scalpers.
These are the decidedly low-tech, old-fashioned problems that beset, in its first two days, the bold new high-tech era of Broadway ticket-ordering by telephone.
But a lot of tickets were sold too.
On Sunday, Ticketmaster, the nation's largest computerized ticketing company, started offering something never available in New York: the chance to know where you'll sit when ordering Broadway tickets by phone.


INSIDE
Mandela Admits Abuses
The African National Congress admitted that it tortured dissidents during its years in exile.
Page A7.
Britain Softens on Mine Cuts
Under pressure, Prime Minister John Major sharply reduced the number of coal mines to be closed.
Page A9. 19 (Yep, 19) Candidates
Jersey City voters have 19 choices for their next mayor.
Some residents say that's too many.
Page B10.
Creatures at Play
Scientists are learning to appreciate how important play is to animal development.
Science Times, page C1.


In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All
To the Editor:
"Blueprint for a Wider War" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30) by George Kenney, former State Department desk officer for Yugoslavia, states that "everything in the Yugoslav conflict follows from Serbia's fundamental goal of creating a larger, ethnically pure state." He should know better.
The conflict was precipitated by the secessions of Slovenia, Croatia and later Bosnia from the Yugoslav federation, secessions made and internationally recognized with no provision for border changes or guarantees of minority rights.
Overnight, millions of Serbs found themselves living in foreign countries.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; No Hiding Place
Now we have to hurry up and decide for ourselves the one critical question about a candidate's fitness to hold the Presidency that the debates failed to answer.
Can he walk and chew gum at the same time?


Classical Music in Review
Beaux Arts Trio  Metropolitan Museum of Art
Institutions, even such intimate ones as chamber groups, have an almost organic instinct for self-preservation, or to put it more kindly, evolution and renewal.
So although we think of chamber ensembles as balanced combinations of musical personalities, time invariably upsets the equation.
The Beaux Arts Trio, founded in 1955, had its first change in the early 1960's, when Isidore Cohen replaced the violinist, Daniel Guilet.
In 1987, the cellist Bernard Greenhouse was replaced by Peter Wiley, leaving the pianist Menahem Pressler as the only original member.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate; BUSH PUSHES HARD IN 3D DEBATE BUT FOES PUT HIM ON DEFENSIVE
The last of the three Presidential debates ended last night with President Bush still on the defensive about his first-term record and laboring to revive his campaign by warning that Gov.
Bill Clinton lacked the leadership, the record and the character to be President.
In their most spirited, direct exchange yet, Mr.
Bush assailed Mr.
Clinton's record in Arkansas, his economic proposals and what Mr.
Bush asserted was a habit of trying to have it both ways on issue after issue.


Review/Fashion; Amid Trends, Room For Individuality
Of the major designers who presented their spring and summer collections over the weekend, Claude Montana was the modernist, Christian Lacroix the most decorative and Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel the trend-setter .
Valentino carried the banner for Italian design.
Issey Miyake of Tokyo used modern technology to create unusual visual effects with fabrics.
Mr.
Montana's designs retain their sleek look -- which depends on cut, not decoration -- though there are changes afoot.
Instead of hard-finished fabrics, he uses soft ones like chiffon, crepe and buttery suedes.
Instead of fussing about skirt lengths, he stays mainly with pants.
"They're easier to move in than a long skirt," he said.


NationsBank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Once More Unto the Brink: Cuban Crisis Relived
Thirty years after the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, American intelligence analysts from that era gathered today to debate details of the drama that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
In connection with the Central Intelligence Agency's first symposium on the missile crisis, the agency also made public 112 newly declassified documents about events leading up to the crisis and the Kennedy Administration's response.


Precision Castparts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Founder of Green Party Dies Mysteriously in Bonn
The founder of the Green Party in Germany -- who stormed the corridors of mainstream politics with defiance and irreverence -- and her longtime companion were found dead in their house in a suburb of Bonn last night, the investigating prosecutor said.
The prosecutor, Wolfgang Komp, said that the Green Party founder, Petra Kelly, 44 years old, and her companion, Gert Bastian, 69, both former members of Parliament, had been dead for some time.
He said that identification was difficult because their bodies had decomposed.


Does Our Society Have No Value Higher Than Tolerance?; Young Suicides
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Teaching About Gays and Tolerance" (editorial, Sept. 27).
The need for teaching tolerance and respect derives from more than the hate crimes you mention.
Youth suicide increased 170 percent between 1950 and 1980.
The Department of Health and Human Services, during the Reagan years, commissioned the 1989 "Report on Youth Suicide," which found that of all suicides each year by people 15 to 24 years old, fully 30 percent are gay and lesbian youth.
The study also found that gay and lesbian youth are three times more likely to abuse drugs and alcohol as other youth and that 25 percent of all homeless youth are gay and lesbian.


No Headline
"This always seemed like a recession-proof industry. But this time it really has affected us. You learn a lot in a year like this when people don't have money." -- FRANK L. TOBE, who sells voter lists and other services to political candidates.  [ A1:5. ]


The Purpose of Playful Frolics: Training for Adulthood
ALONG with love and a good joke, playfulness seems like something that should not be explained, a brilliant splash of animated joy so sheerly pleasurable to watch and engage in that it is its own justification.
Yet to scientists, the problem of how play evolved and why many young mammals, birds and even a few fish and reptiles clearly love to have fun is neither easy nor self-evident.
Scientists have long known that play is widespread in the animal kingdom, and they have described their unabashed glee at the sight of a whale calf rolling and somersaulting around its mother's fluke with the viscous, goofy movements of an aquatic elephant; or a young brown bear plucking a flower with its teeth and scampering off across a meadow like a flirtatious Spanish dancer.


3 Teen-Agers Shot in Bronx Near a School
Two 14-year-old girls walking across an intersection and a 16-year-old boy standing nearby were shot outside a Bronx high school yesterday afternoon by an assailant who blazed away with a rifle or a shotgun and fled on foot.
The police said the girls, both honor students in the freshman class of a school with a reputation for weapons and violence, apparently were bystanders caught in a shooting that stemmed from an earlier dispute between the gunman and the boy, who was critcally wounded.
Investigators said the boy knew and gave the police the name of the assailant, who was being sought last night.


CFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
MORGAN STANLEY  STAYING IN NEW YORK
The Morgan Stanley Group, the financial services company that had been considering moving its New York City headquarters and as many as 4,100 employees to Stamford, Conn., will remain in the city for at least 10 years, company officials said.
The city and state have agreed to $40 million in tax credits and other incentives over the next decade to help keep the company in New York, the officials said.
A1.
REDEFINING THE FAMILY
The traditional American family, a largely mythical political icon in the first place, has declined so far in New York City that married couples living with their own children now constitute only 1 in 6 households.
The trend is neither new nor peculiar to New York.
But a new analysis of the 1990 census has found that the typical family has been radically redefined.
A1.
THE EMBATTLED BOARD
The squabbling on the Board of Education took two new twists: the majority faction acknowledged that it had sought advice from a political consultant, while the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation warned that the infighting could affect how much money he will turn over to the schools.
B3.
In tight financial times, guidance counselors feel the pinch.
B3.
Seeking more black recruits, new Police Commissioner visits WLIB radio. B3.  REGION
NEW ATTACK ON CAR THEFT
The New Jersey State Senate unanimously approved a five-bill package to treat automobile theft and the ramming of police cars as serious crimes rather than juvenile pranks.
The legislation, aimed primarily at Newark, where car theft by teen-agers has been at epidemic proportions, imposes mandatory sentences for thefts and "joyriding" in stolen vehicles.
B6.
AN ADULT APPROACH TO LEARNING
The poor economy has taken its toll on class rolls, but adult education programs -- with roots in the Americanization classes for immigrants 75 years ago -- remain popular.
In the last decade, enrollment nationwide has doubled, to 15 million, with baby boomers and retired people signing up at colleges, public schools or independent programs for everything from acrylic folk art to yoga.
B6.
HIGH MARKS FOR METRO-NORTH
Most commuters in central Westchester County are happy with the service on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, according to a survey conducted by Assemblyman Peter M. Sullivan, who has long been a critic of the railroad.
He said that 64 percent of those questioned rated the service "pretty good," and 31 percent rated it "excellent." B5.
SENATE CANDIDATES WIN BACKING
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan endorsed his fellow Democrat, Robert Abrams, in the United States Senate race in New York.
But the incumbent Republican, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, was also endorsed by some Democrats.
B10.
ELECTING YET ANOTHER MAYOR
Jersey City's voters will elect their fourth mayor in a year next month.
To do so they will have to choose among 19 candidates, including two feuding brothers.
B10.
Our Towns by Andrew Malcolm B6
Chronicle B11


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; AIDS Protesters Disrupt Dinner Featuring Quayle
Vice President Dan Quayle's speech to the 30th annual dinner of the New York State Conservative Party was interrupted last night by four AIDS protesters.
Minutes into the Vice President's speech a man, later identified as George Catravas of the protest group Act Up, stood up and unfurled a red AIDS banner and shouted, "What about AIDS?"


Brenton Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEC TECHNOLOGIES TO BEGIN PC SALES BY TELEPHONE
NEC Technologies Inc. is joining a growing list of personal computer makers that sell their wares directly to customers over the telephone.
The Boxborough, Mass.-based company is a unit of the NEC Corporation of Japan.
The NEC Select Solutions product line, which includes a personal computer, monitor, software and mouse in a single package, will be offered to customers calling an NEC sales center via a toll-free "800" line.
NEC will also begin an advertising and direct-mail campaign to sell the personal computers through a catalogue, a concept pioneered by fast-growing competitors like Dell Computer, Zeos International and Gateway 2000.


Divided School Board Confronts Image and Money
The squabbling on the Board of Education took two new twists yesterday: The majority faction acknowledged that it had sought advice from a political consultant, while the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation warned that the infighting could affect how much money he would turn over to the schools.
The four members of the board's majority faction met recently with the political consultant David Garth to discuss how they could polish their public image.
These members, who have advocated a greater stress on sexual abstinence in lessons on AIDS, said their credibility was being undermined by the board's own public relations division, which they contend is loyal to the Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the faction made up of the other three board members.


Wyman-Gordon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Capital Cities/ABC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


City Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grove Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Time Warner Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liz Claiborne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Capital Cities' Net Up 15.2% Despite Loss for ABC-TV
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income had risen 15.2 percent, despite a small operating loss at the ABC television network.
That loss was offset by gains at the company's eight television stations and its publications division, as well as increases at the video operations, which include ESPN, the all-sports channel.


Carpenter TechnologyCorp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Asian Voice for Democracy
Few people doubt that foreign broadcasts contributed powerfully to the democratic ferment in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Why shouldn't American radio programs do the same in the still-Communist countries of Asia and for the unfree Burmese?
A special Congressional commission makes a persuasive case for creating an Asia Democracy Radio or Asia Information Radio to provide the kind of coverage now offered in the West by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.


Review/Dance; Graham Group Renews Long-Forgotten Works
The Martha Graham Dance Company ended a splendidly danced season on Sunday night at the City Center.
Graham received a fine tribute from her dancers through this high quality of performance.
A more formal homage is planned for 1994, when the company will celebrate the centennial of Graham's birth.
In the meantime, Sunday afternoon's debuts as well as the success of the season's unexpected revivals and the premieres choreographed by company members proved that the troupe is far from being in a holding pattern since Graham died last year at age 96.


COMPANY NEWS
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, has completed the purchase of most of the deposits and offices of Diamond Savings and Loan Co., Findlay, Ohio.
BURNS AEROSPACE CORP., Winston-Salem, N.C., and British Airways P.L.C. have signed a long-term agreement for the design and manufacture of aircraft seating.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center began its 24th season on Friday night with hopes that by the end of it a clearer path to stability will have been found.
Things have not been the same since Charles Wadsworth -- the society's founder, program builder and audience-schmoozer supreme -- retired a few years ago.
Now David Shifrin, a clarinetist, is giving the directorship a try.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; The Last Ads: the Tipoff To Endgame Strategies
In the aftermath of the 1980 election, Jimmy Carter's media adviser, Gerald Rafshoon, was asked to evaluate the effect of the advertising he had done for the President's failed re-election campaign.
"If we had it to do all over again," he said, "we would take the $30 million we spent in the campaign and get three more helicopters for the Iran rescue mission."


Ann F. Friedlaender; Economics Professor, 54
Ann F. Friedlaender, an economist who was the first woman to become an academic dean at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She was 54 years old and lived in Newton, Mass.
She died of cancer, said Charles Ball, an M.I.T. spokesman.


Many Reasons Send Adults to One Place: School
While the debate over the study of Western Civilization rages among the dons from Columbia to Stanford, Philip Dogon remains steadfast in his teaching goals: to help even the clumsiest homeowner learn to rewire a lamp or repair a toilet.
He does this in nine Tuesday nights at the Ridgewood Community School in course No. 502: "Be Your Own Fix-It Handyman, It's Really Easy." His specialty is one of about 170 courses or lectures this fall in this suburb's version of a perennially popular form of learning, the adult education program.


Wesbanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fort Howard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raymond James Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Saving U.S. Plants From Disorder
Runette Giles has to get organized. America's manufacturing future may depend on it.
It's not as if she is an unwilling worker.
She plugs away steadily in the oppressive heat and humidity of Asea Brown Boveri Ltd.'s factory here, building components for electrical distribution equipment.
But disorder is such a fact of her work life that it cuts into productivity, thwarting her own best efforts and threatening the plant's ability to compete with its global rivals.


Cardinal Distribution Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Planters Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allergan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scripps Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Head Start Workers Reach New Contract


As Simple as Child's Play? New Complexity Is Found
IF play among nonhuman mammals has evolved for a vivid tapestry of reasons, from stimulating circuits in the brain to helping an animal learn to tame its hostile impulses, in children play reaches the pinnacle of complexity.
Through games, romps and fantasies of all kinds, scientists said, children practice many of the skills they will need as adults.
As with other animals, the act of playing probably has a strong physiological component, setting off the growth of synaptic connections between neurons and the maturation of different fiber types in muscle tissue.


Odor Forces Evacuation
The 840 pupils at Oliver Street Elementary School were removed shortly before noon today when a bitter odor filled parts of the building, making breathing difficult and causing eyes to water, the police said.
Fire and medical units from Jersey City, Elizabeth and Irvington joined the Newark Fire Department at the school in the Ironbound section.
Most of the affected pupils, teachers and staff members were treated in the playground.
About 12 people, including 3 teachers and 3 firefighters, were treated at nearby hospitals and released.


Books of The Times; It's Your Choice, Lilian: The Cad or the Cluck
Folly  By Susan Minot  278 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $19.95.
In her latest novel, Susan Minot, the acclaimed author of "Monkeys" and "Lust," takes a step backward into the past, to the years between World Wars I and II.
But while "Folly" is set in a different era from her previous books, it takes place in a familiar world of old families and genteel wealth, and it tackles familiar themes of familial and romantic love.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Game 2 Slip, Blowing in the Wind
Ah, well, baseball was bound to cause an international incident sooner or later.
The sport narrowly escaped hostilities with Japan after averting a public relations disaster by relaxing its short-lived ethnocentric rules about the bloodlines of team owners.
This allowed a group well-represented by Japanese to buy the Seattle Mariners, saving that franchise for the Pacific Northwest and saving baseball's face in the rapidly shrinking global community of sports.


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HCA-Hospital Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pulitzer Publishing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chase Manhattan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


High Marks Given To Metro-North
Most commuters in central Westchester County are now happy with the service on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, according to a survey conducted by a Westchester Assemblyman who has long been a critic of the railroad.
The Assemblyman, Peter M. Sullivan, a Republican from White Plains, said that 64 percent of those questioned rated the service "pretty good," and 31 percent rated it "excellent."


Promus Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MANDELA'S GROUP ABUSED DISSIDENTS
In a new effort to show a willingness to come to grips with its past, the African National Congress admitted today that it tortured dissident members during its years in exile and said some of those responsible for human rights violations still held posts in the organization.
In releasing an internal investigation of abuses at its exile camps in the 1980's and early 1990's, Nelson Mandela, the congress president, who ordered the inquiry last March, said the group's leaders accepted "collective responsibility" for the violations.


Interchange Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Panel Questions C.I.A. on Iraqi Arms
As part of its investigation of a politically sensitive bank-fraud case involving Iraq, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence has asked the Central Intelligence Agency whether American agencies set up clandestine front companies that may have helped Iraq's arms buildup, American officials have said.
The request was prompted in part by a defense lawyer in Georgia who maintains that at least two companies -- one in Virginia, the other in New Jersey -- were used by intelligence agencies to help supply weapons or equipment to Iraq as part of the American effort to curry favor with Saddam Hussein's Government, the officials said.


2 PROMISE TO UNDO ETHNIC EXPULSIONS
The Presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the truncated Yugoslavia met face to face today for the first time since the Balkan crisis erupted and promised to reverse ethnic expulsions and punish war criminals.
They pledged to intensify efforts to end fighting in the Bosnian republic, and they urged all parties to the conflict to speed delivery of relief supplies to people in the beleaguered capital, Sarajevo, and to other needy areas.


Before a Full House
Measured by political handicappers' cliche standards, none of the three Presidential candidates committed a dreaded "gaffe" in last night's third debate.
Neither did any of them deliver a decisive knockout punch.
Indeed, the three had little to say they hadn't already said in their previous joint appearances.
Even so, this round was probably as valuable as any other part of the campaign so far.
Even if the candidates' tunes don't change much, the audience does.
"Public" has been a moving target all year, and now America is paying attention.


Moons Galore
As many as 1,000 moons ranging in size from a half mile to six miles in diameter may populate the faint rings around each of the planets Uranus and Neptune, two scientists at the University of Colorado have reported.
Their calculations were based on observations by the Voyager 2 spacecraft, which included the first detailed pictures of the rings and estimates of the distribution of larger moons around each planet, and on computer simulations of the consequences of comets' striking larger moons in the two planetary systems.


Q&amp;A
Salt and Savor
Q.
My soup seems to need more salt when it is cold.
Why?
Would it work to heat it if it is too salty?
A.
With cold soup, the fault may not be in the salt but in the absence of heat to volatilize the other flavorings so they ascend to the nose, said Dr.
Linda Bartoshuk, an expert in the psychophysics of taste at the Yale University School of medicine.


4 Republics to Curb Uranium Sales to U.S.
Under pressure from Washington, four former Soviet republics have agreed to strict quotas on uranium shipments to the United States, one of their main markets for uranium exports, the Commerce Department announced today.
The Commerce Department threatened in May to impose a punitive duty of 116 percent on uranium from the republics after making a preliminary finding that they were selling uranium at unfairly low prices.


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nationsbank Profits Surge; Chase's Earnings Rise 29%
The Nationsbank Corporation announced yesterday that its third-quarter profits had quadrupled because of a sharp decline in losses from bad loans, while the Chase Manhattan Corporation reported a more modest 29 percent profit increase, mainly attributable to strong gains in foreign-exchange trading.
Profits of $350 million at Nationsbank, whose acquisitions have made it the country's fourth-largest banking company, were almost twice the $176 million at Chase, which has slipped in the last two years to sixth place from third.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; A Late-Round Flurry for Bush But Shape of Race Appears Unaltered
The last Presidential debate, the politicians and pundits said before it began, was President Bush's last best hope to shift the tone and the dynamics of the campaign.
Do something different, they told Mr.
Bush, or prepare to lose the Presidency on Nov. 3.
He changed his ways for the better.
There was no looking at his watch in last night's encounter in East Lansing, Mich., as there had been last week, and no suggestion of languor.
His message was clear.
He did his best to make voters think about character and trust, rather than blaming him for costing them their jobs, even invoking Horace Greeley to the effect that character counts most.


Howard Lipman, Art Collector And Ex-Whitney Head, 87, Dies
Howard W. Lipman, an art collector and a former chairman of the Whitney Museum of American Art, died on Sunday at his home in Carefree, Ariz., his son announced yesterday.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Lipman had a series of small strokes in recent months and was generally in declining health, said his son, Dr.
Peter Lipman, a geologist.


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Curtiss-Wright reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All; The Islamic Republic
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's call for bombardment of Serbian military installations in Serbia itself in "Death at Bush's Door" (column, Oct. 9) will not solve the Bosnian or Yugoslav problems.
Even an immediate end of shooting will not automatically establish peace and harmony among people who have been killing one another for a year over problems that are centuries old.
Mr.
Lewis should consult "Islamic Declaration" (1970, updated 1990) by Alija Izetbegovic, President of Bosnia, to see what a Bosnia run by Muslims would be like, and why Bosnian Serbs are fighting.
Consider the main tenet of Mr.
Izetbegovic's doctrine: "There can be neither peace nor coexistence between the Islamic religion and non-Islamic social and political institutions."


McDonald's Agency Shed in Washington
DDB Needham Washington in McLean, Va., and the McDonald's Washington Regional Advertising Association have agreed to sever their 20-year relationship, they said in a joint statement released yesterday, after reports of their split appeared this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
In a telephone interview, Joseph Landy, president at DDB Needham Washington, declined to comment on the decision but noted that DDB Needham Chicago continues to handle portions of the McDonald's Corporation's national account.
He confirmed the report in Advertising Age that some of his 52 employees might be laid off.


New York Finds Typical Family Being Redefined
The traditional American family has declined so far in New York City that married couples living with their own children now constitute only one in six households.
The trend is neither new nor peculiar to New York.
But a new analysis of the 1990 census has found that the typical family has been radically redefined.


By Design; Through a Glass, Chicly
Forget about those sweeping, concealing Jackie O. sunglasses.
Chic shades are now mere small circles of color set in wire frames so thin that they all but disappear.
Many consider the return of this discreet shape, once known as granny glasses, as just another example of the 1960's memorabilia currently cluttering up fashion.
Others say that it was the Italian designer Giorgio Armani who started the trend a few seasons ago to impart a serious demeanor to models.
At any rate, these little owl-like appendages have become the eyewear of choice in Paris, both on and off the runway.


Communications Satellite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Oct. 5 about recycling described the law in New York State incorrectly.
Mandatory statewide recycling indeed exists; it began on Sept. 1.


Review/Ballet; A Troupe Wrapped In Clarity And Zest
Ballet Chicago is a company that not only moves with verve and precision, but also communicates its deep love of dancing to the audience.
It was those qualities -- speed, clarity and brio -- that made the troupe's performance on Sunday afternoon at Brooklyn College so appealing, and so special.
Daniel Duell, the company's director since its founding in 1987, is a former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, and his knowledge of that company's Balanchine repertory has influenced his policies.
It was therefore no surprise that the most familiar piece on the program was George Balanchine's virtuosic "Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux."


Lawsuit From Minors Seeks to Derail Marlin Expansion Draft
The owners of a minor league baseball team in Florida sued the Florida Marlins in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday, seeking to block the Marlins from participating in the Nov. 17 expansion draft and from using their name and logo.
The National League and its president, Bill White, also were named in the suit.
The owners of the Miami Miracle, the team that vacated Miami when the National League granted the area one of two expansion franchises for the 1993 season, are seeking a temporary restraining order enjoining the Marlins from doing business until they compensate the Miracle partnership for its exclusive territorial rights under the Professional Baseball Agreement.


Abrams Gets Endorsements of Moynihan
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan endorsed his fellow Democrat, Robert Abrams, yesterday in the United States Senate race in New York.
But the incumbent Republican, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who has taken to claiming that he is the true heir to Gov.
Bill Clinton's coattails, was also endorsed by some Democrats.
Dominick Fusco, chairman of the Committee of 100 Democrats, a Bronx Democratic organization, said his group had decided to endorse Mr.
D'Amato because of Mr.
Abrams's "ethnic slurs" against Mr.
D'Amato.
Mr.
Abrams called Mr.
D'Amato a "fascist" at a campaign stop in Binghamton, N.Y., the weekend before last.
Mr.
Fusco, who spoke at Mr.
D'Amato's Manhattan campaign headquarters yesterday, said that as an Italian-American who lived during the World War II era, "fascist is a bigger insult than any other insult."
Mr.
Fusco called it "rare" for his group to endorse a Republican.
But the move was not entirely unexpected; the group endorsed Rudolph W. Giuliani in the 1989 mayoral race.
Brother Clinton
Mr.
D'Amato, who has called Mr.
Abrams far more liberal than Mr.
Clinton, says that on issues like the death penalty and welfare reform, he has more in common with the Democratic Presidential nominee than Mr.
Abrams.
Mr.
D'Amato said his fortunes were not necessarily tied to Mr.
Bush's.
"There is some limited impact," he said, referring to Mr.
Clinton's lead in the polls at the top of the Democratic ticket.
"But ours is a strongly contested race. We're both names, we're both well-known."
Mr.
D'Amato has kept his distance from George Bush, but he could not avoid his Vice President.
Dan Quayle was the the featured guest at the Conservative Party dinner last night, which Mr.
D'Amato was scheduled to attend.
Even before the dinner, Mr.
Abrams said that merely by attending, Mr.
D'Amato was "showing his true colors as a loyal servant of Bush-Quayle."
Last night, Mr.
D'Amato greeted the Vice President cordially as Mr.
Quayle came to the dais, and the Vice President praised the Senator as a "fighter" who had won his support when they were colleagues in the Senate.
But afterward, Mr.
D'Amato did not seem especially eager to talk about the Vice President, who had preached fire and brimstone against Mr.
Clinton at the dinner.
Asked if Mr.
Quayle's message had been good for his Senate campaign, Mr.
D'Amato referred instead to his own speech, in which he had criticized Mr.
Abrams.
Mr.
Moynihan, the senior Senator from New York, predicted a Democratic "blowout" in New York.
He repeatedly clapped the Attorney General on the back and said Mr.
Abrams would be an important part of a new Democratic dominance of Washington politics and promised "100 days like we haven't seen since 1933."  Remembering the 1970's
Both campaigns made use of giant props yesterday.
Mr.
Abrams spoke against the backdrop of a large sign painted to look like a check for $117 billion and signed "jobless New Yorkers." It was a reference to Mr.
Abrams's claim that New York has lost $117 billion in Federal money since Mr.
D'Amato took office.
Mr.
D'Amato, who began his morning at the Long Island Rail Road station in Mineola, denounced his opponent while standing next to a giant billboard on the train station wall.
Above Mr.
Abrams's name was text from an interview with The Bronx Press Review, a weekly newspaper, that read: "I am here today to oppose a New York State law or any other form of subsidy for the L.I.R.R." Beneath it, the campaign added its own message.
"Now, he wants to be your Senator." An aide to Mr.
D'Amato said the poster would be displayed on billboards throughout the L.I.R.R. system.
Mr.
Abrams's statement was made in 1970, when he was the Bronx Borough President.
Mr.
D'Amato said that the 22-year-old remark was still relevant.
Timothy Gilles, a spokesman for Mr.
Abrams, called the poster an "outrageous mischaracterization," and said Mr.
Abrams had opposed any further subsidies for the L.I.R.R. until the city's subways received their fair share of financial aid.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


So, Canada, Is There Unlikely Hero for Game 3?
At times, the baseball lords are absolutely prescient.
How else can you explain the fact that the lead article in the 1992 World Series guide is entitled "Surprise, Surprise, Surprise," promoting a Fall Classic that has already had an abundance of just that ingredient?
The article deals with unlikely Series heroes: for instance, Brian Doyle, a part-time infielder with the Yankees who led all hitters in the 1978 Series with a .438 average; and the Mets' Al Weis, a career .219 hitter who batted .455 for the Miracle Mets of 1969, leading all hitters.


International Series Offers No Grand Slams for CBS
THE crowds are singing "O Canada" at the World Series, but it seems as if CBS and advertisers might wind up singing "Oh, no, Canada" -- or even "Oy, Canada!"
The first-ever appearance of a Canadian team in the World Series is, at least initially, eroding the ratings for CBS's telecasts.
A primary reason is that a team's home city can usually provide huge ratings during the Series -- but Canada is excluded from A. C. Neilsen's American data.


Pacific Bank N.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commodity Fraud Charges
The Commodities Futures Trading Commission said yesterday that it had filed administrative complaints against eight brokers and traders on the New York Mercantile Exchange; the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, and the Commodity Exchange.
The charges grow out of an extensive investigation of civil and criminal violations that became public in May 1989 with a series of raids on the offices of member firms.
With the action yesterday, 42 people have been charged with administrative complaints of fraud.
The investigation is continuing, according to officials of the commission.


New York Incentives For Morgan Stanley Prevent a Relocation
The Morgan Stanley Group, a major financial services company that had been considering moving its New York City headquarters and as many as 4,100 employees to Stamford, Conn., will remain in the city for at least 10 years, company officials said yesterday.
The city and state have agreed to almost $40 million in tax credits and other incentives over the next decade to help keep the company in New York, city and state officials said at a news conference yesterday at Morgan Stanley's midtown offices.
At the same news conference, Mayor David N. Dinkins also promised to freeze the city's general corporate tax rate for the next four years.  [ page B9. ]


British Prime Minister Retreats on Mine Closings
Facing mass public protests and a mutiny among among members of his own Conservative Party in Parliament, Prime Minister John Major reversed ground today and sharply reduced the number of coal mines and miners' jobs scheduled for elimination by the Government.
Less than a week after state-owned British Coal said it was closing 31 of 50 mines and laying off 30,000 workers -- more than three-quarters of Britain's remaining miners -- Michael Heseltine, Secretary for Trade and Industry, told a jeering, raucous session of the House of Commons that the Government now intended to close just 10 mines, at a cost of about 7,500 jobs.


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S.-VIETNAM TALKS MOVE TIES CLOSER
Vietnam and the United States have moved closer to establishing diplomatic relations after two days of talks in Hanoi between a high-level Bush Administration delegation and Vietnamese leaders, the State Department said today.
During the meetings, Hanoi pledged to open to American inspection all archival material relating to American servicemen unaccounted for since the Vietnam War, according to a joint statement issued by Vietnamese officials and the leader of the United States team, John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general.


In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All; Let's Not Butt In
To the Editor:
"The Dead of Winter, in Bosnia" (editorial, Sept. 28) chides the United States and its European allies for nonintervention in the slaughter in the former Yugoslav republic.
But what about the thousands we and our allies managed to kill in Korea, Vietnam and other places?
Let's face it: There are no natural resources in the Balkans that the United States or its allies needs.
The people are poor, mostly uneducated and at best would not be much of a market for the goods we produce.
Operation Desert Storm at least protected our oil supplies, and Korea and Vietnam were fought in the name of democracy.
A democracy, by the way, that still doesn't exist.


Sports of The Times; The Smell In the Giants' Locker Room
THE Giants' locker room yesterday afternoon smelled just as it normally does.
Not exactly like perfume.
The nostrils of visitors, though, were particularly acquiver at this time because a player on the team, linebacker Steve DeOssie, said after Sunday's miserable 38-17 loss to the Los Angeles Rams that the team had developed a certain scent.
"We stink," he said.
"We just have to face reality," DeOssie said. "We stink. That's the plain truth."


Bills Against Car Thefts Gain in Trenton
The State Senate unanimously approved a five-bill package today to treat automobile theft and the ramming of police cars as serious crimes rather than juvenile pranks.
The package, which was drafted in consultation with Gov.
Jim Florio, has broad bipartisan support.
It now goes to the Assembly, where passage is considered assured.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  7 NEW LEADERS FOR CHINA
China's Communist Party promoted some free-market enthusiasts to the committee that is supposed to rule for the next five years.
The shake-up suggests that the party intends to focus on economic restructuring instead of ideology.
A1  GREENS FOUNDER KELLY DIES
Petra Kelly, a founder of Germany's Green Party, and her companion, Gert Bastian, a former member of Parliament and former Army general, were found dead in what police said could be a suicide, a slaying or both.
A1


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Circus Plays a Role in Preserving Species
To the Editor:
"Illegal tiger hunting to supply tiger bones for the Chinese folk medicine trade could bring about the extinction of an already endangered species," you report in Science Times (some editions, Sept. 22).
You then report, citing the World Conservation Union of Gland, Switzerland, that poachers in one Indian game preserve alone killed 20 tigers in the last two years, and that only 7,000 tigers are estimated to remain in the wild throughout the world.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crafting a New Look for Adult Education


Stone Age Art Shows Penguins at Mediterranean
FRENCH divers have discovered a partly flooded cave filled with prehistoric rock paintings and engravings, a great underground amphitheater studded with running horses, bison and deer as well as images of human hands believed to have been drawn some 18,000 years ago.
The cave lies deep inside a cliff on the edge of the Mediterranean.
Its murals have surprised specialists because they include drawings of seals and penguins, the first images of such sea creatures ever found in Western Europe's prehistoric caves.
Seals still exist here today but the penguins are an unusual souvenir from an era when much of Europe was under ice and the Mediterranean was a chilly region with a climate more like today's Scandinavia.


Madrid Journal; Eyes Are on Banker: His on Politics?
With his slicked-back dark hair, elegant suits, matador physique and reputation for ruthlessness, Mario Conde became a role model for an entire generation of young Spaniards who believed that finance was the way to the top in the new Spain of the late 1980's.
A decade earlier, political or academic careers were still the fashion.
But by 1988, when Mr.
Conde became president of the Banco Espanol de Credito, a money fever had seized Spain.
Only 37 years old at the time, the high-profile banker was seen as proof that the country had changed.


Credit Markets; Bonds Drop on Fears of Clinton's Economic Plan
The bond market fell sharply yesterday, as investors and dealers were said to be positioning themselves for the likelihood that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas would win the Presidential election and would try to stimulate the economy with increases in Government spending.
The plunge in the market suggests how difficult it may be for whoever wins the election to push through a program to reinvigorate the economy.
The message from investors, traders and dealers is that bondholders will sell if a stimulus package is deemed too aggressive, pushing the Federal deficit much higher.
And if they sell, they could force market interest rates higher and offset any benefits from the stimulus program.
Persistent Selloff
The market's selloff has been persistent since the first week of October, when investors and dealers were disappointed that the Federal Reserve chose not to lower short-term interest rates another notch after weak September employment figures were released on Oct. 2.
The Fed's reluctance to move has had a significant impact on Treasury bills and intermediate-term notes.


First Tennessee National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Armenian Chorus Cancels
The Yerevan Women's Chorus of Armenia, which was to perform on Friday at 8 P.M. at Symphony Space, has canceled its concert because of visa problems.
Ticket holders desiring refunds should call the Symphony Space box office at (212) 864-5400.


Patterns
The Point Is Lightness
It's a made-to-order autumn in Paris.
The air is crisp, the sky blue, the leaves starting to turn.
The chestnut vendors are out on the streets, an exhibition of Botero sculptures lines the Champs-Elysees and the fashion folk are cooped up in tents or smoke-filled arenas.
There's a sale going on at Hermes, but who has time to shop?
The shows go on from morning until night, and you mustn't miss anything.
A new Lacroix or Saint Laurent may burst upon the scene.
Or someone may come up with a whole new way of dressing.


19, Count 'Em, 19 Candidates Run for Mayor in Jersey City
Jersey City's voters will elect their fourth mayor in a year next month.
To do so they will have to choose among 19 candidates, including two feuding brothers.
The winner of the special election will fill a vacancy created by the conviction of former Mayor Gerald McCann on Federal extortion charges and will serve until the regular elections in May.


National Sanitary reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
MARY ALICE WILLIAMS gave birth to fraternal twin girls Saturday night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
One twin weighed 6 pounds, the other 5 pounds 14 ounces.
No names have been chosen.
Ms.
Williams, 43 years old, was a co-host of the Sunday edition of the "Today" show when she went on maternity leave in August.
She is married to MARK HAEFELI, an independent television producer.
They have a 2 1/2-year-old daughter, Alice Ann.


Cummins Engine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Van Dorn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irate Russians Demonize Traders From Caucusus
Confused by the loss of an empire and frustrated by an inflation rate that keeps emptying their pockets, many Russians have fixed their fear and anxiety on a convenient target: traders from the Caucasus who have virtually taken over the farmers markets in Moscow and other cities, offering a tantalizing array of roses, lemons, bananas, bootlegged caviar, eggplant, Bulgarian chickens and other goods at prices beyond the average shopper's reach.
More and more, people mutter darkly of an invasion by "blacks." The term is used loosely here to describe the dark-haired southerners who until recently were described on police blotters as "people of a Caucasian nationality." They include Azerbaijanis, Armenians and Georgians, but also people from Dagestan, Chechenya and other autonomous republics within Russia.


Mildred M. Gilbert; Magazine Editor, 91
Mildred Morton Gilbert, a former executive editor of Vogue magazine, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old.
Miss Gilbert, who was born in Romney, Ind., began her career working for Charles of the Ritz Cosmetics shortly after graduating from Vassar College in 1923.
She joined the merchandising staff of Vogue in 1940 and became executive editor in 1947, a position she held for 19 years.
In 1966 Miss Gilbert was appointed international executive editor.
She retired from Vogue in 1974.


Review/Television; Looking for the Traces Of the First Americans
"The Search for the First Americans" digs into a disagreement among archeologists over when the first humans settled in North and South America.
As the narrator explains in tonight's lucid edition of "Nova," it is pretty certain that by 40,000 years ago prehistoric hunters had settled in almost every part of the world, but not in the Americas, where the earliest hard evidence of a human presence goes back only 12,000 years.
There are inconclusive hints from the languages of today's native peoples and from DNA research that the first Americans may have arrived in the ice age, perhaps as much as 50,000 years ago, when sea levels dropped, exposing a broad land bridge that linked Asia with North America.
But this hour concentrates on archeological finds, particularly stone tools, the solidest evidence of human activity.


Plans for 14 Theme High Schools Begin Taking Shape in New York
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's plan to create small alternative high schools began to take shape yesterday with a decision to give planning grants for 14 proposals to groups including unions, church organizations and colleges.
The proposals, winnowed from 282 applications, offer a glimpse at what the schools might look like.
One would be a School for the Physical City, where the students would study bridges, subways and tunnels.
Another is a Health Opportunities Program School, where students would learn about science by working in hospitals with health workers.


Business at the Tracks Is Beating the Odds
New York racing closed its 42-day autumn meeting at Belmont Park yesterday with no further erosion of attendance or betting, and officials were optimistic that the full year might show the first gain in attendance in 10 years.
The year's totals will depend on what happens during the next 62 racing days at Aqueduct in Queens, where the New York season will be resumed tomorrow.
Between then and the end of the year, nine races a day will be run six days a week, with 33 stakes offering more than $4 million in purses.


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


There Aren't Enough Minutes in a Game to Do the Rangers Justice
There are too many quality players on the Rangers, and not enough minutes in a hockey game.
The resulting mathematics has made the early season painful for Coach Roger Neilson and for the players on the bubble.
"I sat out one game and of course I'm mad about it," defenseman Mark Hardy said today, after an optional skate at the Rangers' practice center.
"But if management thinks this is going to work, you can't let it bother you mentally. You have to realize you're going to sit out sometimes, even if you're playing well."


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JUSTICES TO RULE ON THE RETARDED
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether mentally retarded people are constitutionally entitled to the same protection against involuntary confinement in a state institution that the state gives to the mentally ill.
The case, an appeal by the State of Kentucky, also raises the question of what role the parents or legal guardians of retarded adults can play in involuntary commitment proceedings.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Thursday night's New York Philharmonic program was notable for an interesting new fanfare by Daron Hagen and Garrick Ohlsson's stately playing of the Grieg Piano Concerto.
Mr.
Hagen's "Philharmonia" features antiphonal solo trumpets and repeated-note tremors.
The latter appear out of the orchestra's various sections, each time bearing a different weight and color.
A balance is struck between strident announcement and a wider, more variegated symphonic display.
This is a successful piece, one that uses its virtuoso performers wisely.


Bloody and Unshod, Refugees Flee Serbs
Ana Dujiman, a 29-year-old Muslim refugee, broke down in tears as she lugged her 15-month-old daughter over the last painful yards of a four-mile hike across the mountainside war front.
"What kind of men would steal the shoes from a mother carrying a baby?" she cried as she limped in stocking feet toward a truck that would carry her to join thousands of other refugees in an old military base in the nearby town of Travnik.
Many of the refugee centers are critically short of food and without heat.


Candidates On Television    The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush


Developer Fights Refund Denial
A New Jersey real-estate developer has appealed a judge's ruling denying his company a multimillion-dollar refund from the Township of Berkeley Heights.
The appeal, filed last Friday by the Connell Realty and Development Company of Westfield, seeks to overturn a decision by Judge John Pisansky of Superior Court in Elizabeth, who ruled last month that the township was not liable for $4.6 million in principal and interest.


At Edge of Campaign, Jackson Labors On for Democratic Victory
In a howling rainstorm at the far western edge of the continent, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson huddled under a tent.
If he searched the length of the United States, he probably could not find a place more removed from the hot lights of national politics than this small town on the Canadian border.
"This is a season of pain," Mr.
Jackson told several hundred union members from both sides of the border who had gathered to protest provisions of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"We must turn our pain into power."


Lotus Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Executive Changes
AMERICAN BIOGENETIC SCIENCES INC., South Bend, Ind., appointed Kenneth H. Burk president and chief operating officer.
American Biogenetic Sciences is a biopharmaceutical company.
LIFETIME LEARNING SYSTEMS INC., Fairfield, Conn., a unit of Communications International, has named Donald J. Lay president.
Lifetime Learning Systems produces supplementary teaching materials.


Classical Music in Review
New York New Music  Ensemble  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
The Sonic Boom festival, a joint endeavor by the five ensembles that make up the New York Consortium for New Music, opened on Wednesday evening with a concert devoted mostly to premieres (the exception was Bartok's "Contrasts") played expertly by the New York New Music Ensemble.


Flightsafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dear Offense: Giant Defense Needs a Hand
Coach Ray Handley painted a picture today of a Giants defense that no longer is what it was and of an offense that has failed to emerge from that defense's shadow.
"It's not the same team," Handley said of the team that won the 1991 Super Bowl under Bill Parcells.
"They're not the same players they were in '90. Certain players are getting older."


State Street Boston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Barrick reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florida Pressuring U.S. Over Nuclear Waste
Florida's utilities regulators have accused Washington of "squandering" $3 billion of electricity customers' money in a fruitless search for a place to put nuclear waste.
Under a provision of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, Florida utilities, like others around the country, have been required for a decade to set aside one-tenth of a cent per kilowatt hour of electricity generated by nuclear reactors and place the money in an Energy Department fund for creating a waste dump.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Coltec Industries, New York, is offering $150 million of 9 3/4 percent senior notes due in 1999 at a price of 100 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Ba-2 by Moody's and B+ by S.&amp; P. *
Harris County, Tex., has tentatively priced, through First Boston, $96.2 million of certificates of obligation for a detention facility, with a maximum yield of 6.35 percent for a security due in 2011.
Yields range from 3.50 percent in 1994 to 6.25 percent in 2008.
The issue is rated double A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Rohm &amp; Haas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McCann New York Shifts Manager
Gordon Bowen, who was hired amid much farfare last year to work on the Coca-Cola Company account at McCann-Erickson New York, has handed over his responsibilities for day-to-day management of the creative department there to Marcio Moreira, vice chairman and chief creative officer-international at the parent company, McCann-Erickson Worldwide.
John J. Dooner Jr., president and chief operating officer at McCann Worldwide, said in a staff memo issued yesterday that the shift was made so that Mr.
Bowen, 42 years old, could "dedicate more time to hands-on creative development." The memo added that Mr.
Moreira would handle his new duties "for the time being."


Making Adjustments During Legal Half
The National Football League owners will huddle in Chicago today and tomorrow to map a game plan on a bundle of issues, chief among them those at the center of the league's labor conflict.
Most observers believe the players have scored a string of recent court victories, but the owners do not share this view.
Most of those cases are under appeal, they point out.


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


High Doses of Drugs Forestall Heart Transplants
THREE years ago, Joyette Ranker's heart mysteriously weakened, leaving her short of breath, exhausted and desperate for help.
"I went to four hospitals," she said.
"All the doctors said my condition was hopeless. They left me to die."
As a last resort, Mrs.
Ranker, a 68-year-old retired actress from Hemet, Calif., went to the University of California at Los Angeles to see if she qualified for a heart transplant.
She did and was put on the national waiting list.


American Management Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nurses Taste What It's Like When You're Elderly and in the Hospital
There they were, a roomful of nurses feeding each other crackers that crumbled on their chest, juice that dribbled down their chin, and spoons laden with orange Jell-O that tasted like grandma's punishment for sassing.
The women giggled at the awkward experience of being a dependent adult.
It's silly at first, then strange, frighteningly confining and, well, downright demeaning after decades of independence.


RABIN TRIES TO WIN HELP ON THE RIGHT
After 100 days in office, a time for political stock-taking, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is not yet in command of the Government he wants and is casting around for new religious and right-wing partners.
How he reshapes his governing coalition -- assuming he is able to -- is likely to affect the content and pace of Mr.
Rabin's agenda, above all the continuing peace talks with neighboring Arab countries and the Palestinians.


Parking Rules
Because of Simhath Torah, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CHRONICLE
In London, Earl Spencer, the father of the Princess of Wales, left an estate valued at more than $145 million.
But under the terms of the will, made public yesterday, the Princess is to receive only a few mementos and the proceeds from a trust.
The Earl died of a heart attack on March 29.
The Associated Press reported that DAVID ROBINSON, a senior partner in the law firm acting for the executors, said that "a very high proportion" of the estate's value was Althorp, the family's ancestral home in Northamptonshire in central England.
The earl's only son, Charles, inherited the property and the title.


Transactions
Baseball
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Gene Bennett special assistant to the general manager; Tony Robello senior advisor for player personnel; and Chief Bender director of player development.
Basketball
National Basketball Association  NEW YORK KNICKS -- Waived Terry Dozier, forward, and Gary Waites, guard.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Tom Gugliotta, forward, to a seven-year contract, and Doug Overton, guard.


CHRONICLE
More fallout from the furor caused by SINEAD O'CONNOR when she ripped up a photograph of the Pope on "Saturday Night Live" two weeks ago.
MARY McFADDEN announced yesterday that she is rescinding an invitation to the Irish singer for the showing of her spring and summer collection at the New York Public Library on Nov. 5.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hit Series' Producers Must Scramble to Fill A Dead Actor's Role
One week after the sudden death of an actor with a central role in CBS's comedy hit series "Love and War," the creators of the program are shaken and puzzled about how to proceed.
The actor, John Hancock, died of a heart attack at his home in Los Angeles last Monday.
He was 51 years old.


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Voting Is So Old Hat
After a week soaking in campaign news, campaign polls, campaign editorials, campaign debates, TV and print analysis of campaign debates, not to mention the campaign insights, reflections, clarifications, expostulations, whinings, wheezings, sneerings, cheerings, frothings, sermonizings and rationalizings of pundits, both printed and tube-borne, I'll tell you how it feels to me.
It feels like Clinton has already been President so long that I'm tired of him.


Taubman Is Trying Again On Initial Public Offering
A.
Alfred Taubman's glittering shopping mall empire has taken its second shot at the public markets.
After blistering criticism from institutional investors of the original deal, Taubman Centers Inc. late Friday filed a revised prospectus of its initial public offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Transcript of 3d TV Debate Between Bush, Clinton and Perot
Following is a transcript of the Presidential debate at Michigan State University in East Lansing last night between President Bush, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot, as recorded by The New York Times: Credibility and Believability


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Canadiens Stop Blues  Todd Ewen scored twice, including the tie-breaking goal in the third period, as the Montreal Canadiens beat the St.
Louis Blues by 6-2 last night in Montreal.
Ewen, acquired from St.
Louis in 1989, got two goals in a game for the first time in his career.
He scored once in the opening period and then added the game-winner on a breakaway to start Montreal's four-goal burst.
Ed Ronan, Brian Bellows, Guy Carbonneau and Denis Savard also scored for Montreal, which won its second straight game.
Nelson Emerson and Brendan Shanahan scored for St.
Louis, which tied the game at 2-2 after two periods.
Montreal, coming off an 8-1 defeat of Minnesota on Saturday, outshot the Blues, 33-27.
Ronan got his first National Hockey League goal 6 minutes 9 seconds into the game when he took advantage of a mixup at the St.
Louis blue line to go in alone and beat goalie Curtis Joseph on the backhand.
The St.
Louis defense was caught standing around when Mathieu Schneider set up Ewen alone at the side of the net for an easy tap-in almost three minutes later to make it 2-0. (AP) BASKETBALL  Playing for a Cause  The victims of Hurricane Andrew will have $500,000 more to help them rebuild their lives, thanks to the Chicago Bulls and the Miami Heat.
The Bulls beat the Heat, 111-94, last night in an exhibition game to raise money for We Will Rebuild, a hurricane-relief organization.
All revenues from the game -- ticket receipts, concessions, parking fees -- along with donations called in by fans watching the nationally televised game on TNT, will go to hurricane relief.
The idea for the game came from the Bulls' Michael Jordan, who suggested it to Billy Cunningham, the former N.B.A. star who is a partner in the Heat's ownership.
Seated in the approximately 740 courtside seats in the Miami Arena were children who were left homeless or whose families suffered great damage because of the hurricane. (AP)


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Convenience Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Radio Scanner Owners Aren't Ham Operators
To the Editor:
"Ban on Eavesdropping Scanners Advances" (Business Day, Oct. 9) reports that Congress has banned manufacture or importation of radio scanners that can listen in on cellular phones.
You add: "Such eavesdropping, an increasingly popular pastime among possibly millions of ham radio operators and other hobbyists, has unnerved cellular customers and outraged privacy advocates." This seriously misrepresents amateur radio.
Certainly, some amateur radio operators -- hams -- own scanners, which pick up police and fire bands.
So do some journalists.
Most use their scanners responsibly.
But eavesdropping on cellular telephone conversations has no more to do with ham radio than with journalism.
To attribute this activity to ham radio operators is inaccurate and unfair.


David Harris Cohen; Curator, 43
David Harris Cohen, an associate curator of decorative arts at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., died on Sunday at the Midway Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 43 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of AIDS-related causes, said his companion, Dale E. Thumma.


Does Our Society Have No Value Higher Than Tolerance?
To the Editor:
"Teaching About Gays and Tolerance" (editorial, Sept. 27) defends the effort by New York City public schools to celebrate life style diversity and eliminate any stigma attached to nontraditional family forms.
But you avoid the difficult issues.
You remind us that tolerance is an important social value.
Yes, but you also imply that tolerance is a synonym for approval.
As a nonsmoker, I tolerate smoking.
But I do not approve of it.
Even less do I believe that the public school system should teach my child that smoking and nonsmoking are equally praiseworthy.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kelly Says He'll Stress Recruiting More Blacks
In the first working hour of his first full day as Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly visited a black-owned radio station yesterday to stress recruiting of black officers.
For about 40 minutes on a talk show, "The Breakfast Club" on the station, WLIB-AM, Mr.
Kelly answered cordial but sharp questions from the host, Art Whaley, and 10 listeners.
The topics included minority recruitment, a rowdy demonstration by off-duty officers, the power of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and the role of a proposed independent Civilian Complaint Review Board in dealing with brutality.


CBT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


Classical Music in Review
'Die Fledermaus'  New York City Opera
The New York City Opera of recent decades has tended to play for easy laughs.
So there was ample reason to dread its first "Fledermaus" of the season on Thursday evening, running concurrently with the second Presidential debate.
What topical "humor" might the drunken jailor Frosch -- here, that prize ham James Billings -- inject into the third act?


I.B.M. Joins Big Rivals In Business Consulting
The International Business Machines Corporation announced yesterday that it had started the I.B.M.
Consulting Group, a worldwide concern with a staff of 1,500, making it immediately a large competitor in the crowded field of business consulting.
The new unit offers both general business consulting and technical consulting in specialties ranging from computer networking to manufacturing logistics.


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chemical Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brochures, Fliers, Polls, Ads: Politics as a Business Slumps
There will be many winners come Election Day, but it is already clear who the big losers in politics are this year.
They are the people who print the brochures, mail the fliers, take the polls and broadcast the spots for the candidates.
Election Day is to this industry what Christmas is to retailing, and neither Democrats nor Republicans are buying big this season.


Intel Names New Chip
Ending months of speculation and rumor, the Intel Corporation today named its new microprocessor the Pentium processor.
Pentium, a trademarked name, breaks the Intel tradition of labeling its chips with the suffix "86" as in 286, 386 and 486.
Intel said it departed from its usual practice, which would have labeled this chip 586, because it had been unable to trademark the numerical system.
Companies like Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and the Cyrix Corporation, which have offered clones of Intel processors using the 386 and 486 labels, would be blocked from calling their products Pentium.


Schulman (A.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


American Cyanamid reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Chess Column
During the exhibition match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, the Tuesday chess column by Robert Byrne will not appear.
The column will resume after the match.


Local Government Is Taken to Task As Florida Hurricane Cleanup Drags
Angered by the slow pace of Dade County's recovery from Hurricane Andrew and by mounting evidence of building code violations, Miami area residents are turning their frustration on county officials and the way their local government operates.
Nearly two months after the hurricane struck, in what officials say was the most costly natural disaster in American history, billions of dollars are being spent to rebuild or replace the more than 85,000 homes and office buildings declared "unusable" by the State of Florida.
And while those relief efforts are continuing, the last of 28,000 Federal troops are leaving this week, the tent cities are folding, and the residents of the hurricane zone are realizing that their government must now direct the recovery on its own.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Surrounding Scene; Bush Wins One Contest With a Sharp, Red Tie
They say that George Bush is at his best when he's backed into a corner, that he's a tiger on triple match point, in the last two minutes of the fourth quarter, after the second out of the ninth inning, against the ropes in the 15th round.
That is when, his advisers like to say, he gets loaded for bear.
(Yes, those are really the sort of ferocious metaphors Bush advisers like to use, often all jumbled up in the same sentence.)


Louisiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
If candidates for executive positions were required to give evidence of intellectual ability in any way they chose, bridge experts would welcome the opportunity.
Harold Rasmussen of Dallas, a banker who was in Manhattan last week in a job search, could put forward the diagramed deal played a week ago in the Harmonie Club's member-expert game.
He held the West cards, and defended four spades with a former world champion in the South seat.
South won the opening club lead with the ace, ruffed a club and cashed top two spades.
He surrendered a trump trick to West, who shifted to the heart queen.
This was covered by the king and ace, and the ten was played to West's jack.
That left this delicate position:  [ DIAGRAM ]
The obvious play for West was a club, but that would have been fatal.
South would have ruffed and led his remaining trumps, executing a double squeeze.
West would have had to guard clubs and East hearts, so dummy's diamond nine would have won the last trick.
Seeing this coming, Rasmussen shifted to a diamond, superficially risky, and the defense had to prevail.
South did the best he could by winning with the ace and leading his three trumps, but it did not help.
West was able to throw both his clubs, and South had to lose a trick at the finish for down one.


Illicit Atom-Material Trade Worries Germans
The arrest of seven people and the seizure of radioactive materials smuggled in from Eastern Europe in the last week have heightened fears that the collapse of Communism could lead to a dangerous black market in nuclear weapons and the materials to build them.
The suspects, arrested by German authorities in Munich, Frankfurt and Bochum, were charged with trying to sell the makings of atomic bombs, for up to half a million dollars.
Customs officials also seized nearly five pounds of radioactive uranium that had been left in a car in southeastern Munich last Tuesday.
The nuclear material was believed to have come from Eastern Europe, but authorities did not specify from what country.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
World Music Institute  Merkin Concert Hall
The World Music Institute and Thomas Buckner presented an unusual collaboration between American and Indian performers on Thursday night at Merkin Concert Hall.
The evening grew out of a trip to India undertaken earlier this year by Alvin Lucier, an electronics experimentalist, and Jon Barlow, a pianist who teaches at Wesleyan University.
They were joined by the saxophonist and composer Anthony Braxton; Nageswara Rao, a South Indian lutenist; Anuradha Mohan and Vidyadar Vyas, vocalists, and Samay Cholkar, playing tabla.


PowerBooks Include One More for the Road
APPLE COMPUTER introduced several new PowerBook portable Macintoshes yesterday, bolstering its most popular line with more power, better displays and the ability to connect directly to a wide variety of desktop monitors.
Apple also added two new members of the desktop Macintosh II family, the Mac IIvi and the Mac IIvx.


Bond Rating For Nassau Is Lowered
After months of fiscal instability and political deadlock, the rating on $1.3 billion in Nassau County bonds was dropped two levels today, to the lowest investment-grade rating, and the lowest level in the county's history.
In lowering the rating, officials at Moody's Investors Service said that after months of inaction because of a "protracted and contentious political stalemate" the county was within six to eight weeks of running out of cash to pay its bills, unless it acted soon.


COMPANY NEWS: Teller in a Telephone; Bank to Help Customers Keep Fingers on Dollars
In the latest push for banking by phone, a large bank and a leading maker of telecommunications equipment are testing a new telephone that makes it easier to pay bills, transfer funds and inquire about balances.
The telephone's console has a small screen that is similar to the screen of an automatic teller machine and provides voice "prompts" from a speaker phone.
The Bank of Boston is conducting a test among 300 consumers of a phone specially designed by Northern Telecom of Canada.
The phone will conform with technical standards now being developed that will allow such phones with screens to be used anywhere in the country.


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Falls Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Guzman Adds to Jays' New Confidence
Were it not for one unlikely swing from an unlikely hero named Ed Sprague on Sunday night, the Toronto Blue Jays would be staring at a frightening 2-0 deficit to the Atlanta Braves in the World Series.
Instead, Sprague's homer has seemingly relaxed the Jays because the series is tied, it has shifted to the Skydome for three games and Juan Guzman seems ready to stare down the Braves.
For all the attention Jack Morris has received for being a big-game pitcher and all the discussions about David Cone's nasty stuff, Guzman is a prime reason why the Jays are playing host to a World Series game for the first time Wednesday night.
Guzman melted the Oakland bats twice during the American League Championship Series while allowing three earned runs in 13 innings.


Do Greens Go With Gold? Golf Thinks So
The possibility of including golf as a medal sport for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta has gained the support of the game's biggest wheels, who are ready to roll out a plan in which the world's best male and female professionals would vie for gold medals at the Augusta National Golf Club.
A unified front -- including the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, the United States Olympic Committee, the Augusta National Golf Club, the PGA Tour, the L.P.G.A.
Tour and the World Amateur Golf Council -- emerged yesterday in support of a proposal to the International Olympic Committee to make the sport part of the Summer Games for the first time since 1904.
Golf was a medal sport in 1900 and 1904, but not since.


Market Place; Preserving G.M.'s Blue-Chip Credit
WHEN Robert C. Stempel, chairman of the General Motors Corporation, was taken to a Washington hospital last week, his illness was diagnosed as hypertension.
Fortunately, Mr.
Stempel felt well enough to return to work by week's end.
But the enormous pressure to restructure G.M. that is swirling about Mr.
Stempel and other senior G.M. executives will not dissipate as quickly.


FREE MARKET GAINS
The Communist Party announced a sweeping change in the makeup of its highest executive body today, promoting several enthusiasts of free markets to the seven-member committee that is supposed to rule China for at least the next five years.
The reshaping of the all-powerful Politburo Standing Committee is an important victory for those trying to tug the party toward a new world of free markets -- for goods, though not ideas.
The shake-up, which included the retirement of two leading hard-liners, sends a clear signal that the party intends to focus its energies not on ideology but on economic restructuring.
A Future Power Struggle
The selection of the seven men as members of the new Standing Committee prepares the battleground for the huge power struggle expected after the death of Deng Xiaoping, China's 88-year-old paramount leader.
The seven men will have far more weight than any one else in determining the direction of China after Mr.
Deng dies.
While Mr.
Deng holds no official position, he clearly was the prime force in picking the new Standing Committee.
But as his health deteriorates, he is unlikely to be able to influence it in the way he has in the past.
Mr.
Deng emerged today to congratulate the new leaders, in his first televised appearance in eight months.
He seemed very frail and his facial expression barely changed.
Still, he managed to walk about and wave to the cheering delegates of the just-ended Communist Party congress.
Helped by His Daughter
"The congress was a great success," Mr.
Deng said, according to the official New China News Agency.
"I hope all people will continue to work hard."
Mr.
Deng is known to be virtually deaf and to have difficulty articulating his words, and from the Chinese television footage it appeared that his daughter Deng Rong, who held his arm the entire time, had to repeat his remarks on some occasions so others could understand him.
She also spoke into his ear to tell him what people were saying to him.
While Mr.
Deng is said to be more alert in the mornings, it is still not entirely clear how a man in such a physical state can exert such a grip over national affairs.
One partial answer to this puzzle is that he focuses only on setting broad policy guidelines and on choosing personnel at the highest level.
Even so, some Chinese wonder if those around Mr.
Deng may be manipulating him or else manipulating the country by sometimes speaking in his name.
It is impossible to know how the new leaders will act once they are freed of Mr.
Deng's supervision.
But so far there is no sign that they favor a political liberalization to go along with the economic changes that have opened large segments of the Chinese economy to market forces.
Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party General Secretary, remains the head of the Standing Committee.
As a stereo system played "Descendants of the Dragon," a ballad that ironically was written by a pro-democracy campaigner expelled from China two years ago, Mr.
Jiang strode into a large room in the Great Hall of the People and introduced the other members of the new Standing Committee to several hundred foreign reporters.
A Different Atmosphere
Five years ago, the newly chosen Standing Committee walked around the room, bantering with journalists, but this time the atmosphere was entirely different.
As soon as they had been introduced, the members hurried out of the room, some looking nervously over their shoulders at the mobs of journalists shouting questions at them.
One of the most important appointments today was the elevation to the Standing Committee of Zhu Rongji, a former Shanghai Mayor who is sometimes labeled "China's Gorbachev" because of his aggressive efforts to restructure the economy.
Mr.
Zhu, who is 64, has risen very rapidly and is the leading candidate to replace Prime Minister Li Peng if Mr.
Li is edged out when his term expires next spring.
"Now the reformers finally have some advocates in the highest ranks," a Western diplomat said.
"It's unrealistic to think that they will lead to a Western parliamentary system. But there probably will be dramatic changes in the economy, and that will lead to political changes even if they don't want that to happen."
The youngest of the new Standing Committee members is Hu Jintao, the 49-year-old party secretary in Tibet.
Mr.
Hu has played a central role in crushing dissent in Tibet, where troops have fired machine guns on protesting Buddhist monks and nuns, and yet he is generally considered a reformer.
In part this is because Mr.
Hu endorsed the repression for practical rather than ideological reasons.
Moreover, he was a protege of Hu Yaobang, a former Communist Party leader who sought far-reaching change.
On the other hand, Hu Jintao was also promoted early in his career by Song Ping, a hard-liner, and so the accuracy of the labels is open to question.
The other new addition to the Standing Committee is Gen.
Liu Huaqing, a 76-year-old army veteran who has tried to make the military forces professional and modern rather like those in the West.
Three other party leaders have been retained from the previous Standing Committee: Mr.
Li, the Prime Minister; Qiao Shi, who is in charge of internal security, and Li Ruihuan, who looks after ideology and propaganda.
Most Chinese regard Li Peng as a hard-liner and Li Ruihuan as a reformer, with Mr.
Jiang and Mr.
Qiao somewhere in between.
Those dropped from the Standing Committee were Yao Yilin, the head of the central planning apparatus, and Mr.
Song, the hard-liner who has been in charge of party organization.
In addition to the seven chosen to serve on the Standing Committee, 13 others were chosen regular members of the Politburo.
The full Politburo meets about once a month, with many other party officials present as well.
The Standing Committee, on the other hand, normally meets at least once a week, with much less ceremony.
It is by far the more important body.
Aside from the seven serving on the Standing Committee, 11 officials were elevated to the full Politburo for the first time: Ding Guangen, Mr.
Deng's bridge partner; Li Lanqing, the Trade Minister; Qian Qichen, the Foreign Minister; Yang Baibing, a general; Wu Bangguo, the party leader in Shanghai; Zou Jiahua, a Deputy Prime Minister; Chen Xitong, the Mayor of Beijing; Jiang Chunyun, the party leader in Shandong Province; Wei Jianxing, the Minister of Supervision; Xie Fei, the party leader in Guangdong Province, and Tan Shaowen, the party leader in the city of Tianjin.
Two others who had served on the previous Politburo were retained on the present one: Tian Jiyun, who oversees agriculture, and Li Tieying, the Education Minister.
There is a sense in Beijing that other changes -- in policies and personnel -- are likely to follow soon.
At People's Daily, for instance, an official spokeswoman paused when she was asked if the hard-line publisher, Gao Di, was still holding his job.
"Well," she said uncertainly, "I have no information that he's no longer serving as publisher."


Ekco Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Profits Rise at 2 Bells, But Are Flat at Pactel
Two regional Bell telephone companies reported higher third-quarter profits yesterday.
But another had posted virtually flat earnings earlier.
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, which serves Northeastern states from New Jersey to Virginia, said its net income rose 16.6 percent from a year earlier.
U S West Inc., which serves the Pacific Northwest and some Midwestern states, said net income rose 5.2 percent.


Review/Rock; Mixing Love, Freud and Forbidden Planets
At Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J., on Thursday night, many of the Chills' songs came with soft-spoken introductions from the lead singer, Martin Phillipps.
"This is an apology to women for all the things we blokes do to you," he said before "Male Monster From the Id," from the Chills' fourth and latest album, "Soft Bomb" (Slash/Reprise).
More so than with most garage rockers, Mr.
Phillipps's songs benefit from an introduction: he constructs them with a scrupulous, obsessive attention to language detail that can be lost amid the rush of the live setting.
"Male Monster From the Id" has references to Freudian psychology, Superman and Mr.
Hyde, cavemen and forbidden planets.
It's not a typical love song.
This tension between sophisticated imagery and brusque electric guitar clatter is a key element in the Chills' chemistry.
At Maxwell's, Mr.
Phillipps seemed a bit like a mad rock scientist: his short brown hair was disheveled, his gray sweatshirt didn't fit quite right and when the tempos raced his eyes took on a look of manic distraction.
Mr.
Phillipps's arrangements can be as elaborate as his wordplay: intertwined guitar and piano lines; swelling, swinging rhythms; sharp time shifts and chord changes; propulsive bass parts that offer a counterpoint to the melody.


Knicks Reduce Roster by 2
The Knicks announced today that they have released forward Terry Dozier and guard Gary Waites, reducing their roster to 14 players.
That left Eric Anderson, Greg Butler, Lewis Geter and Bo Kimble to battle for the final two roster spots.
Dozier, a free agent who played in the Continental Basketball Association last season, played just six minutes during the team's first two preseason games, scoring 7 points.
Waites, who also played in the C.B.A. last season, was scoreless in six minutes during the preseason.


Challenges Mount as School Counselors' Numbers Dwindle
The 17-year-old boy with the wispy mustache and the baseball cap turned backward was fuming.
At first, he demanded to be transferred to a new school for safety reasons.
He complained of grudge matches among Dominicans, Puerto Ricans and black students.
He recounted a failed attempt to steal his $300 jacket in a school bathroom.
But a few minutes later, he was telling Phyllis Dulberg in a quiet voice that his girlfriend had given birth to a 2-pound, 2-ounce baby.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
France sought to dampen hopes of an early breakthrough in world trade talks, arguing that the Bush Administration was in no position to close a deal before the Presidential election.  [ Page D1. ]
Four former Soviet republics have agreed to strict quotas on uranium shipments to the United States.  [ D2 ]


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perot Outscores Regular Shows
Ross Perot's political commercials continue to be more popular than some regular prime-time entertainment shows.
Mr.
Perot's 30-minute commercial on NBC Friday night scored a 9 national rating, and the A. C. Nielsen Company estimated that 13 million people watched the commercial.
Each rating point represents 931,000 homes.


Union Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Beverly Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Long Run, Family Leave Will Be a Bargain; Women's Burden
To the Editor:
I read your Oct. 7 installment of "The Good Mother" series, on family leave, with anger.
I am sick and tired of the problems we face as women.
Economically, politically and socially we mothers are damned if we do and damned if we don't hold jobs outside the home.
When I was a young mother in the 1970's, many of us could still stay home with the kids -- one paycheck could maintain the basics.
Less than 20 years later most mothers must work outside the home.
Yet we are made to feel selfish and inadequate by politicians and so-called "men of God."


Clinton Pledge vs. Clinton Plan
I will not raise taxes on the middle class to pay for my programs.
With that ringing assertion, Gov.
Bill Clinton gave Monday's Presidential debate what may be its most memorable moment.
Asked to cite a specific income level below which he would not reach for more taxes, he made a ringing no-tax pledge.


FoxMeyer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris  Village Gate 160 Bleecker Street Greenwich Village  By Eric Blau.
Production conception, English lyrics and additional material by Mr.
Blau and Mort Shuman; based on Brel's lyrics and commentary; music by Jacques Brel, Francois Rauber, Gerard Jouannest and Jean Corti.
Directed by Elly Stone; musical direction by Annie LeBeaux; additional movement by Gabriel Barre; scenery by Don Jensen; lighting by Graeme F. McDonnell; costumes by Mary Brecht; production supervised by Harry A. Kraus, Blue Curl Productions.
Presented by Blue Curl Productions, in association with Phyllis Raskind, Harold L. Strauss and Stuart Zimberg.
WITH: Gabriel Barre, Andrea Green, Joseph Neal and Karen Saunders.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON IS LEERY OF PREMATURE JOY
As they huffed about the asphalt of Midway Airport, tossing a football in one of the quadrennial rites of autumn, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore could not stop grinning, and neither could their aides.
For the Democratic Presidential ticket, today seemed, so to speak, morning in America.
The third and final debate between Mr.
Clinton and President Bush was over.
In this last round, Mr.
Bush had done much better than many had expected, and Mr.
Clinton had spent a lot of time on the defensive, but it did not seem that anything big enough had happened to turn the race around.


WQXR-AM to Change Its Format, to Popular Music From Classical
WQXR-AM, one of the two classical music radio stations owned by The New York Times, plans to change its format to play American popular music.
The plan was announced yesterday by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive officer of The New York Times Company.
Under the new format, the classical music of Bach, Beethoven and Brahms will give way to the American popular standards of Ellington, Rodgers and Porter, performed by Frank Sinatra, Mel Torme and Ella Fitzgerald.
The Times has applied to the Federal Communications Commission for approval to change the station's call letters to WQEW.
The format change for the station (at 1560 AM) may take effect as early as December.
It will not affect the programming, personnel or call letters of WQXR-FM (96.3), which will continue to broadcast classical music.


In Long Run, Family Leave Will Be a Bargain; Staying Home
To the Editor:
Having made the choice to take time off from my career as a lawyer and raise my 11-month-old son, I have been reading your "Good Mother" series with a great deal of anger.
My anger stems from the refusal of any of the "experts" to admit that the choice to raise one's own child is not only honorable, but also the best one for both mothers and children.
When I announced my decision to stay home with my child, I was greeted with shock and disbelief by my professional associates.
Many tried to make excuses for me, saying that I must not have meant I was leaving the practice of law entirely, that I must be planning to do freelance work at home.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation's planned acquisition of the Sound Warehouse and Music Plus music stores from Shamrock Holdings misstated the total value of the deal.
The sale price is $185 million; this includes $120 million in debt owed by the two companies, which Blockbuster agreed to pay off.


Werner Torkanowksy, a Soloist On Violin and a Conductor, 66
Werner Torkanowsky, a conductor, composer and violinist, died on Tuesday at Mount Desert Hospital in Bar Harbor, Me.
He was 66 years old and lived in Hancock Point, Me.
He died of cancer, his family said.


But the Fighter Still Remains in Belmont; After 59 Years of Taking It on the Chin, Bobby Halpern Can Still Throw a Punch
Bobby Halpern pummeled the heavy bag.
He can still punch.
With each sweaty blow, his muscles tensed and ripples rose beneath the pink scars that document a distinctly unusual life: This body, sagging only slightly under the weight of his 59 years, has withstood bullets, knives, prison beatings and more opponents than he can count.
The bell rang.
He hiked up his black Everlast shorts, minus the silver Star of David from his years as "the Jewish Bomber." He tried to speak but his top denture plunked down over his lower teeth, by no means a full row.


Penn Central reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Open Skies, Friendlier Skies
British Airways and USAir.
Lufthansa and Continental.
KLM and Northwest.
Since July, European airlines have been lining up to combine operations with weak U.S. carriers.
If the "mergers" go through, which is far from certain, Americans can expect lower fares and better service.
But there's more at stake than domestic air fares.
The sudden rash of proposals reflects the first tangible fruits of a shrewd Administration strategy to pry open closed European airline markets.
If the strategy pays off, powerful carriers would for the first time be allowed to go head-to-head on international air routes.
That would be great news for travelers everywhere.


Workshop Tries To Teach Pupils How Not to Hate
In Room 119 at Wilson High School here, Sameena Mulla, a 10th-grader whose parents are from India, was telling her classmates about her most memorable and painful experience with racism.
It happened two years ago in Baltimore, where Miss Mulla, then 13 years old, was visiting relatives who lived in a white neighborhood.
She was standing in line waiting to pay for some ice cream; a white woman carrying several items stood behind her in the line, and a white cashier was at the counter.


Union Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Giants Lacking a Big-Play Defense
The Giants struggle. They pout. They win one, lose one, or worse.
They are 2-4 and linebacker Pepper Johnson takes home films of the 1990 season to see how they did it then, the Super Bowl campaign.


No Headline
"You got a sense of priorities. You got a sense of their personal engagement in different issues. They're not all engaged in the same issues. You got a sense of the depth of their understanding of the issues. And you got a general sense of direction." -- CHARLES O. JONES of the University of Wisconsin, assessing the Presidential debates.  [ A19:5. ]


Lawyers' Dueling Spotlights Focus on a Young Woman's Life
The young woman did not come to the courtroom where four former schoolmates went on trial last week on charges of sexually assaulting her in March 1989 in Glen Ridge, N.J.
But she was on center stage, nonetheless, as state prosecutors and defense lawyers turned dueling spotlights on her personality, her mental capabilities, and her sexual past.
And whether she takes the witness stand or not, she is certain to be a central character as the testimony in the trial begins Wednesday.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.B.I. Is Seeking Missing Antiquities
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating the disappearance of three Egyptian antiquities that were shipped on Oct. 1 to the Merrin Gallery in Manhattan from the Cleveland Museum of Art, but never arrived.
The missing items -- two portrait heads and a bronze mirror -- are valued at a total of more than $1 million.
They were to be part of an exhibition that opened on Friday at Merrin, 724 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street.
Merrin's insurer, Lloyd's of London, is offering a reward of up to $50,000 for the safe return of the items or for information that may lead to their recovery.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  JAPAN'S SIMMERING SCANDAL  With the smell of money and the tang of power, a meaty stew of speculation is bubbling in Japan over just how close the ties are between political leaders and mobsters.
A1  DOUBLE DEATHS REMAIN A MYSTERY  Petra Kelly, founder of Germany's Green Party, was shot by her companion, who then killed himself, the police said.
The two former lawmakers were found dead in their house, with any motive a mystery.
A3


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton and Bush Agree on Trimming Armed Forces, but Their Paths Vary
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton agree that the United States military in the post-cold war era should be a smaller force prepared to respond quickly to regional contingencies with the most advanced weaponry.
But the two candidates offer slightly different paths to reach roughly similar goals.
Mr.
Bush would shrink the active-duty military from 1.9 million now to 1.6 million troops by 1995.
Mr.
Clinton would match that cut and reduce the force level by 200,000 more by 1997.
Already, the military is shrinking by 100,000 troops a year.


Warner-Lambert Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Russia on Analyst's Couch
"Interpretation of Dreams" was shown as part of the 1991 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 30, 1991.
The film opens today at Film Forum 1, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
In Andrei Zagdansky's "Interpretation of Dreams," a short (50-minute), interesting and difficult Russian film, an entire country is put on the couch to be analyzed by the film maker using Sigmund Freud as his guide.
Mr.
Zagdansky juxtaposes quotes from Freud, which are read on the soundtrack, and the history of the Soviet Union as captured in vintage newsreels and other old films.


Several Drug Concerns Post Improved Earnings
Several pharmaceutical and health-care companies reported improved earnings yesterday, partly as a result of a strong demand for new products and a weak dollar that bolstered overseas revenues.
In general, the companies' results were in line with analysts' expectations or exceeded them slightly.
Eli Lilly &amp; Company, however, announced late yesterday that it posted a third-quarter loss because of a series of charges related to restructuring moves.


Agreement Reached on Appointment of Bronx Principals
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and a Bronx school district have reached an out-of-court settlement on the appointment of six principals whose assignment Mr.
Fernandez had sought to block amid accusations of corruption, political cronyism and anti-Semitism in the district board's selection process.
The settlement, approved on Monday by Justice Douglas E. McKeon of State Supreme Court in the Bronx, is a compromise.
Mr.
Fernandez and Community School Board 12 in the south-central Bronx have agreed to retain three of the principals, replace one and begin the selection process again for the remaining two jobs.


Review/Theater -- The Destiny of Me; Larry Kramer Tells His Own Anguished Story
"What do you do when you're dying from a disease you need not be dying from?" cries out Ned Weeks, the autobiographical hero of Larry Kramer's new play, "The Destiny of Me." If you are Larry Kramer, a founder of the Gay Men's Health Crisis and Act Up as well as the author of "The Normal Heart," you keep crying out: in the streets, on "Nightline" or, at this moment, from the stage of the Lucille Lortel Theater, where the Circle Repertory Company is giving his blistering confessional drama its premiere.
As the AIDS epidemic courses into its second decade, Mr.
Kramer, weakened by the effects of H.I.V. but still slugging, won't stop shouting at those in authority who he feels impede the search for a cure.
And where has it got him -- or us?
"When I started yelling there were 41 cases of a mysterious disease," says Ned (Jonathan Hadary) as he checks into the National Institutes of Health for an experimental treatment.
"Now they're talking about 150 million. And it's still mysterious. And the mystery isn't why they don't know anything, it's why they don't want to know anything."


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Even With Reduced Credit Rating, Nassau Sells Its Bonds, but at a Price
At noon today, the Nassau County Treasurer ripped open three thick envelopes and discovered that, despite a steep downgrading by a major credit-rating agency, the county had found a ready market for its bonds -- but at a price.
"The bidders and investors are telling us they have confidence in Nassau County," declared the Treasurer, John V. Scaduto.
"This county is one of the richest counties in the country."


Bridge
It is not uncommon for a player who is at the top of the scale in flamboyance to select a partner at the other end.
Zia Mahmood, who attracts an admiring audience in every part of the bridge-playing world, likes to play, when in New York, with Fred Chang, a quiet, thoughtful man who makes few tournament appearances.
They were effective together as part of the team that won the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship earlier this month.
On the diagramed deal Chang held the West cards and wound up defending six diamonds.
This was an optimistic slam, and it might seem that South was due to lose a spade trick and a heart trick.
But as the sequel showed, South had some squeeze prospects.


Former Devils' Return Silences the Boo-Birds
Sean Burke heard the jeers loud and clear during his first visit to New Jersey as a member of another team, but the towering goaltender and his Hartford teammates were the ones who were full of smiles at the end.
The lowly Whalers, who had one victory in their first six games, took advantage of a totally uninspired Devils team tonight and posted a 5-4 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


York International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allegheny Power Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
WE'VE never met her but we love her.
Whether the chic black, red and white tote bag being given away at Galeries Lafayette had anything to do with it is beside the point.
Not too long ago an attractive middle-aged woman walked up to the desk set up to process applications for store credit cards.
Marie Fabry overheard the following conversation:
"Thank you, Madam," the sales clerk said, accepting the completed form.
"Would you fill in your place of employment?"


In Long Run, Family Leave Will Be a Bargain
To the Editor:
The Democrats are proposing a Band-Aid approach on family leave, while the Republicans oppose even a Band-Aid.
Psychiatric findings published about 45 years ago informed us that bonding of an infant with an affectionate mother is generally essential to establish healthy psychological growth in later years of childhood.
Two years of bonding are ideal, but at least one year is tolerable.


Scott Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campus Journal; Presidential Debate Raises Students' Self-Esteem at Michigan State
Students at Michigan State University live under a constant blue-and-maize shadow cast by their neighbors at the University of Michigan, often finding themselves obliged to explain that they attend that other school in Michigan.
But the national spotlight fell, if only briefly, here on Monday when the Presidential race came storming into town.
The campaigns, the Secret Service and hundreds of reporters all arrived to find a campus thrilled to be on the nation's mind for something other than the football team.


Wine Talk
IGNORE for a moment the busy Autostrada, and the view from the proud battlements of this ancient city cannot be much different from what it was at the outset of the 13th century when the young Giovanni Bernardone first saw it.
He was captured during a war between Perugia and Assisi, and there, 10 miles to the east, perched on its own hill, Assisi can be seen today.
To the west is Trasimeno, Italy's largest lake.
Just over the horizon to the south is Montefalco, and beyond that, Orvieto.
On his release, Bernardone, who later became St.
Francis of Assisi, made his way back home through vineyards that were already more than 1,000 years old.
Today, the vineyards, like this Umbrian capital, thrive as they did then.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle, Touring Michigan, Battles for a Toss-Up State
Vice President Dan Quayle campaigned across Michigan by bus today, hammering at what he called Gov.
Bill Clinton's "waffling," questioning the Arkansas Governor's character and warning that turning the White House over to the Democrats would mean "higher taxes and fewer jobs."
The swing is part of a last-ditch effort by the Bush-Quayle campaign to win Ohio, Michigan, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Quayle will be visiting all those states in the next several days, and public opinion polls indicate the Democrats are ahead in all except Michigan, which is rated a toss-up.


Heavy Traffic Impedes Robbers' Getaway
Three armed men robbed a 39-year-old jewelry wholesaler of $350,000 in jewels yesterday on a busy street in Flushing, Queens, the police said.
Minutes later, a police officer captured one of the men as the others fled and $150,000 in jewelry was recovered.
The robbery happened about 7 P.M. in front of 138-40 Roosevelt Avenue, as the man stepped out of his car and headed toward a jewelry store with two bags filled with jewelry, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


New Campaigns
*
Look-alikes resembling Mikhail Gorbachev, Richard Nixon and other international political figures who have suffered the frustration "of having power one minute and losing it the next" are featured in television commercials and print advertisments for Millennium rechargeable batteries.
The campaign, by Tausche Martin Lonsdorf, Atlanta, carries the theme "The power to last a lifetime," which is illustrated by a Queen Elizabeth II look-alike who uses Millennium in her tape player. *
Neiman Marcus is introducing print advertisements intended to portray the retail chain as a pacesetter for fashion and style.
The ads, created by the Richards Group, Dallas, carry a new corporate theme line, "Neiman Marcus. How To Look."


CHRONICLE
SHERRIE S. ROLLINS, who resigned as a top aide to President Bush when her husband, EDWARD J. ROLLINS, became a manager of the Perot campaign, went to work for MORTIMER B. ZUCKERMAN, the publishing and real-estate magnate on Monday.
Ms.
Rollins, who was Assistant to the President for Public Liaison and Intergovernmental Affairs, will be Mr.
Zuckerman's senior vice president for communications.
She will handle public relations for Mr.
Zuckerman in matters relating to his planned purchase of The Daily News, as well as to U.S.
News &amp; World Report, The Atlantic, and Boston Properties, his real-estate and development company.


Administration Hides Nothing on Iraq
To the Editor:
Whether deliberately or not, the editorials of The New York Times -- as well as many of the newspaper's columnists -- continue to distort the facts about United States policy toward Iraq prior to the Persian Gulf war.
The most recent example of this penchant for distortion occurs in your editorials of Oct. 6 ("How to Deter Devious Foreign Policy") and Oct. 14 ("No Excuse for Mr. Barr's Outrage").
Let me set the record straight for you and your readers.
First, no investigation to date -- by Congress, by the United States Attorney in Atlanta or by any Federal agency -- has established Iraqi misuse of grain credit guarantees to purchase military weapons or a diversion to third countries of commodities sold to Iraq.


C.D. Yields Are Mixed For Week
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit turned mixed in the week that ends today, giving depositors some respite from the steady drop in bank rates since July, when the Federal Reserve cut the discount rate and most large banks subsequently cut their prime lending rates.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based interest rate publication, said money market accounts slipped again, but yields on certificates of deposit were up at commercial banks and just slightly off at savings banks.


Book Notes
On Madonna
It seems that about the only aspect of Madonna's book "Sex" (Warner) that hasn't been hyped is the publication date, which is today.
Booksellers across the country had been calling distributors, wholesalers and the publisher frantically because they hadn't yet received copies of the book, and all of them have been told that the book will truly not be released until today no matter the hysteria. (Or perhaps because of it.)
Usually a book's publication date is a basically meaningless convention meant to protect the publisher from reviews appearing before books arrive at stores, usually in the two weeks before or even after the official publication date.


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knee Operation for Utah's Eaton
Utah Jazz center MARK EATON has undergone arthroscopic surgery on his right knee to repair torn cartilage.
Dr.
LONNIE PAULOS, an orthopedic surgeon, performed the procedure Monday and said the surgery was a success.
He is optimistic Eaton can return in several weeks, but said Eaton's size, 7 feet 4 inches and 290 pounds, will make it more difficult for him to return quickly.
"That size of frame and that kind of weight, that will make a lot of difference on his recovery," Paulos said.


Judge to Weigh Damage in Reynolds Case
A judge in Columbus, Ohio, will decide over the next few weeks whether the quarter-miler BUTCH REYNOLDS is entitled to as much as $27.3 million from the ruling body of international track and field.
United States District Judge JOSEPH KINNEARY heard arguments yesterday from attorneys in Reynolds's lawsuit against the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
The federation was not represented in the courtroom.
The federation has said it does not recognize the court as having authority over the London-based organization.


BellSouth's Net Income Off; Debt Refinancing Is Cited
The BellSouth Corporation, the nation's largest regional Bell company, reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income dropped 2 percent, to $344.9 million, or 70 cents a share, from $352.4 million, or 73 cents a share in the third quarter of 1991.
The decline was attributed to a one-time charge for refinancing debt, which will lower future interest costs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Chrysler posted a $202 million profit for its third quarter, more than reversing its loss in the 1991 period.
The auto maker could be the only one of the Big Three to avoid a quarterly loss.  [ Page D1. ]
Citicorp reported a $116 million profit, in contrast to a loss a year earlier.
Chemical posted a 35 percent gain in its net income, while Wells Fargo saw its earnings decline.  [ D1. ]


Theater in Review
The Men Are Afraid of the Women  Ohio Theater 66 Wooster Street SoHo Through Nov. 1  By John Kaplan; directed by Dennis Delaney; scenic designer, Bennet Averyt; lighting designer, Adrienne Shulman; costume designer, Deborah Edelman; sound and technology director, Greg Rajczewski; stage manager, Colleen Davis; artistic director, Robert Lyons.
Presented by Project III, in association with Waterfront Ensemble.
WITH: Kevin Agnew, Tim Barrett, Dina Dillon, Funda Duyal, Joseph McKenna, Mary McLain and Jeff Morris.
MUSIC: Jim Cooper, Ernie Muhlback and Mike Soga.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Could Be Prelude To Private Owner for OTB
Faced with shrinking profits and renewed criticisms of mismanagement, New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation is being studied by an outside company, a move that may bring the independent government agency closer to private ownership.
For much of this year, officials in state and city government have increasingly suggested the sale of the 22-year-old agency, which operates offtrack horse-race betting in the city, arguing that it could be more efficiently run in private hands.
Even Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has been a strong supporter of the OTB president, Hazel N. Dukes, has indicated he favors selling the agency.


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; 2 Roads to the Presidential Campaign
Frontline The Choice '92  PBS, tonight at 9  (Channel 13 in New York)
Produced by Thomas Lennon; Michael Sullivan, senior producer; David Fanning, executive producer; Richard Ben Cramer, correspondent.


With CashTight, Abrams Forgoes Pressing Flesh for Raising Money
Vastly out-financed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato -- and thus eclipsed in the battle of television commercials -- Attorney General Robert Abrams is in the thick of the most elaborate, and desperate, fund-raising drive of his quarter-century in politics.
His public campaigning in the New York Senate race ground to a halt for several crucial days after his Democratic primary victory last month while he worked the phone, seeking contributions.
He has made hundreds of calls to potential donors in the last month, and even now, two weeks before the election, he is spending most of his time raising money.
To assist him, he has employed the largest fund-raising staff of his career.


At 84, He Hopes That '92 Is His Number


Perot in Debate: Too Hard on Airlines and Banks?
Ross Perot, Presidential candidate, asserted in the Monday debate that the United States might, in effect, be dismantling its airline industry and raised the question of whether commercial banks are in worse shape than people generally realized.
The current situations in each industry suggests that though there are indeed problems, Mr.
Perot has oversimplified the difficulties of the airlines and probably overstated current concern about the banks.


Critic's Notebook; The Politicizing of TV's Prime-Time Comedy
Nan Buffum (Mary Gordon Murray) is executive deputy director of the Bush-Quayle campaign.
Her husband Whit (Gerrit Graham) works in a similar capacity for Clinton-Gore.
Caught up in a personal swirl of political sniping and dirty tricks, they both want out of a marriage made in hell.
Finally going before a judge, she snaps, "I'm the Republican, your honor. He's the ass."
On ABC at 10, tonight's episode of "Civil Wars," titled "Below the Beltway," reflects a marked acceleration over the past year or so in television entertainment's willingness -- and technical ability -- to tackle political subjects.
In many instances, a pro forma bow is made in the direction of even-handedness, but the dominant tone comes unmistakably from the left.
The subject of Hollywood's liberal bias may be hoary, but as Dan Quayle has discovered, it is hardly dismissible.
In any event, as prime time gives "reality" further twists, the phenomenon goes well beyond the straightforward political satire found on NBC's "Saturday Night Live" or Fox's "In Living Color" and "Edge."


With Cash Tight, Abrams Forgoes Pressing Flesh for Raising Money
Vastly out-financed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato -- and thus eclipsed in the battle of television commercials -- Attorney General Robert Abrams is in the thick of the most elaborate, and desperate, fund-raising drive of his quarter-century in politics.
His public campaigning in the New York Senate race ground to a halt for several crucial days after his Democratic primary victory last month while he worked the phone, seeking contributions.
He has made hundreds of calls to potential donors in the last month, and even now, two weeks before the election, he is spending most of his time raising money.
To assist him, he has employed the largest fund-raising staff of his career.


COURT APPROVES ORION PICTURES' REORGANIZATION PLAN
The Orion Pictures Corporation said yesterday that Federal Bankruptcy Court Judge Burton R. Lifland entered an order confirming Orion's plan of reorganization.
Orion expects to emerge from bankruptcy by the end of the month.


Union Camp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lester S. Lipsitch; Retired Hospital Chief, 80
Dr.
Lester S. Lipsitch, a former chief of staff of the American Hospital of Paris, died Oct. 17 at his home in Longboat Key, Fla.
He was 80 years old.
His death of a heart attack was reported yesterday by a daughter, Dr.
Carol Lipsitch, of Montclair, N.J.


Italy's Goal Is to Play in Giants Stadium
With just a few timely goals, the Italian national soccer team could play five matches at Giants Stadium in front of huge, adoptive crowds during the 1994 World Cup tournament.
In a schedule released yesterday by World Cup organizers, Giants Stadium was selected to play host to two first-round matches involving the top-seeded team in Group E, plus two other first-round matches involving lesser teams.
If Italy succeeds in qualifying for the World Cup during the next year, it will head Group E and could also play in second-round, quarterfinal and semifinal matches at Giants Stadium.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore  TODAY: 10 P.M., MTV, Town meeting from New York.
THURSDAY: 7:10 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today Show."  James B. Stockdale  TODAY: 10:30 P.M., CNN, interview.
President Bush  THURSDAY: 7 P.M., WWOR (Channel 9 in New York), town meeting from New Jersey.


How to Keep Business in New York
Mayor David Dinkins deserves credit for encouraging the Morgan Stanley Group, one of the nation's leading financial services firms, to keep its corporate headquarters in New York City for at least the next decade.
Had Morgan Stanley moved to a parcel it had optioned in Stamford, Conn., it might have led other large financial firms to consider leaving -- and thus jeopardized the city's status as the world's financial services center.
Mr.
Dinkins and his Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, Barry Sullivan, hammered out a reasonable package of tax credits and other incentives, worth $39.6 million over 10 years, that helped persuade the company to stay.
In return, Morgan Stanley will keep its headquarters, and as many as 4,100 employees, in the city.
Since the company is expected to pay nearly $1 billion in taxes over the next 10 years, the tax incentives appear relatively modest.
And Morgan Stanley has a symbolic value that makes keeping it worth special effort.


Saudi Prince Disputes Schwarzkopf Book on War
The top Saudi commander in the Persian Gulf war has accused Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf of presenting a self-serving, innaccurate account of the war that he says exaggerates General Schwarzkopf's role and diminishes Saudi Arabia's contribution.
In a telephone interview from Jidda, Saudi Arabia, and in a written statement, Prince Khaled bin Sultan, the co-commander of gulf forces, accused his former comrade in arms of "concocting" stories and "distorting" facts in an effort "to give himself all the credit for the victory over Iraq while running down just about everyone else."


Corrections
A headline in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the third-quarter financial report of the Grumman Corporation referred incorrectly to the result.
The company reported a 6 percent drop in profit, not a loss.


Braves Are Running, But They're Running Out Of Games, Too
The Oakland Athletics did their best to run the Toronto Blue Jays ragged in the American League playoffs, with mixed results at best.
But that does not mean that the Atlanta Braves weren't paying attention, tuning up their running game in time for the World Series.
They did so by inserting a National Football League cornerback-kick returner with sprinter's speed into their lineup in a spot where a better bat ordinarily resides.


Phelps Dodge reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Women Advance in Politics By Evolution, Not Revolution
In this acidic political season in which Anita Hill has become a shorthand for outrage and the "Year of the Woman" is a familiar refrain, it is easy to believe that revolution is at hand.
But come November, when the voting is over, there will be no storming of the gates.
Even a wave of victories by female candidates will not give women dominance on Capitol Hill.
Should a female candidate win in every possible race, the 103d Congress would still be 80 percent male.


It Becomes a Lost Night For Braves' Manager
Jeff Blauser thought he had checked his swing, but the first-base umpire, Dan Morrison, waved, signaling a strikeout.
In the Braves' dugout, Bobby Cox picked up a batting helmet and bounced it off the floor, thinking it would remain in the dugout.
But when it ricocheted onto the artificial turf, plate umpire Joe West ejected the Braves' manager.
"I threw the helmet," Cox was saying now in the Braves' clubhouse.
"He should've run me. But that's not exactly why I was mad."


In Long Run, Family Leave Will Be a Bargain; The Children Tell Us
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 6 article in "The Good Mother" series reports that a very expensive study analyzing parents, infants and their reaction to alternative child-care arrangements could end deciding that the only real experts are the children themselves!
Infants will "tell" us if their basic attachment, dependency and bodily needs are being met.
If they look satisfied most of the time, continue to respond well to the parent and adapt with minimal anxiety to day care or home care, we should assume satisfactory growth and development.


In Long Run, Family Leave Will Be a Bargain; Broad Bills Vetoed
To the Editor:
"In Family-Leave Debate, a Profound Ambivalence" (front page, Oct. 7) describes the family and medical leave bill -- which underpins many of your conclusions -- inaccurately.
You note, after discussing unpaid leave allowed under Oregon law, that President Bush vetoed a "comparatively mild bill" that "required only companies of 50 or more employees to give new mothers 12 weeks of unpaid leave." You add, "It was his second veto of such a measure."


Mighty Menopause
"Be useful as well as ornamental" was one of my father's favorite sayings when I was growing up.
And it looks as if I wasn't the only girl who heard it.
As we all know by now, it's "the year of the woman." More women than ever are running for political office.
Experts commonly attribute the rise in women's political participation to the confluence of several events and trends: the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas imbroglio, the chipping away of abortion rights, the growing presence of women in the work force.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a study of fruit flies, showing that life expectancy may not always decrease as organisms get older, misstated the affiliation of Dr.
James W. Curts inger.
He is at the University of Minnesota, not the University of Wisconsin.


First Game at the Forum In Johnson's Comeback
It would have been just another preseason game at the Forum tonight, except for one fact.
Magic Johnson was back.
Though Johnson had already played one preseason game in Honolulu, tonight was his first home appearance with the Los Angeles Lakers since he announced his comeback in September.
Johnson had announced his retirement last November when he learned he had contracted the virus that causes AIDS.


N.B.A. Is Busy: 15 Players Are Fined
The National Basketball Association has fined SHERMAN DOUGLAS of the Boston Celtics and LARRY KRYSTKOWIAK of the Utah Jazz $1,500 each for their roles in a fight in an exhibition game in Salt Lake City.
ROD THORN, vice president for operations, said yesterday that Krystkowiak was also fined an automatic $250 for being ejected from the game Saturday night while 13 others were assessed for leaving the bench area with 1 minute 13 seconds remaining in the game.
Fined $500 each were JAY HUMPHRIES, JEFF MALONE, KARL MALONE, JOHNNIE HILLIARD, ISAAC AUSTIN and MIKE BROWN of Utah, and XAVIER McDANIEL, MARCUS WEBB, BART KOFOED, KENNY BATTLE, DARREN MORNINGSTAR, JOE WOLF and REGGIE LEWIS of Boston. (AP)


The Hand's Shape: Unique and Useful For Identity Check
Problem: the use of stolen or counterfeit ID's or credit cards.
Potential solution: a new system of identification based on measurements of the human hand.
"The shape of the hand is as unique as a fingerprint," said Charles Colbert, a medical physicist and president of Personnel Identification and Entry Access Control.
The company, in Yellow Springs, Ohio, sees hand measurements as leading to a new generation of identity-checking machines.


Tempers Flare as Pennsylvania Rivals Debate
The sparks flew today as Senator Arlen Specter and his Democratic opponent, Lynn H. Yeakel, met face to face for the last of two debates after bombarding each other with negative advertising for weeks.
The hourlong morning radio debate offered the candidates an open format to present their views and interrupt each other at will.
And that is precisely what they did.


Theater in Review
The Madame MacAdam Traveling Theater  Actors' Playhouse 100 Seventh Avenue South (at Grove Street) Greenwich Village  By Thomas Kilroy; directed by Charlotte Moore; set design, David Raphel; lighting design, Kenneth Posner; costume design, David Toser; sound design, James M. Bay; production stage manager, Pamela Edington; piano music performed by Rusty Magee.
Presented by the Irish Repertory Theater Company, Charlotte Moore and Ciaran O'Reilly and One World Arts Foundation, W. Scott McLucas, executive director.
WITH: Ellen Adamson, W. B. Brydon, Denise duMaurier, Rosemary Fine, Michael Judd, Fiona McCormac, Brian F. O'Byrne, Denis O'Neill, Ciaran O'Reilly and Michael O'Sullivan.


Big New Study Finds No Link Between Fat and Breast Cancer
TO the immense disappointment of cancer experts, a study of more than 89,000 women has found no evidence that a diet low in fat or high in fiber protects against breast cancer.
For years, investigators have suggested that women with diets high in fat and low in fiber might be more likely to develop breast cancer.
Many women say that virtually the first thing they do after being treated for breast cancer is to reduce fat in their diets to protect against a recurrence.


U.S. GIVEN PHOTOS BY HANOI OF 5,000
The Pentagon has obtained up to 5,000 photographs of dead Americans from Vietnam that may help clear up the fate of some missing servicemen, American officials and researchers said today.
The photos are reported to be with the Defense Intelligence Agency, where officials are still examining them.
There is no independent way to verify their authenticity, and it is too early to determine how many cases of missing servicemen might be resolved with the pictures.


Bucks' Vincent Sidelined
The newly acquired Milwaukee Bucks guard SAM VINCENT may be out for the season with a ruptured Achilles' tendon.
Vincent was hurt last night during a 143-98 exhibition loss to the Seattle Supersonics in Omaha. (AP)


Personal Health
MY brother and I never regretted that our parents' limited finances precluded a hefty dose of after-school lessons in this, that and the other activity.
After school for us meant play time.
Alone, with each other and with friends on the block, we played with dolls, pets, marbles, stamps, Erector sets, trucks, puzzles, bikes, jump ropes and roller skates.
Groups of us played street games like stickball and hide-and-seek.
Way back in the 1940's, a fellow third-grader and I built a rocket and studied the stars for possible destinations.


Public &amp; Private; Prevailing Winds
The beginning of the end came at a moment of great triumph.
The sound is what I remember best about the State of the Union Message George Bush delivered to Congress on Jan. 29, 1991, just two weeks after the gulf war began -- the sound not of his voice but of the huzzahs, the cheers, the roars that interrupted him time after time.
No matter that the speech was long on the self-congratulation of a country engaged in foreign conflict and very short on a domestic program.
The room was stuffed to bursting with approval, like helium, threatening to levitate the man.
Did he remember that night when he looked into the unforgiving eye of the camera Monday and pleaded with the American people to vote for him, a little plaintive, a little perplexed?


Schering-Plough reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Fe Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Belgrade Signs 2d Pact With Croatia
The Presidents of Croatia and the truncated Yugoslavia signed another agreement today on a series of steps to ease tension and create confidence among hostile ethnic communities.
The joint statement was signed by President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and President Dobrica Cosic of a Yugoslav federation now made up of Serbia and Montenegro.
It followed a day of talks with Cyrus R. Vance, the former American Secretary of State, who represents the United Nations, and Lord Owen, the former British Foreign Secretary who represents the European Community.
The two men are co-chairmen of the so-called peace conference being held here.


People
*
John Sanders, 49 years old, co-president and chief executive at the Wunderman Cato Johnson unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, was named to the new position of executive vice president at Y. &amp; R., becoming worldwide account managing director on the Ford Motor Co. account.
Succeeding him at Wunderman is Mitch Kurz, 40, who had been president at Wunderman Cato Johnson/North America.


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


60-Minute Gourmet
IT is no secret that pork is one of my favorite meats, not only for its versatility and flavor, but also for its healthful qualities.
Pork today is considerably leaner than it was 20 years ago.
It has less marbling because of new breeding techniques, and more of the fat is trimmed before it gets to market.
Yet, the meat remains moist and flavorful in almost any kind of recipe.
Creative hog breeding to maximize yield and flavor has a long history in this country, dating to the earliest Colonial days.
In fact, Thomas Jefferson was a hog breeder of notoriety in his native Virginia.
He is said to have experimented with various breeds of hogs, with some success.
But his neighbors resented the high prices he commanded for his meat and dubbed him the "hog governor." To show their anger they draped his Monticello fence with hot entrails.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Waived Torgeir Bryn and Barry Mitchell, forwards.
Re-signed Michael Anderson, guard.
Continental Basketball Association  OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Signed Ken Auston, forward.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Signed Leo Parent, forward.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Signed Darryl Johnson, guard.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Signed Anthony Pendleton, guard. National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Joe Fishback, safety.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Placed Andre Waters, safety, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Gilbert Renfroe, quarterback.
Hockey  National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Corrie D'Alessio, goaltender, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League
LOUISVILLE ICE HAWKS -- Waived Clint Thomas, defenseman.
Acquired Karl Johnston, defenseman, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'New Visions' Offers New Schools of Thought for Education


When Ailing Pastime Meets TV Recession, Baseball Gets the K
Even as CBS's broadcasts of the World Series provide a compelling video window on the best that major league baseball has to offer, executives of the sport are preparing to negotiate new television contracts that are expected to end the prosperity previously wrought by TV.
Next season will be the fourth and final year of the bonanza that will bring clubs $1.45 billion from CBS and ESPN -- double the amount produced by the previous six-year deal.
But baseball says it has no way to prevent television from drastically reducing its financial commitment to the sport.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo Mocks D'Amato Idea, Lauds Abrams
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who for weeks has resisted criticizing Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's re-election campaign, yesterday rebuked the Senator for suddenly embracing the notion that Mr.
Cuomo would make a good Supreme Court justice in a Clinton Administration, dismissing it in sarcastic tones as a "deathbed conversion."
Addressing the New York State Liberal Party's annual dinner at the Grand Hyatt in Manhattan, with Senator Al Gore and Mr.
D'Amato's Democratic opponent, Attorney General Robert Abrams, on the dais, the Governor excoriated Mr.
D'Amato for trying to grab onto Bill Clinton's coattails in a state where President Bush is trailing badly in the polls.
He also made by far his strongest remarks yet in support of Mr.
Abrams.


Fighting Alcohol Abuse at Princeton Eating Clubs
If the best way to confront a problem is to come face to face with it, Princeton University's former "alcohol czar" may be onto something.
In May Carl O. Wartenburg left his job as the university president's special assistant on alcohol.
Since then, he has taken his crusade against alcohol abuse from the administrative offices of Nassau Hall to the fraternity-like eating clubs on Prospect Street; in other words, to the places where students drink three-fourths of the alcohol consumed at Princeton.


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tyco Toys Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In the End, the Islanders Are Not a Gracious Host
After building a 3-0 lead they didn't really deserve, the Islanders unintentionally did the sportsmanlike thing tonight: they squandered it in a game with the Philadelphia Flyers at Nassau Coliseum.
Then after the Flyers evened the score with two goals early in the third period, the final 15 minutes were the best of a so-so show.


Avery Dennison Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


New Guidelines Established For Magazine Advertising
Concerned that readers are becoming confused, the American Society of Magazine Editors announced new guidelines today to differentiate between pages of advertising and editorial matter.
The industrywide standards expand the guidelines set by the society in 1982, which covered special advertising sections, or "advertorials," but not single ad pages.


Jays' Key Finally Gets a Starter's Call
Jimmy Key pitched in the Toronto bullpen day after day during the American League Championship Series, waiting for a call that he knew might never come.
The starter, who was told before the series against Oakland that he would not be starting, was anxious and maybe even angry about being relegated to reliever.
Since Key exhibits anger about as often as the Canadian flag is held upside down, he calmly accepted the demotion with the class of a veteran who has pitched for nine seasons in Toronto.
The call for Key came in Game 5 and he pitched three scoreless innings in relief of David Cone in a 6-2 loss, but his anxiety was never relieved.
The Jays basically won the playoffs without him.


U.N. May Have to Close a Key Relief Warehouse
The United Nations military headquarters here dispatched an armed rescue mission today to a village 50 miles to the northwest where eight United Nations relief workers were trapped by fierce street fighting between Croatian forces and troops of the Bosnian Government.
The fighting, at Vitez, followed a rapid deterioration in the tenuous alliance between Croatia and Bosnia and sharpened the indications that Croatia is set on carving out parts of Bosnia for itself.


Market Place; Another Look At TV Shopping
PERCEIVED as a hot property in the mid-1980's, Home Shopping Network has recently been little more than a favorite target of the joke meisters who work on Wall Street's equity trading desks.
Best known for its sales of cubic zirconia and porcelain tchotchkes and for its idiosyncratic management, the hybrid of high-tech telecommunications and bargain-basement retailing suffered from a large debt load, an overly diverse group of businesses and a market that proved to be far less explosive than analysts had estimated.


Review/Dance; Pastiche of New Works by Ballet Chicago
Ballet Chicago has been directed since its founding in 1987 by Daniel Duell, once a leading dancer in the New York City Ballet.
While still with that troupe, he began another career as a choreographer: one could have expected Ballet Chicago, as many troupes outside New York, to be dominated by the works of its director.
But Mr.
Duell is interested in a creative company, and Saturday night's program at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College featured new ballets by several choreographers.


Classical Music in Review
Persichetti Remembered  Bruno Walter Auditorium


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.05
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
2.94
5.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.10
5.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.24
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.64
7.56
8.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.63
9.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.50
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Better Earnings at Citicorp and Chemical
Profits at Citicorp and the Chemical Banking Corporation improved considerably in the third quarter compared with a year ago while net income at Wells Fargo &amp; Company dropped 72 percent.
But the performance of the three was overshadowed by several other large banks across the country, which had earnings that were at or near record levels.
The Banc One Corporation of Columbus, Ohio, reported a 33 percent gain in profits, to $186.2 million, while PNC Financial, owner of Pittsburgh National Bank, earned $135.1 million, up 26 percent.
The Norwest Corporation of Minneapolis earned $133.9 million, up 21 percent, and the Mellon Bank Corporation, Pittsburgh, earned $156 million, more than double the year-earlier quarter.


Classical Music in Review
Shura Cherkassky  Pianist  92d Street Y


Accounts
*
Colours, Hackensack, N.J., a chain of cosmetics boutiques, to Pointblank Advertising, New York, as its first agency.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Bell Atlantic Metro Mobile, Wallingford, Conn., to Mason &amp; Madison, New Haven, for marketing communications; the agency already handles assignments like public relations for the cellular telephone company.
Mason &amp; Madison was also named to handle advertising for the Davison Chemical division of W. R. Grace &amp; Co., Baltimore.
Combined billings for both accounts will be $3 million.


Why You Can't Trust The Port Authority
To the Editor:
Although Manhattan's Greenwich Village shore is to become a public park, indifference has allowed subway ventilation towers at Morton Street to obscure it.
This waterfront was where Robert Fulton started the era of steam navigation in 1807, and millions of immigrants landed.
The New York City Comptroller's Bureau of Engineering under two administrations confirmed that the ventilation equipment of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey could be safely operated below ground.
This would have saved the time and expense of building two monoliths.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, before taking office, wrote Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, asking for serious consideration of the Port Authority's placing the facility below ground.


Difficult Balancing Act Of Watching the Police
For Barbara J. Attard, the hills of this beautiful city echo with ugly street stories of racial harassment, sexist remarks and bloody beatings.
In these stories, the offender is a police officer.


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Which Debate System Worked Best? It's a Debate
Now that the nation has survived an assault by campaign debate, certain truths about debate tactics can be passed along to the next generation:
*Presidential campaigns don't know what's good for them.
Before the debates, President Bush's aides wanted a panel of journalists to pose questions; now they say that approach was the least helpful to their man.
Gov.
Bill Clinton's side wanted a single moderator to ask the questions but ended up preferring another format, too.


Books of The Times; Madonna Writes; Academics Explore Her Erotic Semiotics
Sex By Madonna Photographs by Steven Meisel. Unpaginated. Warner Books. $49.95.


Compaq Posts a $49.4 Million Profit
In a strong sign that its strategy of being a maker of low-cost personal computers is working, the Compaq Computer Corporation today reported a profit of $49.4 million, or 61 cents a share, for the third quarter, compared with a loss in the corresponding quarter a year ago.
Revenues soared by 50.5 percent, to $1.07 billion, from $709.4 million.


Tandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Christina Kiss  Pianist  Weill Recital Hall


Business Technology; How the Offshore Rigs Rode Out Gulf's Storm
It was two days after the most savage hurricane of the century ripped through the Louisiana gulf waters and Scott Sewell, the chief Federal regulator of offshore oil production, was touring the region by helicopter, dreading the worst.
He was amazed by what he could not find.
"The massive oil slicks that we didn't want to see weren't there," Mr.
Sewell recalled recently.
"There was very little environmental damage and, frankly, the losses were minimal given the ferocity of the storm."


Understudies By Choice: Chefs Who Really Do The Cooking
NOW to praise the sous-chef, the unsung hero of the stove.
The one whose hand tends the flame but whose name remains obscure, seldom emblazoned on a starched white jacket, seldom embossed on a menu.
A sous-chef's position is the same in every kitchen: he outranks all its cooks except the head chef, but his role can vary.
The kitchens of large hotels, for instance, require a sous-chef with a streak of General Patton to deploy the culinary troops.
In restaurants where the chef is consumed by administrative and social obligations, the sous-chef often becomes a Cromwell, turning flashes of chefly inspiration into dinner.


Amgen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Anderson, Defense 101
Neither a crowd of 28,602 at his college stomping ground nor the appearance of the Chicago Bulls could move Derrick Coleman off the New Jersey Nets' bench tonight.
His sprained right ankle still hurt.
"No big deal," Coleman said before the Bulls defeated the Nets, 99-94, at the Carrier Dome.
"I did get a chance to talk with some old friends."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 16
Oct. 9
Oct. 18
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
209.8
208.9
211.8
Distillate stocks
131.5
132.4
135.4
Crude imports, daily
7.8
6.4
5.5
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.3
1.9
Crude stocks
328.5
324.9
338.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
88.3
88.5
83.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


As More Earn Equivalency Diploma, Its Value Is Debated
Jonathan Ledlow dropped out of Trenton High School a dozen years ago but promptly got his high school equivalent certificate so he could join the Navy, which was all that he desired at the time.
Now Mr.
Ledlow is nearly 30 years old and subsists on $140 a month from the Mercer County welfare board.
Along with his honorable discharge from the Navy, he is proud of having earned his equivalency degree, the result of passing a 7 1/2-hour comprehension test.
It proves he was able to complete something in his life, he said, but he is not sure what good it is doing him now.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marines Rally 'Round the Maple Leaf, Easing a Flap
In a stirring show of understanding, the United States Marines and the citizens of Canada buried the flap of the upside-down Canadian flag with gestures of goodwill tonight before Game 3 of the World Series.
As a Marine color guard from Buffalo stood in the shortstop area in the Skydome, a statement from the Commandant was read saying that the corps had requested the privilege of presenting the Canadian flag.
This, the statement said, was an effort to make amends for the incident on Sunday night in which another Marine color guard had carried a Canadian flag onto the field at Atlanta Fulton County Stadium in an upside-down position before Game 2.


Gasoline Mileage and Jobs
President Bush is seizing on the issue of gasoline mileage rules in his re-election campaign, running radio ads in Michigan and Ohio that predict huge job losses at local auto factories if a Democratic administration tightens the standards.
And some industry groups agree with him.
But efficiency advocates say that raising the standard, now at 27.5 miles a gallon, would actually create jobs in the auto industry and elsewhere in the economy, and Gov.
Bill Clinton says he does not favor a law that would raise the standard above what the industry can achieve.


Chrysler's Surprising Profits
The Chrysler Corporation posted a $202 million profit today for its third quarter, more than reversing its loss in the corresponding period a year ago.
Though Chrysler is the smallest and financially weakest of the Big Three auto makers, it could be the only United States car manufacturer to avoid a loss in the third quarter.
Analysts are forecasting that the General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company will both report substantial losses late next week.


Knicks Just a Memory To Cavaliers' Wilkins
Gerald Wilkins and the Knicks were staying in the same hotel today.
For Wilkins, it was just another cold reminder of a seven-year relationship that ended much differently than he had hoped.
"This is very strange, the story of my life," said Wilkins, after joking with his former teammates Greg Anthony and John Starks in the hotel lobby.
Wilkins was in town with his new team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, for tonight's preseason game against the Los Angeles Clippers.
Meanwhile, the Knicks were getting ready for tonight's preseason game against the Utah Jazz at the Forum.


BORG-WARNER MOVES TO GO PUBLIC AGAIN
The Borg-Warner Corporation, which was taken private in a 1987 leveraged buyout backed by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, sought the approval yesterday of the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 3.3 million common shares publicly.
The shares would be priced at $17 to $19 each, with proceeds used to repay part of the company's debt.


Shooting Prompts More Police Around School
The police presence around Evander Childs High School in the Bronx was increased yesterday as detectives continued to search for the youth who opened fire and wounded a 16-year-old-boy and two 14-year-old girls outside the school on Monday.
As some students outside the school in the Williamsbridge section said yesterday that they needed to carry weapons to protect themselves, school and police officials insisted that the high school, which was the first in the Bronx to install metal detectors, was safe.


IRAQ CASE REVEALS 3-WAY TUG-OF-WAR
When Representative Henry B. Gonzalez stood on the House floor last month and began reading from Central Intelligence Agency reports about Italy's role in a multibillion-dollar bank fraud, the Federal prosecutors who had spent three years investigating the case were stunned.
The Justice Department and the prosecutors in Atlanta thought they had been given all relevant intelligence documents.
But in the last few weeks, as more questions about the C.I.A.'s handling of information about the fraud have been raised, they have learned that there was a lot they were never told.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Debating Done, Bush and Clinton Begin Final Push
No longer able to hope that Presidential debates would lure swarms of voters back to his ranks, President Bush and his advisers dropped the pretense today that campaigning as usual would win his re-election two weeks from now.
Now it is trench warfare, and the battle plan became evident today along the railroad tracks and picture-book crossroads of small-town Georgia and South Carolina.


Review/Opera; Dimitrova in Lead Of First 'Tosca' Of the Met Season
Beneath the gaudy melodrama of "Tosca" lies Puccini's most concise and close-knit score.
The lavish melodies given to the protagonists may linger longest in the ear, but the spare motifs and modulations associated with Scarpia are at the core of the opera's power.
This quality was furthest from Franco Zeffirelli's mind when he designed his plush and pompous "Tosca" for the Met in 1985; this season's revival cuts down on some of the distracting excess, but still fights the logic of Puccini's music.
The tension between score and production was heightened by the various personalities who shaped Monday night's introductory performance.
Tosca and Cavaradossi were sung by Ghena Dimitrova and Luciano Pavarotti, two veterans who followed time-tested approaches to the music.
On the other hand, Christian Badea, the conductor, seemed intent on underlining the symphonic dimensions of the score.
And Alain Fondary, as Scarpia, gave an unconventionally flexible, at times almost lyrical performance, gaining in breadth as the evening went on.


Low U.S. Bond Prices Raise New York City's Cost of Debt
Prices went from bad to worse in the Treasury market yesterday, but a important bond sale did not go badly for New York City.
On a day when the municipal bond market was driven lower once again by the sharp fall in the Treasury market, the city still managed to pull off an $844 million sale of bonds at the second-lowest cost for the Big Apple in 20 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Issues; Debates Leave Some Holes, But Also Clear Impressions
For the relatively few Americans who listen to campaign speeches and read position papers, the Presidential debates left big gaps and plenty of unresolved arguments.
But for the tens of millions of others who watched, the 270 minutes of debate offered a first and rather solid look at where the candidates stood on important issues.


Compaq Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Writers Are Chosen For Poets' Corner
Edith Wharton and William Carlos Williams will be inducted into the Poets' Corner during the vespers service at 7 P.M. on Sunday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street in Morningside Heights.
Memorial stones will be dedicated during the service led by the Rev.
James Parks Morton, dean of the cathedral.
Selections from Wharton's work will be read by the novelists Louis Auchincloss and Mary Gordon.
Poems by Williams will be read by the publisher James Laughlin and by Charles Tomlinson, the British poet who edited Williams's "Selected Poems."


School Board Must Change, Union Says
The president of the powerful teachers' union yesterday joined critics calling for a change in how New York City's schools are governed, saying that bitter divisions on the seven-member Board of Education had convinced her that the current board should be replaced, either by a single commissioner or a panel chosen in a significantly different way.
By abandoning her longstanding support for the current board setup, the union president, Sandra Feldman, could go a long way toward persuading the State Legislature to create a new structure, because of the union's considerable influence in Albany.
Legislators said fundamentally changing the board's structure without the support of the union would be unimaginable.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Syracuse
Coach Paul Pasqualoni has responded to charges that his quarterback, Marvin Graves, should have been included along with the three West Virginia defensive regulars who were ejected in the last minutes of Saturday's game at Morgantown, W.Va.
After a brawl among the players, Graves directed a drive that ended when he threw a touchdown pass that won the game, 20-17, with 51 seconds remaining.
It was the contention of West Virginia fans and Mountaineer coaches that Graves (No. 5) inspired the free-for-all when he threw the football at Tommmy Orr (No. 24) after being tackled out of bounds by Orr.


U.S. Judge Bars Public From a Plea Hearing
A Federal judge denied public access yesterday to information at a criminal plea hearing in the Southern District Court of New York and ordered lawyers involved not to discuss the insider-trading case.
Newspaper lawyers called the move a violation of First Amendment rights.


Mob and Politics Intersect, Fueling Cynicism in Japan
In 1987 Noboru Takeshita and his faction in the ruling party wielded immense influence in Japan -- more, some said, than the Government.
But he was powerless to remove the last obstacle to his becoming Prime Minister: the loud, mocking attacks from a rightist group's sound trucks.
Winning the endorsement of party elders hinged on his silencing the trucks, a fixture of political life here.


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY BUYS CENTRAL STATES INDEMNITY
Berkshire Hathaway Inc. said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to acquire an 82 percent interest in Central States Indemnity from the Central States Health and Life Company of Omaha and other owners in a deal worth about $82 million.
Central States Indemnity's primary product line is credit-card credit insurance distributed through card issuers nationwide.
Its revenues this year are expected to exceed $96 million, the company said, and its net earnings from operations should be about $10 million.


METRO DIGEST
AFFLICTED WITH A SCIENTIFIC ENIGMA
When he began feeling overwhelmingly tired in 1990, Alberto T., a 31-year-old math teacher whose former boyfriend had tested positive for H.I.V., immediately suspected AIDS.
When he tested negative, he was relieved.
But last summer, he discovered that he was one of fewer than 100 patients in the world reported to be suffering from a syndrome characterized by severe damage to the immune system, like AIDS, but without an apparent cause.
And suddenly, he was at the center of a scientific enigma.
A1.
ASSESSING LEAD IN DRINKING WATER
Lead in drinking water exceeds federally permissible levels in nearly 20 percent of the nation's largest cities, including Jersey City, according to the first comprehensive test of municipal water supplies by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal officials embraced the results as evidence that severe lead risks were rare.
But environmentalists said the statistics did not appropriately gauge the risks to consumers -- particularly in older cities like New York.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY
HOW OTHER CITIES SET UP POLICE REVIEW
In San Francisco, the city's civilian agency that monitors and investigates charges of police misconduct is in many respects the kind of agency that advocates of increased civilian oversight of New York's police say should be emulated.
Still, like civilian review programs that have been started in the last 20 years in other cities across the country, the San Francisco program has its limits.
A16.
BRUTAL MARKET, BUT NEW YORK UNSCATHED
Prices went from bad to worse in the Treasury market, but an important bond sale did not go badly for New York City.
Business Day, D1.
Police seek gunman in shooting near school.
B2.
Fernandez and Bronx district reach accord. B3.
Sale of New York City OTB is weighed. B3.  REGION
RAISING CASH IS THE PRIORITY
Vastly outfinanced by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato -- and thus eclipsed in the battle of television commercials -- Attorney General Robert Abrams is in the thick of the most elaborate, and desperate, fund-raising drive of his quarter-century in politics.
A1.
Governor Cuomo rebukes Senator D'Amato.
B5.
CASINO OFFICIAL STEPS DOWN
The chief executive of Connecticut's only casino, opened earlier this year by an Indian tribe, has resigned, citing philosophical differences with the tribe's leadership.
His departure came after he proposed that the casino might give the state a share of its profits if the state rejected other casino proposals.
B8.
IN SPOTLIGHT AT ABUSE TRIAL
The young woman did not come to the courtroom where four former schoolmates went on trial last week on charges of sexually assaulting her in March 1989 in Glen Ridge, N.J.
But she was on center stage, nonetheless, as state prosecutors and defense lawyers turned dueling spotlights on her personality, her mental capabilities, and her sexual past.
And whether she takes the witness stand or not, she is certain to be a central character as the testimony in the trial begins today.
Reporter's notebook, B8.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3
Chronicle B24


Immune Disease Mystery Leaves Patients in Limbo
He first noticed fatigue and a drop in weight in 1990.
Over the next year and a half, he lost 12 pounds for no apparent reason.
He went home from work so tired he could not exercise or go out with friends.
Alberto T., a 31-year-old math teacher from Venezuela whose former boyfriend had tested positive for H.I.V., said he immediately suspected AIDS.
But when he was tested for the virus, there was no sign of it.


W. A. Cullman, 77, A Marketing Expert And an Ex-Educator
W.
Arthur Cullman, a retired educator and executive who was a marketing expert, died on Sunday during a visit to Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Columbus, Ohio.
He died of a heart attack, his family reported yesterday.


Corrections
Because of transmission errors, an article yesterday about race relations in Oneonta, N.Y., referred incorrectly to the police chief and to an incident in which officers accused a student of selling drugs.
The chief is John J. Donadio; the incident occurred as the student was leaving a bar, not a bus.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Nixon Differing With Bush? That's What Friends Are For
Richard M. Nixon is telling friends that President Bush probably lost the 1992 race before it ever started.
As Mr.
Nixon analyzes the contest, the friends say, Mr.
Bush could probably have withstood the damage of a deteriorating economy if in other areas he had been an activist, progressive President instead of a defensive caretaker.
"He's puzzled why Bush never figured out he had to have some policies besides the status quo," one Nixon friend reports, adding that the Bush campaign has yet to ask Mr.
Nixon for his advice.


Shiite Gunman Now Speaker of Lebanese House
The Lebanese Parliament, given a new mandate in the first national elections in two decades, held its opening session here today and chose Nabih Berri, a former commander of the country's largest Muslim militia and an ally of Syria, to be its Speaker for the next four years.
The new Speaker received the votes of 105 of the 128 lawmakers.
In his acceptance speech, Mr.
Berri promised to strive for the restoration of national unity shaken by the elections.


Vitamin as Muscle-Damage Fighter
ALONG with their training regimen and carbohydrate loading, participants in the forthcoming New York City Marathon might consider taking vitamin E, a new study suggests.
For all its many benefits, vigorous exercise does have some drawbacks, and one is the damage done to muscle tissue as oxygen flows rapidly through it.
But now nutrition researchers affiliated with the Federal Department of Agriculture have shown that vitamin E taken before exercise can minimize muscle damage and reduce inflammation and soreness that so often follow a demanding exercise routine.


How to Clean Up Building Inspections Mess
To the Editor:
An Oct. 15 news article reports the trial and conviction of six New York City Department of Buildings inspectors for taking payoffs from 1986 to 1992.
This conduct is reprehensible.
To understand how to stop it we must know why the payoffs were made.
The investigation did not result in charges that Buildings Department inspectors received payments for overlooking violations; rather that they demanded money not to slow up the process.
Whether or not they actually could slow the process is immaterial when contractors need certificates of occupancy, and the law permits only department inspectors to perform such inspections.


It's Beautiful, but Who Wants to Break Up a Set?
DEAR Diary,
Saw ad in this paper that asked "What Makes This Watch Worth $1,000,000?" Thought, "Good question." Thought, "How much longer will battery keep going on four-year-old Timex?" Made note to take a look at what ad referred to as set of five "hand-crafted one-of-a-kind timepieces as monumental as the event they were created to honor -- the discovery of the New World."
Since ad said watches were to be leaving New York branch of Asprey, the London jewelers, by Wednesday for world tour, raced down to check them out at shop at 725 Fifth Avenue.


Review/Fashion; Bare Midriffs And a Singular Opulence
Couture and ready-to-wear collections usually operate on separate tracks, with different showing times, customers and attitudes.
But there are signs that the tracks are converging.
At a news conference today in the middle of the ready-to-wear showings, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the French Minister of Industry and Foreign Commerce, announced that a commission was discussing ways of easing the requirements for joining the couture but that nothing had been decided.
Doing so would permit more designers, presumably those in the ready-to-wear arena, to join the august couture community.


Flightsafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gruber Not So Sure He Has Won Over the Fans
Kelly Gruber has heard boos at the Skydome for so long that it is almost comical.
He hears it when he bats, he hears it when he flubs a grounder and he hears it during batting practice.
The polite Blue Jay fans do not hammer many players, but Gruber is their target for abuse.
Tonight was a little different.
He heard howls when he grounded out in the third inning to set a record for post-season futility with 23 straight hitless at-bats.
He heard derisive cheers when he reached base on a walk in the fifth inning.
Then he heard the Skydome erupt when he knocked a 3-2 changeup off Steve Avery into the left-field seats to tie the score at 2-2, and the Jays proceeded to edge the Braves, 3-2, in Game 3 of the World Series.


CHRONICLE
When JANICE LEVIN, an art collector and philanthropist, gets involved with a cause, she believes in doing more than writing checks.
So when she decided, in 1986, to donate the funds to renovate the children's playground in Central Park near 76th Street and Fifth Avenue, she went to the park to ask parents how they would like it changed.
"I told them the playground was being redone and I had been commissioned by the Central Park Conservancy to ask them what they would want to have that they wouldn't," she said yesterday.
"In less than five minutes, I had a list."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Scores in 3d Debate, Then Opens Fire on the Press
After a debate in which he exposed the vulnerabilities of his two opponents, Ross Perot leveled a vitriolic attack on the press Monday night, making it clear why he prefers to campaign through the unfiltered medium of television advertising.
Mr.
Perot's aides said today that they still did not know when and where he might campaign in person.
But the independent candidate for President continued to buy large and expensive chunks of television time, and it seems clear that the appeal of his campaign will be measured more by Nielsen ratings than by crowd estimates.
At a news conference after Monday night's debate in East Lansing, Mich., Mr.
Perot revived his war of words with reporters by criticizing them for not conveying the enthusiasm of the crowds at his post-debate rallies.
He also accused them of bias for not making a larger issue out of his complaint that some of President Bush's campaign aides have served as lobbyists for foreign countries.
During the extended assault Mr.
Perot asserted that reporters "have less respect in this country than Congress," that they "hate the fact that I'm in the race" and that he had "never met a more thin-skinned crowd in my life." He singled out Time magazine, which he called "a joke," and a reporter for The New York Times -- "I have to be real careful when you ask a question" -- for individual criticism.
Anything for a Headline
"I think you'll do anything for a 'gotcha' story," Mr.
Perot said, referring to the news media in general.
"That just means anything that'll get you a headline, get you a bonus. You get among your peers and you high five and say: 'O.K., now I'm a big man. I got a story on the front page.' "
The news media were not Mr.
Perot's only target.
He also publicly rebuked Orson G. Swindle 3d, the director of United We Stand, America, Mr.
Perot's political organization.
Mr.
Swindle erred, Mr.
Perot said at the news conference, by saying in an interview last weekend that a vote for Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee, would be "a disaster," and that Mr.
Bush would be a preferred second choice to Mr.
Perot.
Saying it was "a serious mistake" for Mr.
Swindle to suggest any preference for a second choice, Mr.
Perot added that he had talked to him about the comments and that they would not be repeated.
"That was just Orson expressing a personal opinion," Mr.
Perot said.
"It does not reflect the feelings of our organization."
The timing of Mr.
Perot's attack on the news media was unusual because it came at a juncture when he has generally been receiving positive notices for his performances in the Presidential debates and his paid television presentations.
In Monday night's debate the Texas multibillionaire skillfully turned a question about his abandonment of General Motors to his advantage, using it to issue a poignant warning about the urgency of eliminating the budget deficit.
Largely unchallenged by either Mr.
Bush or Mr.
Clinton, he also gave new emphasis to questions about the Bush Administration's dealings with Iraq, and reinforced the Republican contention that Mr.
Clinton's experience as Governor of Arkansas would have little relevance in Washington.
While Mr.
Perot had no public appearances today, his associates said they were thrilled about post-debate poll results showing significant improvement in his approval ratings and incremental progress in his potential share of the vote.
"Ross Perot won in these debates the right to kibbitz, the right to be a permanent voice in America," said John Jay Hooker, a Nashville political activist and Perot supporter who said he spoke to the candidate this morning.
"My opinion is that Ross Perot will be a candidate for President of the United States in 1996."
Mr.
Perot's son, Ross Perot Jr., said the campaign's mission in the next two weeks would be to convince voters that a vote for his father would not be wasted.
"Voting for Perot is a vote for his principles," he said.
More Programs Planned
Mr.
Perot is scheduled to broadcast his next 30-minute program on Thursday night, followed by presentations on both Friday and Saturday nights.
The 90 minutes will cost him $812,000.
Mr.
Perot, whose net worth has been estimated in various press reports at from $2.4 billion to $3.3 billion, said in Monday night's debate that he would spend up to $60 million of his own money on his campaign.
By the end of the weekend Mr.
Perot will have spent about $18 million on television advertising since rejoining the race on Oct. 1, according to figures supplied today by the four networks.
Through the end of August Mr.
Perot's campaign spent another $17.5 million, most of it his own money, according to Federal financial disclosure reports.


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A 'Stubborn' Brewery Stays Afloat
F.
X.
MATT is the kind of brewery that has been going out of business in the last few decades: small, family owned and battered by competition from the big companies like Anheuser-Busch and Miller Brewing.
But the F. X. Matt Brewing Company, at least so far, has figured out how to stay alive in an industry that has been brutal to those that fail to differentiate their products from those of the larger companies.
It has established itself as a premier brewer of beers for people who have a recipe but no brewery of their own.
The beers it produces, some of them award winners, include New Amsterdam, Brooklyn Lager, Dock Street, Harpoon Ale, Olde Heurich, Prior Double Dark and some of the Samuel Adams brand.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


First Beijing Visit for Hong Kong's Governor
Hong Kong's new Governor, Christopher Patten, arrived here today on his first official visit, opening the curtain on what is likely to be a quarrelsome five-year relationship with Chinese officials over the degree of democracy in the territory.
Mr.
Patten, expected to be Britain's last governing envoy in Hong Kong before it reverts to China on July 1, 1997, is trying to orchestrate a dignified exit for the British.
But so far his political flair and his proposals to make Hong Kong more democratic have angered Beijing and elicited loud complaints.


Food Notes
A New Egg
In the next few days Simply Eggs, a new liquid egg product with considerably less cholesterol than ordinary eggs, will be available in most supermarkets.
Simply Eggs contains 45 milligrams of cholesterol per egg, compared with 215 milligrams for regular large whole eggs.
Unlike egg substitutes that use only the whites, Simply Eggs is made from whole eggs.
But it is essential to understand that Simply Eggs' fat content, five grams an egg, is the same as that of regular eggs, as is the calorie count, 70 an egg.
As with regular eggs, 64 percent of the calories in Simply Eggs comes from fat.


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.F.L. Inches Ever Closer to New Free-Agency Plan
National Football League owners today listened to proposals on a new free-agency system and discussed the idea of a more intense bargaining effort to resolve their differences with players.
They targeted Nov. 12 as a date for choosing a course of action that would help solve their labor woes.
The meeting was described as an exchange of ideas between the owners and their seven-owner executive council.
The council, along with Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, has been granted authority by the 28 owners to consummate a deal with the players or to present a plan of free agency to United States District Judge David Doty in Minneapolis.


Miscellany
*
The Federal Communications Commission, acting on a referral from the Children's Advertising Review Unit of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, has admonished the Philadelphia public television station WHYY for violating the commission's host-selling policy.
The review unit had investigated an underwriting credit for the "Sesame Street Live" theatrical show that was shown at the end of a "Sesame Street" telecast on WHYY and featured several "Sesame Street" characters.
The unit said the credit violated guidelines meant to prevent children from confusing programming and advertising.


Cairo Journal; After the Earthquake, a Rumbling of Discontent
Dressed in an expensive white blouse and a black skirt, a Government official stood on a street here handing out out money and documents to a crowd of disheveled earthquake victims.
"I have helped them," the official, Awatif Sayed, said a bit defensively, pointing to a woman whose daughter was killed in the earthquake eight days ago.
"I gave her 500 pounds and I will give her the rest of the money soon."


Manager of Indian Tribe's Casino Quits
The chief executive of Connecticut's only casino, opened earlier this year by an Indian tribe, has resigned, citing philosophical differences with the tribe's leadership.
No specifics were available from a spokesman for the tribe, the Mashantucket Pequots, or the executive, Alfred J. Luciani.


On a Bumpy Road to Big Money
With middleweight Roy Jones Jr., nothing comes easy.
At the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, Jones was the victim of a decision so bad that officials there felt duty-bound to acknowledge his talent by voting him the outstanding fighter award even after he was eliminated from the competition.


A Plan by Frito to Outfox The Super Bowl Audience
IN January, Frito-Lay sponsored a special program on the Fox television network that competed against the halftime show during Super Bowl XXVI on CBS.
The maker of snack foods like Fritos and Doritos wanted to offer the giant Super Bowl audience an alternative to what Frito-Lay denigrated as a banal spectacle of dancing snowflakes and salutes to gridiron greats.
So guess which advertiser announced yesterday that it would sponsor the halftime show during Super Bowl XXVII, to be broadcast by NBC on Jan. 31?


Bitter Greens Come in From the Cold
PASTA with bitter greens is a dish making its way into mainstream American cooking.
The movement probably began with broccoli rape, the Italian bitter green that has become popular in the last five years.
Now, Americans have become more adventuresome, willing to try any number of greens that, until recently, only those brought up on them would eat.
Arugula, Swiss chard and mustard greens are among them.
In this particular dish, arugula, which is generally eaten raw, in salads, is cooked a little to wilt it.
To my taste, prosciutto should not be cooked at all.
I prefer it just as it comes off the bone: it has a sweeter, more interesting flavor.


Colgate Palmolive reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jordan's Flip-Flops Almost Rival On-Court Leaps
If Michael Jordan doesn't start getting his stories straight, his nickname may soon have to be amended to Hot Air.
Jordan, who has been given almost every benefit of the doubt by the news media in Chicago and nationally because he is the foremost wonder of the basketball world and essentially a likable multimillionaire, is developing a credibility problem that isn't going to be explained away by some corporate press release.


Study Finds Most Parents Know About Daughters' Abortion Plans
A new nationwide study of 1,500 teen-age girls who had abortions last year found that 61 percent of the parents knew about the abortions in advance even without any law requiring parental notification or consent.
The girls were also far more likely to tell their mothers than their fathers about their pregnancies, according to the study, which was conducted by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, a research organization that examines reproductive issues.


NBO Stores Dismisses Deutsch
NBO Stores Inc. in Fair Lawn, N.J., said it had dismissed Deutsch Inc. in New York, confirming a report this week in Adweek.
Deutsch, NBO's agency since August 1991, had introduced an image campaign for the retail clothing chain that carried the theme "Men's values."


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In a speech yesterday at a stop in Gainesville, Ga., on his train trip through Georgia, South Carolina and North Carolina.


Reebok International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Atlantic Sinfonietta  Merkin Concert Hall


Godiva and Seagram Meet for a Drink
Godiva Chocolatier Inc. and Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc. are teaming to introduce a chocolate liqueur produced by the latter based on the candy made by the former.
Print advertisements, created by Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, carry the self-evident theme "The Godiva of liqueurs." The ads present the liqueur's bottle, which copies the confectioner's gold packaging bearing the Lady Godiva trademark.
Each ad ends with the bold assertion "The real sin would be never experiencing it."


Orr's Pact Extended at Iowa State
JOHNNY ORR had his contract extended for two years at Iowa State, through the 1994-95 season.
Details of Orr's contract won't change, the university said yesterday, and his salary will remain at $107,352. (AP)


McDonnell Said to Plan Cut in Output
In the latest setback for the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, orders for its MD-11 wide-body jet have slowed so much in the last six months that the company is planning to cut production at least 40 percent in 1994, major subcontractors and analysts say.
The production cut is expected to cost at least 3,000 workers their jobs at the aerospace and military contractor's commercial airline division and at its leading suppliers.
The Convair unit of the General Dynamics Corporation, which makes the MD-11's fuselage, said Monday that it would cut 40 percent of its 4,200 workers over the next five months to offset a comparable reduction in fuselage orders from McDonnell.


Transit Police Officer Kills Youth in Subway Car
A transit police officer shot and killed a teen-ager last night in subway car in the Bronx after the youth pulled a gun on the officer, a spokesman for the transit police said.
The shooting happened about 10:23 P.M. on a northbound No. 4 train, while the officer, James Davis, 34 years old, supervised three other transit officers who had just graduated from the Police Academy and were on probation, said the spokesman, Albert W. O'Leary.
The officers were on duty but in in plainclothes as part of a fare-evasion program.
Grabbed One Youth
Four youths boarded the train at the 170th Street-Jerome Avenue station, and one went over to two of the officers, who were seated and said something that caused them to grab him, Mr.
O'Leary said.
"We don't know exactly what he said to them," he said.


Jays Squeeze Out of Tight Spot Into a 2-1 Lead
The combination of playing indoors and in the first World Series game ever played in Canada was too great an obstacle for the Atlanta Braves to overcome tonight.
Canada's Blue Jays, who at least for the week cross all of the political lines in the country, charged to a two-games-to-one lead in the first international World Series, edging the Braves, 3-2, on Candy Maldonado's bases-loaded, run-scoring single in the ninth inning.


Grief Spans Sea as Gun Ends a Life Mistakenly
The Halloween decorations -- a paper skeleton, a plastic ghost -- are still in place outside Rodney Peairs's neat brick ranch-style house near here, and a faint reddish stain is still outlined on the floor of the carport.
The decorations are what drew a 16-year-old Japanese exchange student, Yoshihiro Hattori, to the house in the rural suburb of Central, and the stain is the result.
Saturday night, young Hattori and an American school friend were looking for a Halloween party in the quiet neighborhood.
But they knocked on the wrong door and startled Mr.
Peairs and his wife, Bonnie.
Moments later, the young man lay dying on the carport floor, shot in the chest with a .44 Magnum handgun.


Final Debate Tops Ratings
Defying expectations that the electorate was tiring of the Presidential debates, Monday's third and final debate scored the highest television Nielsen rating of this month's political debates.
The debate had a combined 44.6 rating on the four networks that carried it.
That beat the number for last Thursday, a 43.4 rating. (Each rating point represents 931,000 homes.)


Another Met Undergoes Surgery
Outfielder PAT HOWELL has undergone arthroscopic surgery on his right knee, bringing to 12 the number of Mets who have been operated on this year.
The Mets said their team physician, DAVID ALTCHEK, performed the procedure on Monday at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.
They said Howell is expected to be 100 percent by the middle of November.


INSIDE
Doubts About the G.E.D.
Holders of general equivalency degrees seem no better off than high school dropouts.
Education, page B10.
U.S.
Studies M.I.A.
Photos
The Pentagon hopes photos provided by Vietnam will help clear up the fate of some men, officials said.
Page A7.
Greens Founder Was Slain
The German authorities said that Petra Kelly, founder of the Green Party, was slain by her companion.
Page A3.


Sports of The Times; Series Prize Should Be 1996 Games
THESE are not the Blue Jays we used to know.
They do not give up.
They do not go away.
Two more victories like this and they could even exorcise some of the old conspiracy theories about their giant neighbor to the south.
After the great inverted flag controversy in Atlanta on Sunday night, Canadians reacted with politeness last night at the first World Series game ever held in Canada.
First the fans stood and sang "The Star-Spangled Banner" and then the Jays outlasted the team from south of the border, 3-2, on a bases-loaded single by Candy Maldonado in the ninth inning.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Rebel  Corpus Christi Church


New York City Prices $844 Million in Bonds
New York City priced yesterday about $844 million in bonds for sale to the public.
The city's bond offering consisted of two parts: $759.2 million of general obligation bonds through a group of underwriters led by Lehman Brothers,, and a total of $85.12 million of tax-exempt and taxable capital appreciation bonds through Prudential Securities.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Post Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rate of Home Building Up 1.4% in September
Builders broke ground for new houses and apartments at an annual rate of 1,256,000 units in September, 1.4 percent faster than in the preceding month and the best performance since March, the Commerce Department reported today.
The rise, which was in the upper range of expectations, followed a 12.6 percent jump in August and was seen, as expected by the Bush Administration, and by some private analysts as well, as a sign of pickup for an economy managing only feeble growth.
But others, including the chief economist for the National Association of Home Builders, were less sanguine.


Philip Kuehn Dies; G.O.P. Official, 72, Vied to Be Governor
Philip G. Kuehn, who twice lost narrow elections for governor of Wisconsin, died Sunday at home in Picayune, Miss.
He was 72 years old.
He died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


COMPANY NEWS
FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP., Detroit, a manufacturer of parts for automobiles and trucks, and TRW Inc. announced the completion of Federal-Mogul's acquisition of TRW's independent automotive aftermarket business.


In Race for Congress, a Clash of Mavericks
The candidates seated behind the red-white-and-blue-draped table in a Staten Island church basement had barely finished their opening remarks in a recent debate when a man identifying himself as a retired police officer jumped up with a question.
"How can you say you are a Republican Conservative?" fired the man at the incumbent, Representative Susan Molinari, citing her support for abortion rights.


Mob and Politics Intersect, Fueling Cynicism in Japan
In 1987 Noboru Takeshita and his faction in the ruling party wielded immense influence in Japan -- more, some said, than the Government.
But he was powerless to remove the last obstacle to his becoming Prime Minister: the loud, mocking attacks from a rightist group's sound trucks.
Winning the endorsement of party elders hinged on his silencing the trucks, a fixture of political life here.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Blue Jays Beat Braves to Take 2-1 Series Lead


Leslie Fay Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


'Yes/Oui' for Canada
With Toronto's Blue Jays in the World Series, America is suddenly paying more attention to its friendly northern neighbor.
The timing is perfect.
Canada is right now trying to define itself yet again, and the task is tortuous.
America's interest is in a solution assuring that its most dependable ally and biggest trading partner will also be stable and strong.
In a nationwide referendum next Monday, Canadians will vote on a plan to redefine their national unity and restructure their Government.
Proposed constitutional changes would acknowledge Quebec's special status and the rights of native populations, and would establish the popular election of senators.
With other countries splintering -- even fighting wars -- over just such issues, Canada's deliberation is a model of working democracy.


Kimball C. Atwood 3d Dies at 71; Developed Way to Analyze Genes
Dr.
Kimball Chase Atwood 3d, a geneticist who helped develop a technique for the detection and analysis of individual genes in a chromosome, died on Oct. 13 at his home in Woods Hole, Mass.
He was 71 years old.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.
He had retired from there as a professor of human genetics and development.
The university reported his death this week.


ON THE SET WITH Dick Van Dyke; All the Way From Rob Petrie And Back Again
DICK VAN DYKE, famous long ago in sitcom black-and-white, still looks limber in real-life color.
Killing time on a stultifyingly humid Hollywood sound stage, the 67-year-old comedian is cracking up the crew between takes with the same kind of Silly Putty faces and Gumby-limbed contortions that made "The Dick Van Dyke Show," its last episode shot over a quarter-century ago, one of the most successful television comedies ever produced.
Waiting for his next shot one morning, Mr.
Van Dyke obliges a request from a member of the crew to perform his trademark stutter-step that opened the program every Monday night from 1961 to 1966.
As Mr.
Van Dyke hip-hops around an invisible living-room ottoman, one needn't even squint to see the aura of Rob Petrie, gag writer, devoted suburban husband of Mary Tyler Moore's Laura and genial office minion of Carl Reiner's tyrannical Alan Brady.


Lead Levels Excessive In Water, E.P.A. Says
Lead in drinking water exceeds federally permissible levels in nearly 20 percent of the nation's largest cities, according to the first comprehensive test of municipal water supplies ever carried out by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal officials embraced the results released yesterday as evidence that severe lead risks exist in only a small percentage of American homes.
But environmentalists said the statistics failed to gauge appropriately the risks to the average consumer -- particularly in older cities like New York, where many system pipes are lined with lead.


Corrections
A performance art listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide on Sunday included an incorrect starting time on Friday and Saturday for "Downwind" by Ben Neill.
Because of a producer's schedule change, the opera will begin at 8:30 P.M., not 9, at the Thread Waxing Space in Manhattan at 476 Broadway, near Broome Street.


CENTENAIRE BLANZY BUYS TWO SMALLER RATINGS AGENCIES
The French company Centenaire Blanzy, which publishes reports and ratings on some 370 banks and corporations in 21 countries, yesterday completed the acquisition of IBCA Ltd., headquartered in London, and Euronotation France S.A. of Paris.
The acquisition -- made through a new French holding company, IBCA-Notation Groupe, which is 70 percent owned by Centenaire Blanzy -- makes it one of the world's major rating agencies and represents a large step toward creation of a European credit agency.


Jets Finding It Hard To Get Offense in Gear
In three seasons with the Jets, right guard Dwayne White has established quite a name for himself.
At 6 feet 2 inches and 315 pounds, he has been nicknamed Road Grader, mostly for the help he has provided the Jets' running game and for his deployment as a blocking back in goal-line situations.
"Last year, I was a candidate for All-Pro, but now it doesn't matter," said White, a seventh-round pick out of Alcorn State in 1990 and a starter since the last five games of his rookie season.
"What matters now is how we end the season, the long haul. Some teams start off 5-0 and then break down. I'd rather start off slow and end strong than start off strong and taper off."


Iran-Contra Document Says Bush Favored Secrecy in Hostage Affair
A White House document, little-noticed before, shows that in November 1986 George Bush endorsed a Reagan Administration plan to conceal the specifics of the Iran initiative as details of the secret arms-for-hostage arrangement began spilling into public view.
The document, a cable from John M. Poindexter, the national security adviser, to Secretary of State George P. Shultz, came shortly before Mr.
Bush asserted that he had urged Administration officials to tell the truth about the affair.


DSC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shirley Booth, Star of TV, Radio, Stage and Screen, Is Dead at 94
Shirley Booth, an actress whose warmth and versatility brought her acclaim on stage, screen and television, died on Friday at her home in North Chatham, Mass.
She was 94 years old.
She died after a brief illness, said David Hunt of the Nickerson Funeral Home in Chatham, who announced her death yesterday.


Maxxam Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mob and Politics Intersect, Fueling Cynicism in Japan
In 1987 Noboru Takeshita and his faction in the ruling party wielded immense influence in Japan -- more, some said, than the Government.
But he was powerless to remove the last obstacle to his becoming Prime Minister: the loud, mocking attacks from a rightist group's sound trucks.
Winning the endorsement of party elders hinged on his silencing the trucks, a fixture of political life here.


The Pop Life; Tribute To Dylan Is Slow To Pay Off
Last Friday's euphoric tribute to Bob Dylan at Madison Square Garden left a lot of people with the impression that the producers of the show had struck gold.
Tickets were priced at $150 for industry insiders and up to $80 for the general public, there were two pay-per-view telecasts and the show was transmitted via television or radio to 68 countries.
In the United States, roughly 160 radio stations carried the broadcast.
Even so, Kevin Wall, the chairman of Radiovision, which produced the tribute, says the show cost more than $5 million and won't break even for years.
One major factor is that the concert, which included a raft of artists ranging from George Harrison and Eric Clapton to Johnny Cash and Sinead O'Connor, had no corporate sponsorship, which is unusual these days. (This summer's Elton John-Eric Clapton tour, for instance, was sponsored by Diet Coke.)


Tax-Exempt Funds Off; Taxable Yields Are Up
Yields were mixed in the latest seven-day period ended yesterday, as IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report surveyed more than 862 tax-exempt and taxable money market funds.
Tax-exempt funds had lower yields, while taxable funds posted slight gains.
The decline in tax-exempt yields came from strong investor demand for short-term municipal debt, which drove prices higher and yields lower.
But the pattern is likely to reverse itself as investor appetite diminishes, forcing prices down and yields higher, and the supply of new issues begins to outpace demand.


Trade Pact Can Aid Mexico, but Not Us
To the Editor:
"Free Trade but With Time Bombs" (editorial, Oct. 6) discusses how some of Bill Clinton's proposed modifications of the North American Free Trade Agreement may scuttle it.
You say the agreement "would simultaneously propel Mexico's pro-market reforms forward and raise living standards for U.S. consumers." I think most Americans understand the benefits the agreement would bring Mexico.
But it is hard to see how it would benefit us.
Cheap Mexican labor and lower manufacturing costs make it sensible for American manufacturers to move plants to Mexico.
But will the Americans who thus lose their jobs be able to buy the cheaper articles produced in Mexico or even articles produced in the United States?
Lower-priced Mexican-manufactured goods don't help the unemployed.


Panhandle Eastern Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Correction Official Charged in Kickback Scheme
An assistant commissioner for the New York City Department of Correction was arrested yesterday on charges that he took $24,000 in kickbacks from a janitorial supply company for steering contracts its way.
The assistant commissioner, William Jenkins, who had worked for the Correction Department for two years at a salary of $73,000 a year, was arrested during a stake-out that culminated a five-month investigation.
Mr.
Jenkins was also once seen taking toilet paper from the company, investigators with the New York City Department of Investigation said.


UNR Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankees Cite Marlins Suit In Their Territorial Claim
The New York Yankees are looking at the lawsuit filed against the Florida Marlins by a minor league baseball team and may file one themselves over the eviction of their Fort Lauderdale minor league team.
"We are studying the lawsuit that the Miami Miracle filed very carefully, and we're making a decision as to the direction the Yankees will proceed," David Sussman, the Yankees' vice president and general counsel, said today by telephone from New York.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Wisconsin Bell Inc., a unit of Ameritech Inc., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $150 million of debt securities. *
Federal National Mortgage Association plans to price a total of $1.3 billion in debentures today, with $800 million of an issue due in 1997, and $500 million of an issue due in 2002.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Found Guilty in Bias Beating in Florida
Jurors returned a guilty verdict today against one of seven young white men charged in the August beating death of a 19-year-old Vietnamese-born man who had objected to the use of a racial slur.
Bradley W. Mills, 19 years old, of Tamarac, was convicted of a single count of second-degree murder in the death of Luyen Phan Nguyen, a premedical student at the University of Miami.


Jim Garrison, 70, Theorist on Kennedy Death, Dies
Jim Garrison, who as District Attorney in New Orleans made startling assertions of a widespread conspiracy and cover-up in President John F. Kennedy's assassination, died yesterday at his home in New Orleans.
He was 70 years old.
The New Orleans coroner, Dr.
Frank Minyard, a longtime friend, said the exact cause of death would be determined in a routine autopsy today.
Mr.
Garrison had been bedridden with heart disease.


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; A Heroic Then, a Realistic Now
Memories of the Ford Administration  By John Updike  371 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Will any readers miss the irony in the title of John Updike's 15th and latest novel, "Memories of the Ford Administration," and try to summon up remembrance of the years from August 1974 through December 1976?
In case we have still not caught on by the end of the book, Mr.
Updike's narrator lists the Mayaguez, Helsinki, the Nixon pardon, the evacuation of our embassy staff from Saigon, all of which he feels had a positive resolution, and concludes with tongue only half in cheek: "As far as I know, he was perfect, which can be said of no other President since James Monroe. Further, he was the only President to preside with a name completely different from the one he was given at birth, Leslie King Jr. 'President King' would have been an awkward oxymoron."


Washington Water Power reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Martin Marietta Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge's Ruling Due Today On Daily News Ownership
A Federal bankruptcy judge is expected to rule today on whether Mortimer B. Zuckerman will become the new owner of The Daily News.
With no other bidders for the ailing tabloid in sight, and with the newspaper's main creditors and major unions generally in Mr.
Zuckerman's corner, people involved in negotiations to save the 73-year-old newspaper said that the judge, Tina L. Brozman, had little choice but to certify the sale to Mr.
Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News and World Report.
Mr.
Zuckerman received the support of the drivers' union last night when the union ratified an agreement.


In Debate, Dodd Presses His Foe on Failing to Vote in Many Elections
Senator Christopher J. Dodd sharply questioned his Republican opponent, Brook Johnson, on his failure to vote in Connecticut elections in a debate here today.
Mr.
Dodd, citing town records, said Mr.
Johnson had voted only twice in the last 10 elections in his hometown of Greenwich.
Mr.
Johnson, a textile executive who came out of political obscurity five months ago, has acknowledged that he has not voted regularly, saying that the demands of his business kept him out of town for many votes.


Abkhazians Seek Freedom From Georgia; Outside Help Is Needed
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 8 editorial sees and understands the tragedy taking place in Georgia quite adequately, despite details with which our historians would disagree.
After reading it and the reactions of the Security Council and State Department, I start to believe there are forces trying to defend us, and that world opinion can no longer be deceived by lies spread from official news agencies in Moscow.
There has never been any conflict in Georgia on national grounds, other than the political ones inspired from abroad.
Forces in Russia are trying to overtake and restore the Russian Empire; they are strong, cruel and ingenious.
The war in Abkhazia may be small from the Russian or American viewpoints, but not for Georgia.


Piccadilly Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With His King on the Run, Fischer Manages a Draw
After Bobby Fischer had pressed him positionally throughout the game, Boris Spassky not only escaped into a draw yesterday, but also spent the last 22 moves of the 80-move struggle torturing his opponent by chasing his king all over the board.
Spassky was no doubt getting even for the games in which Fischer had done the same to him.
The score after Game 23 of the exhibition match in Belgrade still stands at Fischer 8, Spassky 4.
The winner's $3.35 million prize will go to the first player to win 10 games.


Gleason Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kelly Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Salvador Skeletons Confirm Reports of Massacre in 1981
In a small rectangular plot among the overgrown ruins of a village here, a team of forensic archeologists has opened a window on El Salvador's nightmarish past.
Two feet below the ground, a few tiny skeletons grin up almost intact from what was once the tile floor of the parish house.
Other bones are crushed in places and caked with dirt, but they can be identified well enough to determine that they belong to at least 38 bodies.


Prague Journal; Kafka and the Jews in a Web He Would Recognize
Like K., the central figure of "The Castle," the Franz Kafka Society in the writer's native city is striving unceasingly to attain its destination.
But, as in the book, this quest is proving vain.
The society's goal is the splendid Kinsky Palace on Old Town Square, whose use the Czech government granted to the group a year ago.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Britain Now Seeks Market for Coal
Having offered reprieves to 21 coal mines and 23,000 miners of British Coal this week, the Government must now decide what to do with the tons of coal that miners will continue to bring to the surface.
The Government decided last week to close more than half of British Coal's mines and lay off 30,000 miners because of shrinking demand, then reversed itself because of fears of strikes, unrest and open rebellion in Parliament.


Cray Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Serbs and Croats Now Join In Devouring Bosnia's Land
After months of merciless artillery bombardment, this mostly mountainous republic has been reduced to a handful of desperate cities and towns controlled by the Government, with its people increasingly accepting that their struggle for survival is lost.
Outside Sarajevo, Serbian forces have seized at least two-thirds of the country.
Croatian troops control most of the rest.


Bundesbank: Sound Money Bastion
Should European monetary union some day become a reality, one of the world's most powerful and influential institutions -- the Bundesbank -- will be consigned to the dustbin of history.
Profound skepticism that this will ever happen steeps the sleek and quiet corridors of power at the Bundesbank's 13-story headquarters here these days.
But in a way, the future of the central bank is partly what the recent turbulence on European money markets has been about.


Soda Maker' Discount Notes
The Dr.
Pepper/Seven-Up Companies, the country's third-largest soft-drink maker, is offering $656.5 million face amount of senior subordinated discount notes due in 2002.
The notes are rated below investment grade and are being offered through BT Securities.
Proceeds from the sale, combined with bank borrowings and cash on hand, will be applied to a previously announced recapitalization plan.
Through this offering, the company expects to realize about $375 million in proceeds, as underwriters priced the low-rated high-yield issue at $571.204 per $1,000 of bonds, to yield 11.5 percent at maturity.
The heavily discounted notes do not pay interest until Nov. 1, 1997.


Heritage Media reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Baby Bell' To Offer TV Service
The Bell Atlantic Corporation announced plans today to develop what amounts to an electronic video-rental store, which would enable shoppers at home to dial up movies or television programs over ordinary telephone lines.
Technology developed by Bellcore, the research consortium owned by the seven regional Bell companies, makes possible a telephone system that may compete with cable television systems much more rapidly than experts had previously predicted.


Keeping a Chimney Clean (and Safe!)
A CRACKLING fire is a pleasure on a crisp autumn day, provided the smoke goes up a chimney that has been properly cleaned and inspected.
"There's a killer attached to your house if you don't take care of it," said Dennis Smith, owner of Chimney Doctors, an 11-year-old company.
A variety of problems can occur if a chimney is not inspected and swept regularly.
Animals can nest or even die in the flue, causing odors or blockages.
A blocked or damaged gas furnace can send noxious carbon monoxide fumes into the room instead of up the chimney.
And a buildup of creosote, a natural but flammable byproduct of burning wood, can start a deadly chimney fire.


Key Brings the Blue Jays Just One Game Away
Jimmy Key, who by virtue of his nine years as a member of the Toronto Blue Jays qualifies for honorary Canadian citizenship, tonight executed the most remarkable performance by a player in a World Series game played in Canada.
That this was only the second World Series game ever played in Canada makes no difference.
Key was that superb.


Matra to Complete Merger With Hachette by Year-End
Quashing recent rumors of a hostile bid from a rival European media group, the French communications giant Hachette S.A. announced today that it would complete its controversial merger with the Matra military contractor before the end of the year.
In a statement, the company said that the merger would tentatively involve the exchange of 11 Hachette shares for every 5 shares of Matra and that the deal would be submitted for approval to the shareholders of both companies.
The new group would be named Matra-Hachette,.


Chrysler Campaign For New Models
The Chrysler Corporation yesterday introduced the extensive -- and expensive -- ad campaigns for three make-or-break models for 1993: the Chrysler Concorde, the Dodge Intrepid and the Eagle Vision.
Estimates are that Chrysler will spend $80 million through year-end to advertise the cars, which carry the code name LH; they are crucial for reviving Chrysler's automotive sales.


Gates/FA Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jenny Craig reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SCI Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


THE SCHOOL BOARD: Bitterness Boils Over


Arvin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acuson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


No Green Jackets. How About Gold Medals?
There would be a mini-Olympic Village for the athletes, and men and women on the course of Augusta National under a plan proposed today by the Atlanta Committee for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, which formally announced its intention to push for the inclusion of golf.
"We wouldn't be here if we didn't think our chances were good," said Billy Payne, president and chief executive officer of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.


Fisher-Price Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Student of Lines, on Site and on Paper
ISADORE SELTZER has always been excited by architecture, having studied it at art school and having conducted walking tours of Lower Manhattan.
But Mr.
Seltzer has devoted most of his life to doing illustrations for magazines, including the recently renovated New Yorker.
He has also illustrated children's books.
And in his newest children's book, his fifth, "The House I Live In," Mr.
Seltzer has combined both passions.
"I studied architecture at Chouinard Art Institute" in Los Angeles, he said, "and in this book I finally had my chance to play with it."


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Refines Golan Terms As Mideast Talks Resume
Israel said today that it had reformulated its proposal for territorial concessions in the Golan Heights in an effort to obtain a peace treaty establishing normal relations with Syria.
But Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's negotiators gave no details of their offer, so it was impossible to tell whether the latest package of Israeli ideas contained significant new proposals or just new wrapping.
The offer was made as the seventh round of Arab-Israeli peace talks opened here today.
As in earlier rounds, since the Middle East peace conference's opening session in Madrid a year ago, Israeli officials met with Syrians, Lebanese, Jordanians and Palestinians.


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Is Clinton Driving Bond Market?
Has the sharp fall of the bond market in October been a Clinton rout?
And if so, was yesterday's sharp jump in Treasury prices -- with the 30-year bond up more than half a point -- a Clinton rally?
Or is citing Bill Clinton just an easy way for traders and journalists to explain what is going on in a $1.3 trillion market that can be buffeted every day by changing winds of fortune?


Was It a Game or Just a Bad Dream?
When the 27th out nestled into Candy Maldonado's glove in left field and the Skydome erupted and the Toronto dugout emptied onto the field, Tom Glavine never budged.
The Atlanta Braves' starter sat in the dugout and wondered if he was watching a repeat of a horrible movie.
It was so frustrating for the losing pitcher to watch the Blue Jays dance after their 2-1 victory tonight in Game 4 of the World Series.
The triumph gave Toronto a three-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series and Glavine observed the evidence before him that said the Braves were close to losing their second straight World Series.


AMR Lost $85 Million In Quarter
The AMR Corporation, which owns American Airlines, reported an $85 million loss for its third quarter yesterday, largely because of the summer air fare war that American escalated.
The third quarter is normally the strongest one for the airline industry because of increased vacation travel.


Reviving the Specter of Mussolini
The most dramatic television commercial of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's campaign came in two versions last week: tough and tougher.
Ten days ago, the Republican Senator's campaign began running advertisements attacking his Democratic opponent, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, for calling him "a fascist." The ad shown to the press, and broadcast initially, used a narrator speaking over pictures of news clippings about Mr.
Abrams's remark.


Mapco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Vernel Bagneris Michael's Pub 211 East 55th Street Through Nov. 7
When Jelly Roll Morton was hard up for cash, one scheme he considered was to put salt in Coca-Cola and sell the concoction door to door as a cure for tuberculosis.
This odd notion is one of many interesting biographical tidbits that Vernel Bagneris offers in his diverting cabaret show, "Vernel Bagneris Presents Jelly Roll Morton: A Me-morial."


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the Home Shopping Network, misstated the location of WWOR, the superstation.
It is based in Secaucus, N.J.


Essay; The Fourth Man
Suppose you're fed up with Bush and don't quite trust Clinton.
You want to register a protest because you refuse to identify with the prissy anti-politician who once said "I never vote, it only encourages them."
That leaves Perot, right?
Wrong.
He is not a suitable vehicle for protest because he is a multibillionaire on an ego trip.
He purchases his ideas in a book written for him, denounces sound bites in sound bites, slyly adopts "the issues" as his issue, and takes a two-month vacation from campaigning to avoid hard scrutiny.


Moscow Resounding With the Thundering Hoofs of the Anti-Reform Posse
The debate over Russia's future has broken out into the open with a vengeance as an increasingly vocal opposition prepares for a bitter battle over President Boris N. Yeltsin's program of economic reform.
Acting in open defiance of the Russian leader, the Parliament's conservative majority today rebuffed his appeal for a postponement of the Congress of People's Deputies, the country's top legislative body, which is to convene on Dec. 1.
By delaying the session until spring, Mr.
Yeltsin had hoped to head off a certain showdown over the fate of the Government as his own broad authority to rule by decree expires.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 8 A.M., CBS (Channel 2 in New York), "CBS This Morning."
TODAY: 7 P.M., WWOR (Channel 9 in New York), "America Again," town meeting from New Jersey.
Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 7:10 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today."


Mayoral Aide Was Accused of Harassing
Randy Daniels, appointed as a Deputy Mayor last week, was accused of sexual harassment by a female subordinate nearly five years ago when he was the press secretary for the City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, city officials and a relative of the woman said yesterday.
The allegations came as Mayor David N. Dinkins was already defending his decision to appoint Mr.
Daniels in the face of other criticism.
The Mayor's defense came in response to a column yesterday in The New York Post that said Mr.
Daniels should not have been appointed because his former employer, Sir Lynden O. Pindling, the recently defeated Prime Minister of the Bahamas, had been accused of aiding Colombian drug traffickers in exchange for bribes in the early 1980's.


Canadian Occidental Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE 5-year-old boy was thrilled when his mother told him that they would be going to a concert to see Raffi, his favorite singer.
He had never been to a concert before, and grew increasingly excited as the day approached.
But when the boy and his mother entered the concert hall, he became noticeably upset, and cried out, "What are all the other people doing here?"
Young children often have difficulty handling social situations that adults take in stride.
A visit to a restaurant or movie theater can lead to a cycle of frustration, loud voices and tears, sometimes on the part of parents as well as children.
While there are many tests that purport to measure children's readiness for school, it's often more difficult for parents to determine when their child is able to sit through a ballet or a baseball game.


Review/Theater; Battling Over a Woman With No Say
Inspired by recent news articles about the custody battle between the parents of a young woman left comatose by an accident and the woman's lover, Paul Walker's "Under Control" is a rambling and often self-indulgent play that is given a generally compelling performance by a well-chosen cast under the crisp direction of Jonathan Silver.
Where Mr.
Walker has modeled scenes on television series like "L. A. Law," Mr.
Silver delivers what is in the text, but they often seem like clumsy gags interrupting the complex battle for understanding and compassion engaging the principal characters: Holly, a woman left mute and motionless after a car wreck (Danna Lyons); her parents (Milton Carney and Diana Martella); her younger sister, Loretta (Amy Pierce), and her lover, Diane (Anita Pratt Morris).


Plum Creek Timber L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
WHITNEY HOUSTON, who is four months pregnant, has canceled a concert tour of Israel and Europe on the advice of her physicians, her publicist in Israel said yesterday.
Th Associated Press reported that the 28-year-old singer, who married fellow pop star BOBBY BROWN, 23, in July in a lavish wedding, was advised to cancel the trip and remain under medical care, the spokesman, MIRI BEN-JOSEPH, said in a statement released in Jerusalem.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Barbara Bush; Bush's 'Secret Weapon' Enters New Jersey Battle
Barbara Bush got off the bus from the shopping mall (a charter, the Bush Family Express), shook a few hands outside Bergen County Republican Headquarters on Main Street and then walked inside to attend to business: debunking the polls and attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton's record in Arkansas.
Mrs.
Bush, the grandmother of steel and the woman her husband calls his secret weapon, was making her third appearance of the campaign in New Jersey.
With Election Day less than two weeks away, campaign officials said it might not be her last.


Unser Won't Switch
AL UNSER Jr., the winner of the 1992 Indianapolis 500, ended months of speculation yesterday by saying that he would stay with the Indy-car circuit and the car owner RICK GALLES next season, instead of switching to the international Formula One circuit.
"I have had some opportunities to drive the Williams car and for Benetton," Unser said in a conference call, referring to two of the top Formula One teams.


Heartland Express reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harley Davidson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A chart in The Metro Section yesterday about New York Congressional District 13 misstated the percentage of the voting-age population that is white.
The correct figure is 83.85 percent, not 34.


27 Needless Deaths
Some murders are cause for special fury.
Among New York City's homicide victims last year were 27 helpless children who might have been saved had the Human Resources Administration honored its commitment to protect them.
According to the National Association for the Protection of Children, deaths from abuse and neglect nationally rose from 878 in 1985 to 1,383 in 1991.
New York City accounts for an appallingly high percentage of these deaths, averaging 107 annually since 1980.


Giants Begin Overhaul By Releasing Walls
As soon as he heard Ray Handley's recorded voice on the answering machine saying "call me," Everson Walls knew the Giants had released him.
The 32-year-old defensive back, who made his reputation on his ability to intercept passes, today became the first in what could be a wave of older players who leave what is clearly a team in transition.


Wells Rich Enters Direct Marketing
Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York said yesterday that it had formed its first direct-marketing agency, Bastoni Barnes.
The agency is named, naturally enough, for the two women heading the shop, who were named managing partners.
Christine Bastoni had been senior vice president and creative director at FCB Direct West in San Francisco, where clients included Pacific Bell and Citibank.
Winifred Barnes had been a senior vice president and management supervisor at McCaffrey &amp; McCall in New York, with accounts like Mercedes-Benz of North America and Ciba Vision.


Southwest Airlines Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louis Rich Picks Foote, Cone
The Louis Rich Company in Madison, Wis., yesterday awarded its estimated $14 million account to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago.
Last week, Louis Rich, a unit of Kraft General Foods that markets processed turkey products, dismissed its agency of seven years, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, 3 Fresh and Idiosyncratic Viewpoints
You might say that Martine Sitbon belongs to the pop music school of fashion design while Mariot Chanet is a team of classicists and Maurizio Galante is a romanticist.
The Sitbon show on Saturday was enlivened by the presence of the photographer of the moment, Steven Meisel (sans camera, signing autographs like a movie star or star model), and a gaggle of transvestites in flamboyant wigs and costumes who put on a show of their own for photographers.


Digital Trims Its Severance Benefits
Reflecting its continuing financial troubles, the Digital Equipment Corporation today reduced the severance package that it is providing to employees who are laid off.
The company hopes the move will enable it to lay off more employees without exceeding the $1.5 billion restructuring charge that the company took in its fiscal fourth quarter of 1992 to cover the cost of severances.


Sports of The Times; Home Sweet Dome
OUTSIDE, it was chilly and windy.
Too chilly for baseball like it oughta be.
But in the snug Skydome last night, the Blue Jays kept building a nest for the latest World Series tradition: in the 10 games in domed stadiums the home-sweet-dome team has never lost.
In winning the 1987 and 1991 World Series, the Minnesota Twins won all eight of their games at the Metrodome.
And now, in taking a 3-1 lead over the Atlanta Braves with last night's 2-1 squeaker, the Blue Jays have won both of their home games.
If they win another tonight, the World Series trophy will need a Canadian work visa.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Bush and Clinton Customize Their TV and Radio Ads in the Swing States
George Bush "gave us the second biggest tax increase in American history," the announcer in a new Clinton campaign television ad intones.
"Family income in Ohio, down $2,100. George Bush -- broken promises, forgotten Ohio."
Next door, the Bush campaign is delivering a special message to Michigan.
"This year the issue is jobs," the announcer in the Bush campaign radio commercial says.
"Let's see what Clinton's plan would do to jobs in Michigan. His radical environmental proposals require increasing car mileage standards to 40 miles per gallon in eight years. This would be a disaster for Michigan jobs."


The Jokes Are Old, but Never Stale; Elderly Comics Bring Youthful Smiles in Senior Centers
"It's a pleasure to be here," Max Goldberg said as he kicked off his act for about 100 elderly residents of a Long Island adult home, who needed no explanation to roar at his punchline: "To tell you the truth, it's a pleasure to be anywhere!"
Like scores of entertainers who grew old in a business with no mandatory retirement age, Mr.
Goldberg, whose 73-year career carried him from the Borscht Belt to the senior-center circuit, may have never hit the big time -- so far -- but he never gave up, either.


Exhibition for Children About Racism
ONE by one, the faces of three children fill a video screen.
With simple words they tell powerful stories of contemporary American life.
Tanisha: "I was riding the school bus, and a girl called me a nigger. Another girl laughed." Tanisha is black.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  GRIM LINK TO EL SALVADOR PAST  In a small, rectangular plot among the overgrown ruins of El Mozote, a team of forensic archeologists has opened a window on El Salvador's nightmarish past.
Two feet below the ground, a few tiny skeletons grin up almost intact, and other remains indicate what were once at least 38 bodies.
A1  WORLD TRADE TALKS FALTER  The Bush Administration's lingering hopes for a pre-election breakthrough in world trade talks collapsed when negotiations in Brussels broke down with American and European officials farther apart than before on farm subsidies.
A1  BOSNIA DIVIDED INTO 3 PARTS  After months of merciless artillery bombardment of virtually every major city and town, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been torn into three ragged mini-states with the Muslim-led forces of the Bosnian Government hanging on in a handful of desperate cities and towns.
A1  BOSNIAN OFFERS PLAN FOR PEACE  The President of the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina offered a concession in the search for peace by saying he would send a senior military officer to talks on ending the hostilities around Sarajevo.
A10  YELTSIN'S FOES READY TO FIGHT  The debate over Russia's future has now broken out into the open with a vengeance as an increasingly vocal opposition prepares for a bitter battle over President Yeltsin's program of economic reform.
A8  JAPAN GRAPPLES WITH ITS HISTORY  Two days before Emperor Akihito begins the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, Tokyo is once again consumed by a familiar battle over its own history: how to avoid apologizing for Japanese war atrocities, while at the same time appearing deeply apologetic.
A9  Israel offers concessions on Golan Heights territory.
A3  Militants in Egypt kill a tourist and wound two others.
A3  Pretoria rebuked over amnesty for political crimes.
A5  Prague Journal: Kafka and Jews in a web he would recognize.
A4  National A12-24, B10  UNCHECKED EXPLOITATION  A bipartisan commission found that the Federal law enacted six years ago to combat illegal immigration had done nothing to stop the exploitation of migrant farm workers, one of its principal objectives.
A1  BUSH HITS HIS STRIDE  On a two-day campaign swing through Georgia and the Carolinas, the President seemed finally to have warmed to his message: that Governor Clinton cannot be trusted with the White House.
A1  Campaigning in New Jersey, Barbara Bush dismissed the polls.
A21  An inquiry on U.S. equipment in Iraq belies a Bush claim.
A16  In Flint, Bush has made little gain with the fuel-efficiency issue.
A12  The Bush and Clinton camps are tailoring ads for swing states.
A20  From Bush and Clinton, more of the same on the drug war.
A22  A NEW CONCERN FOR CLINTON  Two weeks ago Ross Perot was a footnote to the 1992 race.
Now Clinton strategists say their private polls suggest that he is cutting into the Democratic lead in a number of states.A1  The Perot camp is now trying to lure Clinton backers.
A21  Gore called for "a revolution" on environment standards.
A20  The valedictory tang to the political autumn.
A21  On the Trail: Time out for comic relief.
A22  In his Wisconsin race, Senator Kasten is rallying.
A22  IS THIS MISSION WORTH IT?
As Columbia and its six astronauts were declared ready for a 10-day voyage starting today, questions were raised about whether the risks and costs of a shuttle flight were justified given a mission that seems extraordinarily modest.
A1  GAIN IN CANCER RESEARCH  Stanford scientists said they had increased the immune defenses of nine lymphoma patients with a therapeutic vaccine custom-made from each patient's own cancer.
A18  REPORT ON LOS ANGELES RIOTS  A municipally appointed study commission found that Los Angeles's government responded dismally to the outbreak of rioting last spring.
It recommended a vast overhaul of the Police Department and other city agencies.
A12  NEW TURN IN PRIEST ABUSE CASE  The Boston Globe reported that the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fall River, Mass., had removed the Rev.
James R. Porter from priestly duties at least eight times for sexually molesting children but had repeatedly allowed him to resume parish work after receiving optimistic medical prognoses.
He has since been accused of molesting almost 100 children in three states.
A12  The slaying of a Vietnamese-born youth resulted in a conviction.
A19  Airlines will be ordered to replace part of the wing on the L-1011.
A14  Federal employment dipped for the second straight year in 1991.
A15  Metro Digest B1  D'AMATO, THE FUND-RAISER  As Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato seeks a third term, his continued ability to amass a huge political fund has enabled him to run a fiercely competitive campaign against Attorney General Robert Abrams, who is one of New York State's all-time vote-getters.
A1  Home Section C1-15  Master restores stained glass.
C1  Pool-hopping with Kelly Klein.
C1  De la Renta and Saint Laurent in Paris.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C19-28  Draw for Fischer and Spassky in Game 23.
C17  "Once Upon a Time in America" will be released uncut.
C19  Business Digest D1  Sports B13-20  Baseball: Blue Jays take 3-1 Series lead.
B13  Football: Giants drop Walls.
B13  Obituaries B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  The cold war: get over it.  27 needless deaths.
The color of New York's police.
Mary Cantwell: Acquired family.
Letters  William Safire: The fourth man.
Leslie H. Gelb: A Bush green light to Iraq?
Garry Trudeau: Action report.
Tom Brokaw: Save the taiga.


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jenny Craig Plans Buyback of Its Stock
The diet-center operator Jenny Craig Inc., whose stock price has been trimmed because of a decline in sales and profits, said today that its directors had agreed to repurchase up to three million shares, or 11 percent of its stock outstanding.
The company also reported that its profits fell 7.2 percent, to $9.72 million, or 35 cents a share, in the quarter that ended on Sept. 30., from $10.5 million, or 44 cents a share a year earlier.
Revenue declined 5 percent, to $114 million, from $120 million.
It was the first decline in revenue in the company's history.


Little Hands at the Stove
CHILDREN who like to bake cookies or even put together a three-course Italian dinner may find they just need a little structure.
Hearth Song, a catalogue company in Sebastopol, Calif., that sells toys, games and crafts for families, offers a new cooking club called Cook It!
Every month for a year, through the mail, members receive four or more recipes, kitchen tools (like oven mitts, cheese-graters and wooden spoons) and lessons to put the step-by-step recipes into motion.


No Headline
Maybe if everyone sees these things clearly, they will have to do justice.
The Government cannot see all of these children and not want to do justice. -- RUFINA AMAYA, describing massacre victims in El Salvador.  [ A1:4. ]


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Taking the First Steps Of a Long Traversal
The 15 string quartets of Dmitri Shostakovich now loom as one of the most imposing sets of masterworks in this century.
These are personal, urgent compositions, many written, we now know, for friends and colleagues who understood the composer's double life: his public front of acquiescence and servitude toward the Soviet Government, shadowed by his private self, who undercut celebratory declarations with dark and bitter irony.
The quartets are full of formal compositional tricks -- canons and double fugues -- along with soulful folk songs and robust circus numbers.
They are Classical in spirit, almost transparent in their structure, yet are tortured and intricate in their overlapping emotions.
They dance and grimace and sometimes seem to talk.
There are times, too, when they create sounds and sensibilities that seem beyond ordinary description.
So when the Manhattan String Quartet began a seasonlong, chronological traversal of this cycle at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center on Monday night, I joined the sold-out audience with high expectations.
Though performances of the cycle are no longer as rare as they once were -- this ensemble already accomplished this feat once before, during the 1989-90 season and the British Fitzwilliam Quartet presented New York's first cycle in 1982 -- the works are so powerful they almost deserve an annual hearing.


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Riddles for Bush and Rumors That Elvis Advises Clinton
It's comic relief time out there on the trail.
Scene One:
President Bush is in Spartanburg, S.C., breakfasting at the Waffle House, as in Gov.
Bill Clinton always waffles.
He is down a good 10 points in the polls but otherwise up for just about anything, even a challenge from a fellow diner to engage in a game of riddles.


Keep Your Hands in View in East Side Markets
To the Editor:
I am a cook and was shopping for an elegant dinner for a client on East 74th Street.
The dinner menu was: glove boned chicken with vegetables and fresh herbs; red pepper soup; string beans with pearl onions and mushrooms; baked apples stuffed with raisins and walnuts.
I went to an Upper East Side market to try and find, among other things, some apple cider to bake the apples.
Oct. 2 was a beautiful, sunny morning.
As I entered the store and approached the first aisle, I took off my sunglasses.
As I was putting them in my jacket pocket, this man (a clerk at the store) rushed in front of me and said: "Are you shoplifting? What are you putting in your pocket?"


B.C. Soars to Higher Plane
This summer, Tom Coughlin wrote each of his Boston College football players a letter documenting last season's accomplishments and setting out the goals for the new year.
Coughlin said he wanted the Eagles to be a good football team in September and a great football team in November.
With 10 days left in October, Boston College may be close to meeting the goal of its second-year coach.
The Eagles are undefeated at 5-0-1, and are ranked 11th in the Associated Press poll and seventh by The New York Times, and are fresh off an upset of Penn State last Saturday in State College, Pa.
That victory marked the first time that Boston College had defeated Penn State on its home field and only the second time that the Eagles defeated the Nittany Lions since the series began in 1949.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


PNC Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; From Frankfurt, Live
When the Frankfurt Radio Symphony Orchestra last visited Carnegie Hall in 1989, it was searching for a successor to Eliahu Inbal, its music director since 1974.
Soon thereafter it found its man in Dmitri Kitayenko, a Russian conductor who led the Moscow Philharmonic for 14 years and who also directs orchestras in Norway and Denmark.
On Tuesday evening, Mr.
Kitayenko led his Frankfurt players in works by Webern, Brahms and Prokofiev.
It was not an especially revealing evening.
On record, Mr.
Kitayenko's performances have always struck this listener as competently bland.
And although the orchestra's recordings have been impressive, its 1989 performance revealed problems of ensemble and tone that it has not yet overcome.


CANCER PATIENTS AIDED BY VACCINE
Scientists at Stanford University say they have boosted the immune defenses of nine lymphoma patients with a therapeutic vaccine that was custom made from each patient's own cancer.
In two patients, cancer tissue that had remained after standard chemotherapy completely disappeared after the patients had been injected with the genetically engineered vaccine, the scientists say in a report being published today in The New England Journal of Medicine.


Foreign Affairs; A Bush Green Light to Iraq?
What President Bush did NOT say in the days immediately before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, 1990, illuminates the historical sky like an electrical storm.
It puts into sharp relief Ross Perot's charge that Mr.
Bush "in effect" or inadvertently gave Saddam Hussein the green light to attack.
Never once in the week prior to the attack -- as Iraqi troops on the disputed border massed to over 100,000 -- did Mr.
Bush ever say, or even hint, that the U.S. would respond to Iraqi aggression with force.


A Rocky Off Season Lies Ahead for the A's
Their season ended a week ago, but it was not the kind of exit that the Oakland Athletics expected, not for a team that was as close as it gets to a dynasty in baseball these days.
They were hooted in Toronto, beaten back by the Blue Jays and ushered out of a return to the World Series with a resounding shove.
Now, they are likely to be dismantled by the bottom line.


Market Place; Searching for Oil Beyond Moscow
WESTERN oil analysts have talked for years about the geological wonders of the area that used to be the Soviet Union, and how much oil could be produced there with modern technology, if only the right deal could be struck.
So far, to their frustration, it has been mostly talk.
But recently, according to oil company executives and other experts, the prospects for significant agreements have been improving, because oil officials of the various republics are bringing better deals to the table.
This may mean that investors who have been waiting for the right play in the opening of the former Soviet empire should not be disappointed by the on-again, off-again negotiations, but should be patient a little longer.


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Unseals Transcript Of Inside-Trading Plea Talks
Acceding to requests from defense lawyers, Federal Judge Lawrence M. McKenna agreed to unseal transcripts yesterday about a plea conference in an insider-trading case.
Judge McKenna ordered the courtroom to be cleared and the transcripts sealed on Tuesday, shortly after Darrin Gleeman and Christopher Garvey entered guilty pleas in the United States District Court of the Southern District of New York.


Abkhazians Seek Freedom From Georgia  To the Editor:   "Abkhazia: Small War, Big Risk" (editorial, Oct. 8) contains many inaccuracies about this "frontier district of the former Soviet republic of Georgia" that I would like to address.   Your description of native Abkhazians as "a Turkic-speaking, mostly Muslim group" is outrageous. The Abkhazian people have their own language, which the Turks know absolutely nothing about!


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Country Gardens In the City
"I GET my first crop -- green onions -- in March, and right now I've got Italian leaf broccoli," Charlotte Elsner said, barely hinting at the range of edibles she harvests from her South Philadelphia backyard.
When it comes to living at least partly off the land, a surprising number of city folk do.
As the autumn days dwindle, these backyard and rooftop farmers take justifiable pride in the fruits of labor that began in January when seeds were ordered and plots were planned.
"Eight months of the year, I've got my own pesticide-free crops here," Ms.
Elsner, a printmaker, said of the 20-by-40-foot area she devotes to vegetables and herbs.
"One of the earliest is dandelions. Great for salads. Then there's Red Flame lettuce, a heat-resistant strain that goes for months. And also Black Seeded Simpson, a beautiful pale green."


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the Advertising column yesterday about the plans of Frito-Lay, a subsidiary of Pepsico, to sponsor the halftime show during the Super Bowl next January included jumbled passages.
The next-to-last paragraph in the first column of the article should have read: "Frito-Lay will run two commercials during the show, he said, most likely for 'one of our big brands' handled by BBDO New York. There will also be a sweepstakes or similar type of consumer promotion."
The last paragraph in the second column should have read: " 'We were looking at several ideas,' Mr. Coleman said, 'but none we were able to bring to fruition.' He said those ideas were primarily sports-related, to better compete against Mr. Jackson's musical fare. Mr. Coleman said he would continue to seek a marketer to sponsor an alternative program on Fox, though he acknowledged that 'there's no question the competition is more formidable than he faced in January.' "


Texaco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Courtroom Is Venue Of Choice For Owners
The National Football League owners today ended a two-day meeting with no formal votes but with a consensus that their top priority is to find a solution to their labor troubles.
They also said they preferred wading through the courts for a solution to grasping at a quick-fix settlement that would not enhance the league's financial health and competitive balance.
"I think what we saw here was a consensus that any settlement that hurts the league is not preferable to remaining in the courts," said Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner.
"We've gone through the process this long, and there is no advantage to delaying everything to the 11th hour. But if protecting the league's best interest means a year of chaos, then we'll have a year of chaos."


TBC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grey Quits At Bantam And Joins Ballantine
Linda Grey, who recently stepped down as head of Bantam Books to start her own imprint there, resigned from the company to become president and publisher of the Ballantine Publishing Group and an executive vice president of its parent, Random House Inc.
Ms.
Grey, who is to join Ballantine Nov. 9, will succeed Susan Petersen, Ballantine's president for 10 years.
Ms.
Petersen said yesterday that she had resigned.
"It is time for a new leader, with new ideas" to take over the publishing house, she said, adding that she would explore and develop new opportunities.


VF Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Through the Hands of a Master, the Brilliance Returns
EVERY weekday morning, Mel Greenland buys a subway token, boards the Broadway-Seventh Avenue express train and heads exultantly into the 12th century.
Mr.
Greenland's destination is a third-floor studio at St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity Church on Montague Street in Brooklyn Heights.
There, suspended over a light box, the 67-year-old Brooklyn-born master stained-glass conservator performs major and minor miracles on gossamer glass paintings brought to life by light.


Report Says Priest Worked Despite Abuse Complaints
The Bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of Fall River, Mass., and other church officials removed the Rev.
James R. Porter from his priestly duties at least eight times from 1964 to 1970 because he sexually molested children but repeatedly allowed him to resume work after receiving optimistic accounts of his treatment, The Boston Globe reported yesterday.
The newspaper based its report on a personnel file of "dozens of pages" that it said it had obtained from that period.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Campaign Is in Its Autumn, but a Season of Struggle Wends On
The pumpkins have a pundit's leer and the goblins lean like tired attack advertisements here on the porches of some of the humblest clapboard houses in America.
The political season is winding down as Bill Belkner walks by on his way from the unemployment office.
"They got nothing in there for me," says Mr.
Belkner, who has not had a job since July 1991, when the Presidential aspirants were many and their promises fresh.


Carnegie Hall Jazzes Itself Up, Welcoming a Page of U.S. History
The door opens a bit wider: Carnegie Hall's jazz program, which begins tonight, is one more indication that major performing-arts institutions are taking a serious interest in a musical form that until now has been treated as something of a poor relative.
It is a move that has recent precedents, including jazz orchestras and programs at Lincoln Center and at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
Tonight's event, "Saxophone Summit," is the first of four jazz concerts at Carnegie Hall this year, and five more are planned for next year.
Carnegie has also committed itself to a resident jazz orchestra, under the direction of the trumpeter Jon Faddis.


Grove Tries Again
CALVIN GROVE, a champion once, thought he lost a title by "cold-blooded robbery." Now he's just a contender, determined to reclaim what he considers rightfully his: a world boxing championship.
His obstacle on Nov. 7 in Lake Tahoe, Nev., will be AZUMAH NELSON of Ghana, the heavy-hitting three-time champion in two weight divisions who will be defending his World Boxing Council superfeatherweight title.
"I was robbed," Grove said yesterday at a news conference, recalling the torrid August afternoon in Mexicali, Mexico, in 1988 when he lost his featherweight championship to JORGE PAEZ.


Review/Theater; O Juliet, O Desdemona: Wherefore Is Everyone?
In the inverted world of "Goodnight Desdemona (Good Morning Juliet)," Juliet is standing on the ground delivering the balcony speech, not to Romeo but to a timid, time-traveling Canadian academic.
The academic (Cherry Jones) is embarked on a literary mission to prove her theory that "Romeo and Juliet" and "Othello" were originally written as comedies, not tragedies, and magically she has found herself within the plays.
This extended comedy sketch by Ann-Marie MacDonald (at the CSC Theater) has its satirically redeeming features, but it also seems like a collegiate prank.
It is arch when it should be airy and it has moments of unnecessary vulgarity.
Before the heroine arrives in Verona, she has dawdled too long in Cyprus trying to rectify "Othello." As a rewriter of Shakespeare, Ms.
MacDonald cannot compete with Lee Blessing (in "Fortinbras"), to say nothing of Tom Stoppard.
Watching "Goodnight Desdemona," one inevitably thinks of Robertson Davies, another Canadian writer with an interest in academia, and how cleverly he would have handled this idea.


Jobs Bond Proposal Will Assist New York
To the Editor:
Others have been telling us how they will improve our economy and quality of life, but New Yorkers can do it themselves with a yes vote Nov. 3 for Proposal 1, the jobs bond.
Proposal 1 will create jobs and lay the foundation for economic growth -- 24,000 immediate jobs, it is estimated, as infrastructure improvement projects proposed by local governments are undertaken under fast track procedures.
Many projects could begin by the spring construction season.
This work will also stimulate private development and expansion, resulting in 80,000 to 100,000 permanent private-sector jobs, adding about $10 billion to our economy.


Democrats: Courting the Younger Generation
The Democratic National Committee on Tuesday began a $1 million advertising campaign aimed at younger voters.
The 30-second spots, one feature a young man and the other a young woman, are appearing on the networks, geared to shows with younger audiences like "Beverly Hills 90210" and "Roseanne." ON THE SCREEN White letters on black background: "A reality check. Jonathan."
Various images of young man named Jonathan, talking to camera, in the kitchen, looking through the newspaper classifieds, of his mother in the kitchen as he talks about living at home, snapshots of Jonathan with friends at graduation.
These words appear on screen: "The Democratic Plan: create new jobs, invest in people, develop new technologies."
Ends with these words on screen: "The Democratic Party. A plan that works for a change."


Times Mirror Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Bush May Gain Little by Fuel Stance
During the last two decades, 23,000 people lost their jobs in General Motors' car, truck and parts manufacturing plants in Flint, and evidence of hard times is easy to see in crumbling roads, boarded up homes and a downtown blighted by empty buildings.
The Bush-Quayle campaign hopes to find fertile ground here for a campaign message spotlighting Gov.
Bill Clinton's proposal for substantially higher gasoline mileage standards and warning that thousands more pink slips would be the price paid by Flint and other Michigan cities if it becomes law.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- The Drug Problem; Candidates Seek Little Change in Antidrug Efforts
After nearly 20 years of failed efforts to solve the nation's drug problem with fast boats, helicopters, door-busting police raids and the world's largest prison system, both major candidates for the Presidency are proposing more of the same.
Never mind that nearly all the experts in the field believe that the best hope for success lies in attacking the desire for drugs by greatly expanding prevention and treatment programs.


Brave Talk as Atlanta Faces the Exit
The Atlanta Braves know all about adversity, they swear they do.
That's why, Sid Bream said, there was no gnashing of teeth, no soul-searching or tearing out of hair after they tumbled to within one defeat of being eliminated from the World Series after losing, 2-1, to the Toronto Blue Jays tonight.
So why did the Braves stay cloistered behind closed doors for 25 minutes?


MCI Posts 13.6% Net Gain; Ameritech Is Down 12.9%
The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier, reported yesterday that third-quarter net income had risen 13.6 percent and that telephone traffic, or how long its customers talk on its network, had risen nearly 15 percent.
At the same time, Ameritech, the fourth-largest regional Bell company, reported that its third-quarter net had dropped 12.9 percent, partly because of a one-time gain last year from the sale of part of Ameritech's interest in Telecom Corporation of New Zealand.


A Guy And His Dolls
AMANDA MARIE is a cross between Jacqueline Bisset and Shirley Temple.
She is well made and very American in her duffel coat and jeans.
This summer she landed in the permanent doll collection at the Musee des Arts Decoratifs, part of the Louvre.
Amanda was designed by Robert Tonner, a New York doll maker.
His porcelain, multicultural dolls are about 16 inches high and range from the childlike to the sultry.
One wears a pillbox hat and two-piece suit and recalls Jackie Kennedy.
You could say Barbie has some competition, except for the price; Mr.
Tonner's dolls range from $600 to $1,500.


METRO DIGEST
FUND RAISING, THE D'AMATO WAY
Senator D'Amato has gained a reputation as one of the Senate's most aggressive and prolific fund-raisers.
Over the last decade, he has collected more than $21 million, much of it from people or businesses with matters pending before one of the Senate committees on which he has served.
His practices have gained such notoriety that they have led to several investigations and have damaged his popularity.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SOME COMPROMISES ON TRUMP PLAN
The chairman and staff of the New York City Planning Commission have reached agreement on several significant issues with Donald J. Trump on his Riverside South project, including increasing the amount of subsidized housing, how much of a park's maintenance costs Mr.
Trump will pay.
But other elements of the plan are still being negotiated.
B3.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bosnian, in Shift, Says He'll Send an Officer to Talks on Sarajevo
The President of the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina offered a concession in the search for peace there today when he said he would send a senior military officer to take part in talks on ending the hostilities around his capital, Sarajevo, and opening up the besieged city to the outside world.
The Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, made the announcement before returning home after two and a half days of talks here with the Presidents of Croatia and Yugoslavia, which consists of Serbia and Montenegro, as well as with the two mediators in the Balkans crisis, Cyrus R. Vance of the United Nations and Lord Owen, representing the European Community.


One Holdup Too Many as Armed Motel Clerk Kills a Gunman
For months someone has been holding up the people who work behind the counters in the fast-food restaurants, bars and motels along Jericho Turnpike.
This morning, it happened again.
But this time, the clerk had a licensed .357 Magnum, and shot and killed the robbery suspect.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl an Easy Winner
The defending champion, Ivan Lendl, beat Martin Damm of Czechoslovakia, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday for his second victory in the Hong Kong Marlboro Championships.
Lendl, seeded second in the round-robin tournament, must win only a set against Germany's Michael Stich today to advance to the semifinal.
Stich, the 1991 Wimbledon champion, was beaten by 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 by Todd Woodbridge of Australia to hurt his chances for the semifinals. (AP) Graf Advances to Final: Top-seeded Steffi Graf beat Andrea Strnadova of Czechoslovakia, 6-0, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals of the indoor tournament at Brighton, England.
Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez won her first-round match by default when Jo Durie of Britain retired with an ankle injury suffered on the first point of the match.
Fernandez was leading by 3-2 when Durie quit.
In other matches, fifth-seeded Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia and No. 8 Lori McNeil of the United States advanced to the quarterfinals. (AP)


D'Amato Serves as a Magnet for Funds
It was an obscure provision buried deep in the arcane language of a 1,000-page trade bill, but Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was on the case.
A handful of sugar refiners, including one with a plant in Brooklyn, stood to gain $365 million in tariff rebates and Mr.
D'Amato was all for it.
With his help, the provision squeaked through the Senate in the summer of 1987.
That fall, five years before his next race, Mr.
D'Amato received $8,500 in campaign contributions from the sugar refiners.


Legislators Embarrass de Klerk on Amnesty Plan
President F. W. de Klerk suffered a humiliating rebuke today when his racially exclusive, usually tame Parliament refused to approve his proposed amnesty for major political crimes.
Mr. de Klerk promptly announced that he would override Parliament by submitting the measure to his President's Council, a rubber-stamp panel controlled by his National Party.


Attack on Bus in Egypt Kills a Briton
Gunmen believed to be Islamic militants killed one British tourist, the first foreigner to die in the current round of attacks, and wounded two others today after firing on a bus in southern Egypt.
The attack, which occurred some 170 miles south of Cairo, is the second on foreign tourists in Egypt in less than a month.
It follows a statement by the underground Islamic Group warning foreign visitors not to travel to the pharaonic monuments in Luxor.


Will the 1-5 Jets Finally Draw a Line in the Turf?
Buffalo is not the kind of team that the Jets want to face with their guards down, or their tackles or center for that matter.
The Bills' All-Pro defensive end, Bruce Smith, is playing better than he has in the last two seasons.
Coach Marv Levy warns that Smith is especially nasty against the run.
And the Bills' no-huddle offense will require the Jets to counter with a good rushing attack for sustained, time-draining drives that will keep the Bills' offense off the field as much as possible.


Challenges Mounting for G.M. Chief
Whether Robert C. Stempel stays or is removed as the chairman and chief executive of the ailing General Motors Corporation, his effectiveness is waning.
The growing urgency to streamline G.M.'s costs and operations has ignited speculation and published reports, which General Motors denies, that Mr.
Stempel's job is on the line.


Events: Mother Goose And Antiques Galore
Memories and Memorials  New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at West 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.
An exhibition of 19th-century children's books, woodblocks and illustrations, including Mother Goose stories and alphabet rhymes, starts Tuesday and runs through Dec. 27.


Bridge
There are many players of great ability who rarely play in national championships but make their mark at the local level.
In the New York metropolitan area, Janos Racz, David Kaufman, Simon Erlich and Victor Melman fall in this category.
In the 1991-92 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams they claimed a string of scalps that included high-ranked squads headed by Mark D. Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J., Jim Becker of Manhattan and, finally, Michael Camp of Manhattan.
The Camp team, which included the formidable Zia Mahmood, had been unbeaten until that point, so the teams met again last week, with victory and the title going to Camp.
But the Racz foursome, originally seeded 12th in the field of 42 teams, had shown its ability to hold its own with players of international reputation.


It's a Big Pond, and We're All Part of It
AT the Howard Beach-J.F.K. subway station for the A, C and H trains, a new iridescent relief-mural of humanoid sea creatures gives riders something to look at and something to think about.
"I called the piece 'In Search of Harmony Bay,' " said Esther Grillo, who designed the painted concrete sculpture, "because I wanted people to seek harmony here."
She had the help of seven 14- to 18-year-olds from John Adams High School in Ozone Park, Queens, in the project, which was sponsored by the New York City Art Teachers Association-United Federation of Teachers under the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's "Creative Stations" program, which finances temporary art for subway and railroad stations.
It is expected to be at the station about a year.


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A headline and an entry in the front-page "Inside" summary yesterday about photographs of Americans obtained by the Pentagon from Vietnam described them incorrectly in some copies.
They were photographs of dead Americans, not missing.


Bush Campaign Halts Use of Ad Showing Time Cover
President Bush's campaign committee said today that it had stopped showing a television commericial that used a Time magazine cover to attack the credibility of Democrat Bill Clinton.
"The ad ceased running yesterday," said Bobby Birchfield, a lawyer for the Bush campaign.
"We will not run it again." He made his comment at a Federal court hearing on an order sought by Time to stop the commercial.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Dormant Oils
Q.
What does a dormant oil do and when does it do it? -- Lucy R. Jensen, Greenbelt, Md.
A.
Dormant oils, also called horticultural or superior oils, are considered an environmentally safe form of insect control.
They are derived from petroleum hydrocarbons that damage insects' protective coatings and interfere with their development.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kirsty MacColl Bottom Line
Kirsty MacColl's voice is part smoke, part sweetness, a girlish alto frayed by remembered pain.
It might seem suited for the gentle pop musings of a Mary Hopkin or for the folksy wistfulness of a Sandy Denny, the two singers Ms.
MacColl most resembles.
But Ms.
MacColl, the daughter of the folksinger Ewan MacColl, writes songs that have a steely core; with wit and cutting perception, as well as finely turned melodies, she fights back against betrayal.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.97
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
3.02
5.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.23
5.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.29
6.45
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.64
8.07
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.70
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.56
6.55
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing sample questions from the General Education Development high school equivalency test gave an incorrect answer in some copies for one question.
The question, under the Social Studies heading, asked which type of business had the fewest customer complaints, based on a bar graph; the answer should have been D, supermarket, not C, car dealership.


The Cold War: Get Over It
Despite all the public preoccupation with the economy, George Bush and Bill Clinton have had plenty to say about foreign policy.
The problem is that most of it looks backward.
By failing to talk about America's future role in the world, whoever wins on Nov. 3 is missing the chance to claim popular support for needed change.
Mr.
Bush is trying to take credit for being in the right place at the right time when the cold war ended.
And he is reaching even further back, to reopen the wounds of Vietnam.
But he has said little about the world of the future.


Albany International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marion Merrell Dow reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USG Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Failures of City Blamed for Riot In Los Angeles
Accusing the city government of acting like a dysfunctional family during the riots this spring, a special commission today recommended an overhaul in the way government agencies share power and a return to basics in the police department.
As if to remind the public of the acrimony that characterized much of his tenure as Police Chief, Daryl F. Gates, who resigned under pressure, immediately called the authors of the report liars.


Buckeye Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japanese Edgy Over Emperor's Visit to China
Two days before Emperor Akihito begins the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, Tokyo is once again consumed by a familiar battle: how to avoid apologizing for Japanese war atrocities while still appearing deeply apologetic.
From the moment the trip was first proposed by Beijing, the Government here has tied itself in knots over how to phrase Akihito's first words to a nation where millions died at the hands of the Japanese.
Influential right-wing politicians tried to scuttle the trip altogether, protesting that the Emperor, and with him modern Japan, will be humiliated by seeming to kowtow to China.


Ex-I.R.S. Agent Is Indicted On Affidavit
A dismissed Internal Revenue Service agent has been indicted on Federal charges of obstructing justice and making false statements against a defendant who died of AIDS after the agent helped bring charges against him of tax evasion, money laundering and drug dealing.
The indictment of the agent, Frank T. Primerana, follows a Justice Department investigation into charges that defendants in the case were illegally singled out for arrest on drug charges because they were gay.


MacDermid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Screaming Trees and Versus  CBGB
Seattle grunge-rock lives in a re-imagined 1970's of loud guitars and long hair, when hard-rock meant Cream, Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin and early Black Sabbath; 1990's hindsight connects the older music to punk and adds disillusioned lyrics.
Screaming Trees, which performed Sunday night, is virtually a generic grunge-rock band.
Gary Lee Conner blares out guitar riffs, windmilling his right arm like Pete Townshend; Mark Lanegan groans and croons in a baritone voice somewhere between Jim Morrison and Iron Butterfly's Doug Ingle, intoning lyrics about, as one song puts it, "wasting my time and wasting my mind."


How to Grow Edible Plants
Many edibles are well suited to small spaces in or out of town.
Good growing tips can be found in the following recent publications.
FRUITS AND BERRIES FOR THE HOME GARDEN by Lewis Hill, Garden Way Publishing, $24.95.


COMPANY NEWS
AIRBUS INDUSTRIE, said that China Eastern Airlines had ordered five Airbus A-340 planes for flights to the United States and other long-distance destinations.
BOEING DEFENSE &amp; SPACE GROUP announced it has selected General Electric Co. to supply engines for the 767 Airborne Warning and Control System, or AWACS, aircraft.


Destec Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Board's Bitterness Boils Over and Impedes Schools
What began months ago as a debate within the seven-member Board of Education over condoms and AIDS instruction appears to have reached a level of bitterness and mistrust that has begun to hamper the board's ability to oversee the running of New York City's schools.
"I can't recall a time when the board was so publicly at odds," said Charles I. Schonhaut, a former deputy chancellor who is dean of the Long Island University education school.


Morris, a Lonesome Loser, Ponders Final Start
If you think it is not bothering Jack Morris that he has not yet won a post-season game after three starts, think again.
Morris is not pleased with his performance, even though the Toronto Blue Jays stretched their lead over the Atlanta Braves to three games to one tonight at the Skydome.
"I am not exactly thrilled that I am 0-2 in the post-season right now," said Morris, who will be the Toronto starter for Game 5 here Thursday night, opposing John Smoltz.
"I have to hold my head up and thank the good Lord that I am here right now."


Plans for a Czech Music Academy Outlive East European Suspicions
Alain Coblence gave himself a party this weekend, and after what he has been through recently, he probably deserved it.
The honoree was actually his Prague Mozart Foundation.
The fierce opposition the foundation has encountered in Prague -- where, as its soon-to-be-changed name suggests, it was to have been based -- tells much about the suspicious state of Eastern European, and especially Czechoslovak, cultural politics today.
Mr.
Coblence is a lawyer and arts patron who holds French and American passports.
His foundation intends to oversee an academy of young musicians taught by some of the great classical-music artists of the world.
The academy will begin in temporary quarters this January and, after its restoration, will be based at the Esterhaza Castle in western Hungary, not far from Vienna, where Haydn was music director from 1761 to 1790.
The academy will also present annual festivals in Budapest; Cracow, Poland, and Prague.


Texaco Net Drops 5.9%; Amoco Rises
Texaco Inc. reported yesterday that third-quarter earnings declined 5.9 percent while the Amoco Corporation's net income soared 61 percent.
They were the first oil giants to report earnings for the quarter and both benefited from higher natural gas prices in the United States.
Analysts said that trend lifted profits industrywide in the quarter and will also in the fourth quarter.


Ameritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


James Stoker Jr., 87, Ex-Director Of N.Y.U. Mathematical Institute
Dr.
James Johnston Stoker Jr., a former director of New York University's Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, died on Monday at his home in Greenwood Lake, N.Y.
He was 87 years old.
His family reported the death on Tuesday and said he had died after a long illness.


James River Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


WORLD SERIES
GAME 4 Toronto 2 Atlanta 1
After a remarkable pitching performance by Jimmy Key, it has come down to this: One more victory for the Blue Jays, and Canada will have its first World Series championship.
SportsThursday, page B13.


United Technologies Net Rose 19% in 3d Quarter
The United Technologies Corporation, the aerospace and technology giant, said yesterday that third-quarter earnings rose by 19 percent from year-earlier levels despite a sharp drop in profits at Pratt &amp; Whitney, its jet engine division.
Two other companies with a similar customer base, the Sundstrand Corporation and the Loral Corporation, reported earnings that analysts said were very respectable, given the slowdown in military contracts and problems in the commercial aviation business.


RULING FAVORS TEXAS INSTRUMENTS AND MICRON
Texas Instruments Inc. and Micron Technology Inc. won a round yesterday in the memory chip trade wars when the Commerce Department said in a preliminary ruling that it would impose anti-dumping penalties against South Korean chip makers.
The Commerce Department announced duties ranging from 5.99 percent to 87.4 percent on dynamic random access memory chips with a capacity of one million bits of information or more that are exported to the United States by three companies -- Gold Star, Hyundai and Samsung.


A Congressional Race Turns Into a Grudge Match
There may be no Congressional race anywhere this year that presents sharper political choices than the contest between Nita M. Lowey, a liberal incumbent Democratic Representative, and Joseph J. DioGuardi, a conservative Republican who represented the same district from 1985-88.
After redistricting, the new 18th Congressional District that they both want to serve includes much of southern Westchester and a sliver of the Bronx and Queens.
The two last faced each other in 1988, when Mrs.
Lowey unseated Mr.
DioGuardi.
That year, Mr.
DioGuardi, who had defeated the liberal stalwart Bella S. Abzug in 1986, called Mrs.
Lowey "Bella without a hat." Mrs.
Lowey said Mr.
DioGuardi was "just Dan Quayle without the good looks." The 1992 race took off from there.


Calendar: Lectures and Tours
Garden Talks  Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.
A series of four lectures starts on Wednesday with a talk on native American plants in mixed borders.
In the future, topics will be shade gardening (Nov. 18), ornamental pot plantings (Jan. 20) and planning a perennial garden (Feb. 17).
Tickets, for the series, $52; single talks, $15 (members, $40 and $12).
Advance registration is required.
Tours Near and Far  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
Next month's walking tours will include one of the East Village (Nov. 8) and another of Ellis Island (Nov. 22).
Bus tours will be offered to the Brandywine River Museum in Chadds Ford, Pa., (Nov. 1) and the Newark Museum (Nov. 8).
Fees range from $15 to $65.
Advance registration is required.
For Families  Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (212) 549-3200.
Family art classes for children and adults will be held from 1 to 4:30 P.M. on Sundays through Dec. 27.
Projects include making masks (Sunday), model clay landscapes (Nov. 8), cornhusk dolls (Nov. 22) and holiday wreaths and swags (Dec. 6).
Suggested fee, $4 a family, in addition to weekend admission of $4; students and those over 62 years old, $2; members and children under 6, no charge.
Fall Foliage  Bartlett Arboretum, 151 Brookdale Road off High Ridge Road, Stamford, Conn.; (203) 322-6971.
A fall foliage walk is to take place on Sunday at 1 P.M.
On Oct. 30, from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M., the arboretum is requesting volunteers to help ready the gardens for winter.
No charge.
Decorative Arts Talks  Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts, Girdle Ridge Road off Pea Pond Road, Katonah, N.Y.; (914) 232-1252.
A series of four lectures on 19th-century American decorative arts starts Oct. 30 with furniture styles from 1860 to 1900.
Other talks include the influence of international exhibitions (Nov. 6), American trends from 1820 to 1860 (Nov. 13) and style in turn-of-the-century New York (Nov. 20).
Fee, for the series, $35; single lectures, $10 (members, $24 and $9).
Advance registration is required.
Harvest Fair  Pace University, Bedford Road (Route 117) off the first northbound exit on the Taconic State Parkway, Pleasantville, N.Y.; (914) 773-3789.
Craft sales, demonstrations, nature walks and children's activities will be part of a fair on Sunday from 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Admission is $2; for those 65 and older, $1; children 12 and younger, no charge.


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Review/Fashion; De la Renta in Paris (Saint Laurent, Too)
Now it's the Americans' turn.
First came the Belgian, British, Italian, Japanese and Austrian designers, along with the French, to show their work on the runways here over the last 10 days.
On Tuesday afternoon, Oscar de la Renta took his made-in-New York collection to one of the tents in the courtyard of the Louvre, where about half the 80 scheduled ready-to-wear showings for spring and summer were held.
The French got the last word, however, with Yves Saint Laurent's strong showing this morning.


Uncovered Short Sales Reach High on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not covered had reached an all-time high between mid-September and mid-October, continuing a run-up that so far has lasted seven straight months.
At the end of the period, on Oct. 15, the short positions stood at 948.3 million shares, up 4.5 percent from the 907.5 million shares reported in the previous month.
With that increase, short interest has jumped an astounding 34 percent since the monthly increases began in mid-March.


Party With Rodin and Faberge
JOHN FUNT, one may say, was just a bit skeptical.
Standing among the warren of still-bare cubicles in one of the baronial anterooms at the Seventh Regiment Armory, the party planner and consultant to Tiffany &amp; Company looked as if he had met his match.
Mr.
Funt had volunteered to be one of the impresarios of Vintage Hours, an exhibit of vignettes inspired by donors and members of the board and benefit committee of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The center will benefit from a party that is planned for Friday night.


Connecticut Debt Issue
A $233.05 million tax-exempt debt offering by the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority is being tentatively offered to yield a maximum 6.70 percent for a bond due in 2023, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Question on Eve of a Shuttle Flight: Is It Worth It?
As six astronauts and the space shuttle Columbia were declared ready for a 10-day voyage, questions were raised today about whether the great risks and costs of a shuttle flight were justified for a mission that seems extraordinarily modest.
The main goal of the mission, which is to begin at 11:16 A.M. on Thursday, is to deploy a two-foot, $4 million satellite described by the space agency as looking like a large golf ball.
Its mirrored surface is to reflect laser beams used to study movements of the Earth's crust.
The satellite was built by the Italian Space Agency and matches one lofted in 1976 by the space agency on an unmanned Delta rocket.


Watching the World Go By in a Home by the Highway


People
*
Janice Doty was named to the new post of senior vice president of client development at McCracken Brooks, heading the newly opened New York office of the Minneapolis-based sales promotion agency.
She had been director of direct marketing communications at I.B.M.
United States, New York. *
Warren Benjamin, an executive vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, Torrance, Calif., was named to the new post of director of client services.


Bob Harrington Cabaret Critic, 42
Bob Harrington, the cabaret critic of The New York Post and of the trade newspaper Back Stage, died on Monday at Central General Hospital in Plainview, L.I.
He was 42 years old and lived in East Meadow, L.I.
His family said he died of AIDS-related causes.
Mr.
Harrington disclosed his illness in his Back Stage "Bistro Bits" column in December.


U.S. HOPE DASHED ON GLOBAL TRADE
The Bush Administration's lingering hopes for a pre-election breakthrough in world trade talks collapsed today as negotiations in Brussels broke down, leaving American and European officials much farther apart than before on trimming farm subsidies.
The failure of the meetings will certainly prolong and could conceivably doom six-year-old negotiations to lower trade barriers around the world.
European officials have expressed growing reluctance to make a deal with a President who may soon be forced from office.


Dinkins and Jewish Leaders Commemorate Federation's Anniversary


BC Tel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Rail reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


CHRONICLE
Ben Shahn cared so much about the mural that he was commissioned to do for the facade of the William E. Grady High School in the Brighton section of Brooklyn in 1957 that he paid for part of it himself.
"He never told me the exact amount," his widow, BERNARDA BRYSON SHAHN, said the other day, "but we called it the school we built." Mr Shahn died in 1969.
Tomorrow, Mrs.
Shahn, who is 89 years old, will speak at a ceremony rededicating the mural, entitled "Science and the Humanities," which has been restored under the Adopt-a-Mural program of the Municipal Art Society.
In 1992, the Samuel Rubin Foundation adopted the mural with a grant of $7,500.


Gruber Knocks Himself Out In Game of All-Round Effort
Football coaches are always claiming they have to see the films before they can comment on a play.
In Kelly Gruber's case tonight, it was quite true.
Gruber was stunned by a hard slide home with what turned out to be the winning run in the seventh inning.
He had to watch television after the Blue Jays' 2-1 victory tonight to find out what he had done in the late innings, which turned out to be considerable.


LAW FAILS TO STEM ABUSE OF MIGRANTS, U.S. PANEL REPORTS
The law Congress enacted six years ago to combat illegal immigration has done nothing to stop exploitation of migrant farm workers, one of its principal objectives, a Government-appointed, bipartisan commission has found.
The panel, charged with assessing the law's impact on agriculture, confirms earlier reports that illegal immigration continues largely unchecked.
The commission attributes the problem to lax enforcement, widespread fraud and the tenacity of people, mostly Mexicans, in fleeing severe unemployment at home for jobs in the United States.
Little Incentive to Improve
Congress was both tough and benign in adopting the Immigration Reform and Control Act.
To stop illegal immigration, the law established sanctions against employers who hire unauthorized workers, and it granted amnesty to three million workers who could show they had worked at least 90 days in agriculture in the United States in the year ending May 1, 1986.
But inadvertently, the law also gave birth to a bustling market in counterfeit documents that has undermined the objectives of the law.


Tennis Center Expansion Is Scaled Back
Concerned by rising costs and vehement opposition from a number of Queens civic groups, the organizers of the United States Open have scaled back their proposed expansion of the tennis tournament's site in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Instead of leasing 31 more acres of the Queens park from the city -- in addition to the 17 already occupied there by the National Tennis Center -- the organizers would lease an additional 25.6.
Instead of demolishing the three existing stadiums and building three new ones, they would renovate two of the existing three, raze only one and build only one to replace it.


Man Is Fatally Shot As Commuters Flee
A man was shot and killed and another man was critically wounded yesterday on a busy street in Jamaica, Queens, as rush-hour commuters fled for cover, the police said.
The shooting occurred about 6 P.M. at 168th Street and 88th Avenue, as rush-hour commuters left the nearby 169th Street subway station and clustered around several bus stops in the area, said Sgt.
Pat Moynihan, of the 103d Precinct.


Economic Scene; Refereeing The Blame Game
"THE economy, dummy," reads the now-famous sign in Clinton headquarters, an unsubtle reminder of where the candidate's main chance lies.
Even President Bush seems to agree that he has hopelessly botched the recession thing: If re-elected, he has promised to pack his senior economic advisers onto the first Learjet leaving town.
But reality is more elusive.
While independent analysts might not give Mr.
Bush high marks for bravery, few claim that his decisions seemed foolish at the time, or that the recession on his watch has been more debilitating than those of the 1970's and 80's.
Nor, for that matter, do many think that the long-term economic prognosis is really worse today than in the what-me-worry 1980's.


Norwest Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marsh &amp; McLennan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corestates Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Midweek Report
Week Eight
The National Football League's only undefeated team gets a minor test on Sunday when the Dolphins (6-0) play the Colts (3-3) in Miami.
The surprise Vikings, leaders of the N.F.C.
Central, put their 5-1 record on the line against the resurgent Redskins (4-2) at home.
The surprising Steelers, co-leaders with the Oilers of the A.F.C.
Central, take their 4-2 record to Kansas City to meet the 4-3 Chiefs.
In the schedule's unkindest cut, the 1-5 Jets, who were out of harm's way with a bye last weekend, will be required to take the field again, this time against the Bills (4-2) Monday night.
San Diego Chargers
The 34-14 victory over the Colts has cost the Chargers an arm and a leg.
The team's leading runner, Rod Bernstine, who rushed for a career-high 150 yards with two touchdowns on 23 carries against Indianpolis, will be out for at least six weeks after undergoing shoulder surgery
The team's top defensive player, end Leslie O'Neal, who leads the team with five sacks, is expected to miss at least one game after knee surgery yesterday.
Rookie Chris Mimms is expected to start in his place against the Broncos on Sunday.
Bernstine, who may be out for the season, got a get-well card of sorts yesterday.
He was named the American Conference offensive player of the week.
Philadelphia Eagles
Losing to the Redskins was bad enough.
Losing Andre Waters could be worse for the Eagles.
The strong safety, who led the team in tackles for four of the last eight seasons, broke his left leg in the Washington game and will be out for most of the season.
Waters is giving his recovery the same dedication he shows on the field.
After being told that he could let the leg heal naturally and miss the entire season or that he could have screws inserted surgically and possibly return for the last few games, he chose the surgery.
Denver Broncos
Ruben Rodriguez, a free-agent punter, was signed yesterday to replace Mike Horan, who is out for the season.
Broncos trainer Steve Antonopulos said it appeared that Horan, who tore a knee ligament against Houston last Sunday, will require reconstructive knee surgery.
Coach Dan Reeves, who is in the final year of his contract, denied a report on ESPN that he might be coaching the Phoenix Cardinals next season.
"There's no truth to it whatsoever," Reeves said. Los Angeles Raiders
Quarterback Todd Marinovich has recovered from his sprained left knee and is expected to start Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.
The Cowboys (5-1) lead the National Conference East and the Raiders (3-4) have won three consecutive games.
Their defense has allowed 13 points and just a field goal in its last 10 quarters.
Defensive lineman Anthony Smith, who had four sacks and forced two fumbles against the Seahawks last Sunday, was named defensive player of the week in the American Conference.
Green Bay Packers
Brett Favre will start at quarterback against the Chicago Bears on Sunday, although Coach Mike Holmgren told reporters he has not decided whether he will be the starter for the rest of the season.
Quarterback Don Majkowski, however, said Holmgren indicated that Favre would start for the remainder of the season.
"A decision was made," Majkowski said.
"I'm going to accept it for now and just work as hard as I can."


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Service Corp. International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush: Mixing Harshness With Warmth
The Bush campaign began broadcasting three new commercials in local markets yesterday; the campaign would not specify which markets or the size of the buy.
Two 30-second person-in-the-street advertisements attack Gov.
Bill Clinton.
A 60-second ad uses warm images to portray President Bush as a family man and a leader.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with words in white on black background: "On Integrity. October. 1992."
Quick close-ups of people in a park and in a crowd of people in a building in Cincinnati talking about Mr.
Clinton.
The camera is shaking to make the ad seem authentic and not canned.
Closes with: "To be continued tomorrow."


Huge Rally in London Protests Mine Job Cuts
To the cheers and applause of spectators lining sidewalks, tens of thousands of coal miners and their families marched through the streets of central London today, protesting Government plans to reduce the numbers of British coal mines and miners.
Led by a brass band, the marchers stretched nearly three miles around Hyde Park, at the same time Prime Minister John Major and his beleaguered Government were locked inside Parliament in a heated debate over their coal policy.


Advanta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Resource Mortgage Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Color of New York's Police
The percentage of blacks on New York City's police force falls far below their percentage of the population.
That embarrasses the department and feeds tensions between police and communities.
The new Commissioner, Raymond Kelly, rightly puts minority hiring at the top of his agenda.
New York ranked last in a recent 50-city survey that measured how well police departments reflect their populations.
Only 11.4 percent of New York City's officers are black; blacks comprise 28.7 percent of the city's population.
The percentage of black officers has remained steady since 1983, even though two black Commissioners who preceded Mr.
Kelly were concerned about the disparity.


Plan for Bus Terminal
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday announced a $90 million plan to renovate its bus terminal in mid-Manhattan in an attempt to reduce crime, improve service and remove the homeless.
Port Authority officials said the plan calls for rebuilt restrooms, brighter lighting and signs, and the elimination of many small open spaces where homeless people gather.
Rather than project a single long-term spending plan, the officials said they would allocate $15 million a year and adjust their plans each year.


A Century of Design On Display in London
Swatch watches, Alessi kettles, Dr.
Martens shoes, paper dresses, Eileen Gray lacquer furniture and Mackintosh fireplaces are among the design landmarks on exhibit in a new gallery that opens today at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
The 20th Century Gallery, a permanent display, features consumer, household and one-of-a-kind objects selected for the quality of their design.


Long Shots Are Good Bets at Aqueduct
Race tracks aren't famous for omens, but Aqueduct opened its fall season yesterday with a rush of success for long shots, including the 16-1 Wallenda in the Cowdin, the first of the 33 stakes races booked at the track in the next two months.
Wallenda outran a smart bunch of nine other 2-year-old colts to win a race that has been won in the past by late-blooming juveniles or by untested ones taking their first strides on the road to the big leagues, like Easy Goer in 1988.
But he also extended a winning streak for outsiders that began in the opening race when Nymphist paid $23.80 for a $2 bet to win and that continued in the third race when Miss Tahiti won at $39.80 and that reached a peak in the sixth when Clever Knave scored at $49.80.


When Anderson Struts, the Bulls Take Notice
It was 24 minutes of one game that didn't count, but Kenny Anderson gave the Chicago Bulls enough of a preview for several of them to hold up two world-champion thumbs.
"Dynamite player; that's a given," said John Paxson, guard.


Kovalev's Goal Is October Revelation
Aleksei Kovalev dropped to his knees and pumped his hands at the roof.
He looked like Jimmy Connors in a helmet, only considerably more European.
In fact, Kovalev's hesitation backhand last night at Madison Square Garden had been at least as deadly as any drop volley.
The high, two-handed flip of a rebound off Mark Messier's shot beat Washington, 2-1, for the Rangers, just when his teammates were despairing that the game had been stolen from them.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; President, After 10 Cool Months, Is Catching Fire as a Campaigner
As President Bush likes to say, this is a weird election year, and now comes the latest surprise: after 10 torpid months, Mr.
Bush has suddenly reawakened as a fist-shaking, stem-winding Presidential candidate.
On a two-day train trip through the South this week, the President seems finally to have found a message he believes strikes a chord.
Gov.
Bill Clinton cannot be trusted with the White House, he says -- "a pattern of deception" is the refrain at each whistle stop -- and President Bill Clinton would raise taxes on working men and women.


INSIDE
New Israeli Peace Offer
Israel, without outlining any details, offered concessions over territory in the Golan Heights in an effort to obtain a peace treaty on normal relations with Syria.
Page A3.
Twist in School Shooting
A distraught teacher talked a student into trying to kill her last week at her Brooklyn school, officials said.
The shooting had gained attention as an example of school violence.
Page B1.
Jim Garrison Is Dead
The onetime New Orleans prosecutor, who crusaded in the belief of a conspiracy in President Kennedy's killing, died at age 70.
Page B12.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goulds Pumps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


If Clinton Wants a Democratic Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
Few would quarrel with "The Clinton Doctrine" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, Oct. 6), which welcomes Gov.
Bill Clinton's commitment to a more democratic foreign policy.
More troubling is the unholy mix of sanctimony and cynicism with which Mr.
Rosenthal -- and Governor Clinton -- reduce an important principle to a self-serving slogan.
Stung by past charges that they were dovish on defense, Democrats are looking for a way to criticize President Bush from the right.
So they accuse him of coddling Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Saddam Hussein.


Robert W. MacGregor; Union Official, 76
Robert W. MacGregor, a former union official and Labor Commissioner for Nassau County, died on Monday at his home in Coram, L.I.
He was 76 years old.
His daughter, Janet E. MacGregor, reported his death yesterday.
She said he died of heart failure.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; REPUBLICAN GAINS IN WISCONSIN RACE
A month ago Senator Bob Kasten appeared to face an impossible battle against an upstart state lawmaker who broadcast folksy television advertisements complete with an endorsement from Elvis Presley.
But now Senator Kasten, a two-term Republican, is fighting back with a slashing television campaign that has pushed him from about 20 points behind in the public opinion polls to within striking distance of his Democratic challenger, Russell D. Feingold Jr.


Jackson Weaver, 72, Voice of Smokey Bear
Jackson J. Weaver, a radio personality in Washington and for 45 years the voice of Smokey Bear, died there on Tuesday at Holy Cross Hospital.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Weaver died of complications from diabetes, said a spokesman for WMAL radio, where Mr.
Weaver had worked.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Al Gore; Environment and Industry Can Flourish, Gore Says
A day after President Bush attacked his positions on the environment, Senator Al Gore called today for a "new industrial revolution" in which stricter environmental standards would oblige businesses to adopt more efficient technologies.
Campaigning in Northern New Jersey this afternoon, Mr.
Gore spoke in greater detail of his philosophy on the environment than he has in recent weeks.
Although he did not deal with specific matters of policy, he said his stands on the environment and those of the Bush Administration present "as clear a difference as on any issue we face in this campaign."


Raychem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marine Midland Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; PEROT INTENSIFIES HIS AD CAMPAIGN
Capitalizing on the momentum he generated in the three Presidential debates, Ross Perot began making the case today in a barrage of new television and radio advertisements that a vote for him would not be wasted.
While Mr.
Perot again did not appear in public, his top campaign aides tried to convince reporters that Mr.
Perot could win.
And for the first time, they said that Mr.
Perot's best hope is to steal support from Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Negotiations about trimming farm subsidies collapsed in Brussels, dashing the Bush Adminstration's hopes for a pre-election breakthrough in world trade talks.
The failure of the meetings could conceivably doom six-year-old negotiations to lower trade barriers around the world.  [ Page A1. ] Companies
Bell Atlantic plans to develop what amounts to an electronic video-rental store, which would enable shoppers at home to dial up movies or television programs over ordinary telephone lines.  [ D1. ]


Charles M. Grigg, 73, Expert on Civil Rights
Charles M. Grigg, an expert on the civil rights movement and a professor emeritus of sociology at Florida State University, died on Oct. 14 at his home in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 73 years old.
A family friend, John Griffin, said the professor died of cancer.


Teacher Asked To Be Shot, Police Charge
Distraught over a separation from her husband and a recent diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, a Brooklyn machine-shop teacher talked a 17-year-old student into bringing a gun to school last Friday and trying to kill her during a between-classes break, the authorities said yesterday.
The police arrested the student, Lamar Goodwine, of 370-A Bristol Street in East New York, Tuesday evening on charges of attempted murder and weapons possession.
The teacher, Barbara Mendez, 23, who was hit in the shoulder and survived, was not charged.
But officials said they were not ruling out that possibility.


Bus Company in Crash Escaped Notice
A Brooklyn-based charter bus company involved in a fatal crash in New Jersey in July escaped scrutiny by Federal regulators who did not even know that the company existed because of an oversight in record keeping, a Federal official said today.
Had the company, Sensational Golden Sons Bus Services, been listed on the Federal census of bus companies, its operations and vehicles could have been inspected between 1990, when it received its Federal operating license, and the time of the accident, said John F. Grimm, an office director with the Federal Highway Administration.


Sunbeam-Oster Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Modine Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Drugs Cost Less in Canada Than in U.S., Study Finds
The General Accounting Office released a study yesterday showing that the prices charged by Canadian subsidiaries of American drug companies were 32 percent lower than the same companies charged American customers.
The study, for the health subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, compared 121 drugs.
It found that although the prices of 23 drugs were lower in the United States, 98 were higher here, most often by 50 percent or more.


Jays' Gaston Proving He's Lucky and Good
Cito Gaston, whose managerial prowess has been one of the hottest topics in this town for two years, whose moves are among the most thoroughly dissected, is living proof that living well is the best revenge.
Gaston, the Toronto manager, the man who was almost dared by shapers of public opinion to win the American League pennant or else, did win it.
Then, as Toronto's first World Series began to unfold and the light refracting through baseball's merciless optic lenses of public opinion grew even hotter, Gaston braced, asked his players to play the game his way and has yet to fall to the ultimate second-guess.


Review/Dance; 'Aria,' a Bill T. Jones Premiere That Deftly Blends Contrasts
The dancers in the Bill T. Jones/ Arnie Zane Dance Company are among the best in American modern dance, beginning with Mr.
Jones himself, Arthur Aviles, Sean Curran and Eric Geiger, to name the most obvious.
The women are no slouches either, but this is a troupe in which male dancing dominates.
It was perhaps to give Mr.
Aviles a friendly challenge that Mr.
Jones invited Jennifer Gelfand, a brilliant young ballerina from the Boston Ballet, to appear with Mr.
Aviles in a new duet.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Wynonna Judd  Paramount
Wynonna Judd is going to send women's country music into the 90's if she has to kick it there herself.
On Friday night, Ms.
Judd, who with her mother, Naomi, made up the multi-million-selling duo the Judds and who is now a solo artist, put on a show that was fastidiously contemporary.
She looked sleek and urbane, wearing glittering black thigh boots, black tights and a velvet-back black shirt-jacket; her long peach-blond hair was painstakingly arranged over her shoulders.
The stage set was elegantly simple: no frills, no banners.


Review/Dance; 3 Parts of a Somberly Arranged Whole
A talented choreographer is not necessarily also skilled at arranging dance programs, as Joy Kellman demonstrated last Friday night when she presented "Somewhere Between Never and Always" at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
That was the overall title for an evening of three works.
Each was heartfelt and well danced, yet the program as a whole was ponderous.
The two pieces shown before the intermission formed one uninterrupted elegy.
The choreography for "Salt," a premiere to recorded music by John Adams, required the dancers to walk solemnly and offer support to one another.
Christopher Caines, Jenn Paislee Clark, Chiko Katsube, Leslie Partridge, Adolpho Pati, Heather Richie and Ed Tyler did so with impressive dignity.


National Pizza Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


U.S. Company Investigated in Iraq Arms Buildup
Three Government agencies are investigating how an American company was allowed to ship Iraq equipment that was used for building nuclear weapons despite President Bush's assertion during Monday's Presidential debate that no military equipment from the United States had been found in Iraq after the war.
Richard Boucher, a State Department spokesman, confirmed today that the Pentagon, Commerce Department and Customs Service began a joint criminal investigation last spring into the export of an electron-beam welder by Leybold Vacuum Systems, in Enfield, Conn., the American subsidiary of a German company.


Kimberly-Clark reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ruling May Make Suits Against Insurers Easier
A Federal Appeals Court in Chicago has ruled for the first time that homeowners in poor neighborhoods who believe they are victims of redlining by insurance companies can sue insurers under Federal housing law.
The decision, hailed yesterday by consumer advocates and civil rights groups, could make it easier for consumers to take insurance companies to court if they find companies deny them homeowner's insurance or charge excessive prices because they are residents of inner-city, minority neighborhoods.


If Clinton Wants a Democratic Foreign Policy; Courage of Dissent
To the Editor:
In the debate over Gov.
Bill Clinton's anti-Vietnam War activities there is a fundamentally important point being missed by both sides: Most of us who were vehemently against the war in Vietnam were not demonstrating against either our country or the men who were forced to fight in what for them was an incomprehensibly brutal and personally devastating experience.
On the contrary, our vehement antiwar activity was motivated specifically by the belief that it was the war itself that was destroying our country and that the American combat troops in Vietnam were the primary victims of that war.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ROOF gutters should be cleaned, and repaired if necessary, every fall and spring to protect a house against serious problems resulting from poor drainage.
These can range from basement leaks and foundation settling to leaking roofs and damage due to soaking of insulation.
Provided you do not mind working from a ladder, cleaning and inspecting gutters is usually easy.
If you do not care to do the job yourself, hire a professional rather than forgo the task.
Gutter cleaning is offered by some gutter installation companies, as well as some roofing companies, chimney sweeps, handyman companies and tree- and yard-care companies.
Check the Yellow Pages of your local phone book for listings of these various businesses.


Gay Center Is Hub to Share and Care
IN A DIM, no-frills room, small-business owners share experiences about working independently, offering services free of charge, networking and gaining respect.
In a room called the Balcony, amid party props, Patrick Henriquez and a dozen other volunteers talk intensely about next weekend's nature excursion.
Upstairs, in a crowded hall, Urvashi Vaid, executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, warns of a new wave of anti-gay violence around the country.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Andrea Marcovicci Oak Room Algonquin Hotel 59 West 44th Street Through Jan. 30
Early in "Just Kern," her touching tribute to the music of Jerome Kern, Andrea Marcovicci sings a rendition of the Kern-Johnny Mercer standard "I'm Old-Fashioned" that is so emphatic it becomes a proclamation of her musical conservatism.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Michael Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greiner Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton's Camp Says It Is Wary Of Perot Inroads
Two weeks ago, Ross Perot was a footnote to the 1992 race.
Now, Clinton campaign strategists say their private polls have raised concerns that he is cutting into the Democratic lead in states like this one.
"Certainly there's movement" in Mr.
Perot's direction, said one senior campaign official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
"I think it's because people don't know the facts about him."


Newell Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Great-West Lifeco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Jigsaw Puzzle Goes Vertical
JIGSAW puzzles have entered a new dimension.
Wrebbit USA, a toy company in Carsonville, Mich., has introduced the "Puzz-3D" line, five three-dimensional puzzles in the form of Victorian mansions and a Bavarian castle, among others.
The puzzles are meant for children, but adults may have to help.
The challenge is to get children to use their spatial and visual abilities and build upward.
The puzzles are assembled much the way toy models are but without the glue.
The pieces, laminated and thicker than ordinary jigsaw pieces, and a firm base keep the puzzle standing.
Each puzzle comes with hundreds of pieces.
The old mansion (right), is a foot high and has 426 pieces; the Bavarian castle, 16 inches high with 917 pieces, is considered the hardest, and the Victorian house is supposed to be easiest.
The United States Capitol model has 690 pieces and is also considered difficult.


F.A.A. to Order Replacement of Part Tied to Crash
The Federal Aviation Administration plans to order airlines to replace part of the wings on Lockheed jets like the one that burned on July 30 at Kennedy International Airport after its wing broke under the stress of an aborted takeoff, Government officials said today.
The pending order was disclosed by the National Transportation Safety Board in a preliminary report on its investigation into the fiery crash, which gutted the plane just moments after its crew and passengers evacuated safely.


HBO &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Equifax Profit Increases 26%
Equifax Inc., a leading provider of information for consumer financial transactions, has reported a 26 percent increase in its third-quarter net income to $22.3 million, or 27 cents a share, from $17.7 million, or 22 cents a share in the corresponding period last year.
Third-quarter revenue rose 2.6 percent, to $278 million, up from the $271 million for the period last year.


Uncut Version of 1984 Cult Film to Be Released
There are legendary cult films like "Citizen Kane," "Psycho," "Casablanca" and "All About Eve."
And then there's "Once Upon A Time in America."


POOL-HOPPING WITH: Kelly Klein; Reflecting A Lovely World
WAITING, in the back of a limousine half a block long, is Kelly Klein.
She sits behind the blackout windows, hands folded, thoroughly composed.
Escape?
No.
Obsession?
Never.
Her signature fragrance could only be Serenity.
Mrs.
Klein, who has been married to the designer Calvin Klein for five years, is showroom perfect in a dark brown sweater, dark olive jacket, dark taupe pants and dark brown suede shoes -- which would make most women look like an algae-covered mudslide.
But the earth tones pick up on her tawny hair, which complements her moderate tan, which highlights her mind-boggling ring.
Part of her collection of the Duchess of Windsor's jewels (Mrs. Klein was pictured last year in Vogue wearing the Duchess's pearls with jeans), the double-banded gold ring surrounding emerald-cut diamonds was given the name "Eternity" by Prince Edward when he presented it to Wallis Simpson.
Which is how Mr.
Klein's Eternity fragrance got its name.


National Intergroup Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Johnson Delights and Earns a Night Off
Magic Johnson crossed paths with Pat Riley in the hallway of the Forum this morning.
They hugged, then Riley said to Johnson, "I thought you weren't playing tonight."
Johnson said, "I'm not, but I still have to practice."


Editorial Notebook; An Acquired Family
As we near Election Day, on which I will rejoice because it will mean the end of a nasty campaign, I keep remembering that moment during the Republican Convention when Mr. and Mrs.
Bush and their considerable progeny were on stage exemplifying "family." The family I would have trotted out had I just won the nomination, I told myself at the time, wouldn't have looked like theirs.
True, there'd have been two daughters, a mother, an aunt, a sister and a niece up there acknowledging the applause.
But the rest wouldn't have resembled me in the slightest.
What binds us is friendship.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
There is no mystery about what binds the 12 members of the Adams Round Table, who assemble every month at the Bella Vita restaurant on York Avenue in Manhattan.
They are mystery writers who, as DOROTHY SALISBURY DAVIS, a member, explained yesterday, "feel that it is beneficial for writers to talk to each other about the craft of writing."
Tonight they are getting together at a party to celebrate the publication by Longmeadow Press of their third anthology of short stories, "Missing in Manhattan."


Trump Yields To Demand On Housing
The chairman and staff of the New York City Planning Commission have reached agreement on several significant issues with Donald J. Trump over his Riverside South development project.
Planning officials said yesterday that in negotiations, the developer agreed to increase the amount of subsidized housing to at least 12 percent of the project's housing units, from 10 percent.
There was also agreement on maintenance costs the developer is willing to pay for a large park on the site, which stretches along the Hudson River from 59th to 72d Streets, the officials said.


Accounts
*
Chock Full o' Nuts Corp., New York, named five semifinalists in the review of its account, with billings exceeding $2 million.
The New York agencies vying to succeed TBWA Advertising, New York, the company's shop for seven years, are Altschiller Reitzfeld; Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.; CME KHBB Advertising; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners; and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano.
A decision is expected next month. *
Wendy's Boston ADI Co-op, Wendy's Albany ADI Co-op and Wendy's Hartford/New Haven ADI Co-op to Mintz &amp; Hoke Advertising &amp; Public Relations, Hartford, for local marketing and media placement for 76 restaurants in those markets.
The account, with billings estimated at $1.5 million, had been at Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston, which resigned the account when it merged with Arnold Fortuna Lane &amp; Cabot, Boston, a large McDonald's agency.
The merged firm is Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot.


U.S. Archivists to See Hanoi's Files on Missing
American archivists will travel to Vietnam at the end of this month to begin reviewing documents and photographs from Hanoi's files to help resolve questions about the fate of missing American servicemen, Administration officials said today.
Hanoi announced on Monday that it would open its archives to search for information requested from Washington.
Vietnam's decision came after senior Administration officials confronted Hanoi's leadership with information the Pentagon obtained from Vietnam's archives in recent months, including as many as 5,000 photographs of dead Americans.


G-III Apparel Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


First Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Classmate Testifies at Start Of Glen Ridge Sex Abuse Trial
The jury in the Glen Ridge, N.J. sex abuse trial heard testimony today from a former schoolmate of both the defendants and the mildly retarded woman the prosecution contends was sexually abused by them in a basement recreation room in 1989.
The prosecution began by leading three police officers through testimony, supplemented by a sketch and photographs, about the layout of the park where the young woman first met the defendants and the L-shaped room in the basement of the home of Kevin and Kyle Scherzer, twins who are two of the defendants.


Home Video
With the price of movies like "Wayne's World" slashed under $10 in discount stores and supermarkets, low-priced mega-hits have become featured attractions in all kinds of outlets.
If one report bears out, that might soon include a fast-food chain.
Executives in the video industry say that Orion will soon release "Dances With Wolves," a 1991 rental hit with a $99.98 retail price, for sale exclusively at McDonald's between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Ordinarily, the movie might be priced for sale at $19.95 in video stores.
The price at McDonald's is expected to be under $8.


The Values of Superman Will Live On
To the Editor:
It was with much sadness that I read of the coming demise of Superman in D.C.
Comics (editorial, Oct. 4).
You mention the public had found Superman too square and, along with the cartoonists, grown bored with the character.
Yet when I was young I always bought Superman because he represented values that, even as a child, I thought were important.
Superman grew up in the heartland of America and represented the values of loyalty, patriotism and friendship.
He stood for something, and nothing in the universe could make him sell out those values.
I recall on more than one occasion growing up reading episodes where Superman risked his life for Earth and the beings who were his new family.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS, Arlington, Va., named Paul Brands vice chairman and Philip Giuntini president.
FAY'S INC., Liverpool, N.Y., an operator of drug, paper-goods and auto-supply stores, named Betsi O'Neill vice president of advertising and promotion.


In One Show, Ads of the 40's Look at 90's
THERE is a television program that regularly addresses advertising- and marketing-related issues like the overcommercialization of American culture and the influence of sponsors on programming.
Surprise No. 1: The program, "Homefront," is not a PBS documentary but a weekly ABC series -- in the nighttime soap opera genre, no less.


Owens-Corning Shows New Insulation Method
In a bid to regain some of the market for refrigerator and freezer insulation that it lost to plastic foams in the late 1970's, the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation said yesterday that it had developed an experimental fiberglass panel with six times the insulating value of foam-filled panels.
The announcement comes at a time when appliance manufacturers are scrambling to develop new technology to meet increasing Federal energy efficiency standards and eliminate the use of chlorofluorocarbon gases, or CFC's, to form the insulating foam.


Informix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


General Datacomm Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NORTHWEST PILOTS UNION LEADERS AGREE TO CONCESSIONS
Leaders of the pilots' union at Northwest Airlines unanimously agreed to contract concessions of $100 million a year over the next three years, the Air Line Pilots Association said yesterday.
The union's chairman, O.C.
Miller, said, "Our pilot group has clearly demonstrated that they desire to invest in the continued success and growth of NWA. They have also made it clear they expect to receive a return that is commensurate with the size of this investment." Northwest originally asked the pilots for contract changes of $500 million over five years.
Separately, Northwest reported third-quarter net income sank 56 percent, to $46.5 million from $105.1 million in the year-earlier period.
Revenue rose 3.4 percent to $2.2 billion.
Its parent, NWA Inc., reported that its net loss narrowed to $19.7 million from $22.6 million.


Market Place; Concord Camera's Hefty Pay Deal
FORGET all that political rhetoric.
Losing a job doesn't have to be an unpleasant experience -- particularly for a former employee who used to work in an executive suite.
Take the recently announced management changes at the Concord Camera Corporation, a maker of inexpensive cameras that has long reported strong growth in sales and profits.
Jack C. Benun, longtime chairman and chief executive of the Avenel, N.J., company, announced earlier this month that he would be leaving as soon as a planned acquisition was completed.


Newman T. Halvorson; Accountant, 84
Newman T. Halvorson, a former partner of the Ernst &amp; Young accounting firm, died on Oct. 19 at University Hospital in Cleveland, Ohio.
He was 84 years old.
His death was reported yesterday by a spokesman for Ernst &amp; Young, Marc Eiger, who said the cause of death was congestive heart failure.


U.S. Plans Retaliation For Europe Trade Rebuff
With eyes on the November elections as well as on the international trade impasse, top American officials began making plans today for retaliation against European exports after Wednesday's breakdown of world trade talks in Brussels.
Cabinet-level officials, after waiting in vain to see if the European Community would make any new proposals, met at the White House this evening but reached no final decision on how to proceed.
President Bush personally authorized the retaliation threat in the summer and would almost certainly make the final decision now, but he was campaigning out of town today.


How New York State Helps Keep Business in New York City
To the Editor:
"How to Keep Business in New York," your Oct. 21 editorial about Morgan Stanley's decision to retain 4,100 jobs in New York City, fails to note New York State's critical role in maintaining the city's status as a world capital of financial services.


BUSH SAYS PHOTOS ARE MAJOR BREAK
President Bush said today that the acquisition of thousands of Vietnamese photographs of the bodies of American servicemen was a "major breakthrough" in accounting for missing Americans.
But he said he would have to determine "exactly how major" before deciding to move toward diplomatic recognition of Hanoi.
The President also said, in an interview with CBS News, that he would like to see Vietnam become democratic, and seemed to suggest that this might be a factor in his decision, or related to it.
"We're not that far along," he said.


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 3


The Art Market; Antiques For Royalty And Others
WHEN the first International Antique Dealers Show opened four years ago, New York City had never seen anything like it.
Rivaling the extravagant European shows, like the Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires in Paris or the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair in London, this was an exhibition that epitomized glamour and quality.
It was also the first truly international antiques show ever to come to New York.
The timing was right: in 1989 the art market was still strong.
Sophisticated collectors who thought nothing of hopping a plane to Paris or London to search for the best antiques now needed to go only as far as the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue to see offerings from the top European and American dealers.


WORLD SERIES: GAME 5
A grand-slam home run by Lonnie Smith helped bring the Braves within a game and send the Series back to Atlanta for Game 6 Saturday.
Atlanta . . . 7 Toronto . . . 2
SportsFriday, page B9.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Declined to exercise their options on the contracts of Tom Brunansky and Billy Hatcher, outfielders.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Released Scott Bailes, pitcher.


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Profit Doesn't Soothe BankAmerica Investors
The BankAmerica Corporation said yesterday that it earned $476 million in the third quarter, the most of any American banking company.
But the news failed to reassure investors and traders worried about growing losses on California real estate loans.
They pushed the company's stock price sharply lower.


Restaurants
Rene Pujol
The greeting as you step down into Rene Pujol is as warm and comforting as a mug of tea in January.
In part, that is what has kept this Gallic institution vigorous during all these years of jarring change in the theater district.
The 22-year-old Rene Pujol is part of the loosely related trio of Pujol family restaurants, which includes Les Pyrenees on West 51st Street and Pierre au Tunnel on West 47th Street.
In recent years it has been known as a place that turned out serviceable French fare in a rather somber and stuffy setting.
Two years ago, however, the restaurant was given a welcome overhaul, and the results have been all for the better.


No Headline
Let's deal with the big-ticket items before we ask millions of mothers to torture themselves. -- WILLIAM RATHJE, a garbage expert, on the disposable diaper debate.  [ A1:6. ]


Review/Film; Animated Violence From Comic Books
"The Professional," which opens today at the Cinema Village Third Avenue, is a Japanese animated film whose comic-book tawdriness would be just as well served by witless live action.
In this lurid melange of violence and soft-core sex, animation makes it possible to pay close attention to a bullet entering a villain's forehead or to other similarly piquant touches.
But the animators' delicacy is wasted on a crude, idiotic story.
Based on the graphic novels (comics) by Takao Saito, and directed by Osamu Dezaki, "The Professional" tells of a ruthless hit man who is wildly popular with women.
Perfunctory about both sex and violence, it involves the dull Duke Togo, also known as Golgo 13, in an array of alternating shootouts and trysts.
The women, who lure Duke into sexual encounters every 15 minutes or so, all have the same statuesque shape and propensity for moaning and sweating.
Their dialogue ("I've waited for you to pull my trigger, lovingly and softly") is embarrassing even by comic-book standards.


Arkansas Best reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Red Barber Dies


Salomon Profit Drops 93% in Quarter
In an announcement that caught Wall Street by surprise, Salomon Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings took a nose dive in the third quarter.
Salomon said its earnings plunged 93 percent to $6 million, from $85 million, or 60 cents a share, in the corresponding period of 1991.
Earnings per share were less than zero for the most recent quarter, after preferred dividends were paid.
Revenues, after interest expenses, totaled $636 million, down from $880 million in the third quarter last year.


Walls Gets a Look-See; McMillan Feels Left Out
The Jets are going to have cornerback Everson Walls, cut by the Giants on Wednesday, in for a workout on Saturday.
That decision left Jets cornerback Erik McMillan wondering today about his role on the team.
Jets defensive coordinator Pete Carroll said the Jets' invitation was one they would make when any player with Walls's background was waived.


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guitarist in Debut
The Japanese guitarist Norio Sato is to make his New York debut tonight at 8 at the Society for Ethical Culture, Central Park West at 64th Street.
Mr.
Sato will play solo guitar works by Toru Takemitsu, Akemi Naito and Yori-Aki Matsudaira and, with the Cygnus Ensemble, chamber works by Katori Makino, Yoritsune Matsudaira and Jo Kondo.
Tickets are $10; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 548-6724.


Cominco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.95
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.90
4.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.13
5.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.33
6.29
7.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.60
8.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.67
8.65
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.58
6.56
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Huge Improper Trades Jolt the Bond Markets
A series of improper trades in Treasury futures and options early yesterday morning at the Chicago Board of Trade, estimated at as much as $2.5 billion, jolted the markets and briefly sent Treasury prices plunging.
When the trades, apparently by a trader accompanied by two customers, were sold off soon thereafter, evidently at the order of board officials, prices rebounded to previous levels.
Board of Trade officials, who said they were investigating the incident, said they had referred the matter to the United States Attorney's office and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
But they provided few clues of their own, leaving traders buzzing over what had happened in their midst.


3 Teen-Agers Are Wounded Near a School
Three teen-agers were shot and wounded just outside their Brooklyn junior high school yesterday, when another student opened fire on a schoolmate who had bumped into him earlier in the day, the police said.
It was the second time in four days that students were hit by gunfire outside city schools.
On Monday, two 14-year-old girls and a 16-year-old boy were shot outside a Bronx high school.


CHRONICLE
It's never too late to earn a college degree, or so Thomas Edison State College in New Jersey will prove on Sunday when it awards a Bachelor of Science degree to its namesake, 61 years after his death.
Thomas Alva Edison will get a posthumous degree in applied science and technology in Trenton at the college's 20th commencement.


Afternoons Spent Dreaming of Arabian Horses
ONCE upon a time last month there was a teen-age girl in Connecticut.
She loved horses, as many girls do.
She loved the grace of those large animals, their power, their form and the way she just knew she'd feel sitting atop that broad, muscled back so high above the pedestrian world.
This girl -- we'll call her Jaclyn Trentacoste, Jackie for short -- has always dreamed of horses.
Sometimes she'd imagine galloping through dark woods, sometimes sunny meadows.
Sometimes her horse pranced haughtily before an immense crowd unable to contain its applause.
But always the horse and the little girl were together.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Education; Rivals Agree on Need for National School Standards but Differ on U.S. Role
In a campaign in which education continues to get lost someplace between the economy and character, the real question is not so much how candidates differ on the issues but how much education will matter in their Presidencies.
Broad philosophical differences do divide the candidates and shape their education policies.
But it is striking just how much President Bush, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot agree about what ails American schools and how to fix them.


Corrections
An article on the Company News page of Business Day on Wednesday about the third-quarter earnings of the Compaq Computer Corporation misstated the sales per employee in some copies.
Compaq's sales exceeded $100,000 for each employee.
A chart with the article was mislabeled in some copies.
It showed sales per employee in thousands of dollars, in a range from zero to $140,000.


Officials Say Fatal Crash Might Have Been Avoided
New York State transportation officials acknowledged today that a July bus accident that killed six people might have been avoided if the bus had been inspected within the previous year, as required under state law.
But the state's bus industry is largely self-regulating, the officials said.
Without major new expenditures of taxpayers' money, they said, regulators can do little more to bring operators into compliance.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: House Race; Colorado's Test for the Religious Right
The political power of the religious right, demonstrated this summer in its control of the Republican Party platform, will be tested soon in an otherwise obscure Congressional race here.
Without help, Bryan Day, an inexperienced and underfinanced Republican challenger, would hardly stand a chance against Representative David E. Skaggs, a three-term Democrat, even though Mr.
Skaggs had 57 overdrafts at the House bank.


Ashland Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Sandy Skoglund Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 31


Nassau Is Urged to Hold Fiscal Crisis Talks
The president of Long Island's biggest business organization called on Nassau County officials today to conduct round-the-clock talks to end the county's 10-month fiscal crisis.
The official, James L. Larocca, warned that the deadlock was damaging the Island's image as a place to conduct business.


Review/Art; Three Shows Celebrate the Spirit of Fluxus
"Be President. Elect Yourself," urges a hand-printed placard mounted on a stick inside the New Museum of Contemporary Art, in SoHo.
It's a thought, given the current campaign.
But the placard, suitable for carrying in a demonstration, is just one of hundreds of objects and ideas that vie for attention in three entertaining and bracing shows that celebrate the 30th anniversary of the art movement known as Fluxus.
Fluxus was never, strictly speaking, a movement at all.
It began as the collective spirit of an international group of young artists, writers and musicians in the early 1960's.
Those in New York were influenced by John Cage and Marcel Duchamp, and sought anarchic alternatives to Abstract Expressionism and the powerful gallery system that prevailed at the time.
Fluxus art ranges from toylike objects made of found materials, to written proposals for projects, to staged "events" in which little or nothing appears to happen.
Basic to Fluxus is a belief in the use of chance in art, in the connection between art and everyday life, and in the creative role of the viewer in making art.


Top Republican Fights to Retain His Albany Seat
It could be a muckraking Thomas Nast cartoon come to life.
An extravagant millionaire, obviously a scion of old-line Republican wealth, sends his trusted butler off with bags of money to do whatever it takes to buy his favorite candidate and win the election.
But wait, stop the frame. What's wrong with this picture?


Red Barber, Baseball Voice Of Summer, Is Dead at 84
Red Barber, the Mississippi-born broadcaster whose distinctive Southern twang still echoes as the unmistakable voice of the Brooklyn Dodgers, died yesterday at the Tallahassee Memorial Regional Medical Center in Florida.
He was 84 years old, and a hospital spokesman said he died of pneumonia and other complications after emergency surgery on Oct. 10 to remove an intestinal blockage.


INSIDE
More Doubts on G.M. Chief
A statement by a General Motors director has added to speculation that the auto maker's chief executive may be asked to step aside.
Page D1.


Boston Edison Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Lonnie Smith Didn't Stall This Time
THERE was no stopping Lonnie Smith now.
No indecision.
No mysterious fakes.
No low, white obstacles to stumble over.
The umpires waved him around the bases, and he jogged at his own pace, muttering "a few words I don't care to repeat."
He said later it was an "insult" for the Blue Jays to walk David Justice to get to him.
The bitterness was tangible.


ALC Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the benefits of drug therapy for some heart patients misidentified a drug they are given.
It is hydralazine, not hydrozaline.


Fieldcrest Cannon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton, on Tour of Western States, Chides G.O.P. for Investigating His Mother
Continuing his two-day campaign swing through Western states, Gov.
Bill Clinton spent today reaching for normally Republican and independent voters while repeating his attacks on President Bush.
Speaking to an enthusiastic crowd of at least 10,000 people along the Puget Sound waterfront in Seattle, the Democratic Presidential nominee took advantage of the latest report of Republican efforts to dig up damaging information about him to twit his opponent.


A Reprieve for Pendleton and Braves
Terry Pendleton has been fortunate to play in four different World Series.
Some Hall of Fame players like Ernie Banks, who is attending this series and floating around with the wonderful smile of someone at his first game, never received the chance to play in a World Series.
But Pendleton, for all his chances in October, is also unfortunate because he has never played on a team that won the World Series.
Pendleton avoided another devastating series loss for at least another game because the Atlanta Braves defeated the Toronto Blue Jays, 7-2, tonight in Game 5 of the World Series to shrink their deficit to three games to two. 'Stunk This Entire Series'
Pendleton wants his fortune to include a World Series championship and the Braves kept those hopes alive.
With Jack Morris seeking to close out Atlanta for the second straight season, pitching for the Blue Jays instead of the Minnesota Twins in this series, Pendleton ripped a run-scoring double in the first inning and helped ignite a five-run fifth with a two-out double that preceded Lonnie Smith's grand slam.
The Braves got what they wanted.
The series is returning to Atlanta.


SHUTTLE LAUNCHED ON SCIENCE MISSION
The space shuttle Columbia roared aloft today with six astronauts on a science mission whose main goal is to deploy a $4 million, two-foot satellite and inaugurate a new kind of booster rocket.
The 122-foot spaceship blasted off at 1:09 P.M., arcing into a bright blue Florida sky on a 10-day voyage.
It is the seventh shuttle flight of the year, the 13th for Columbia and the 51st for the nation's fleet of winged spaceships.


Bay State Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alex Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


U.S. Gives Accounts of Serbian Atrocities to U.N.
The United States turned over to the United Nations today a compilation of data it has gathered from a variety of sources recounting the killing and torture of thousands of men, women and children, most of them Muslims, by Serbian irregular forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is the second such report submitted to the United Nations by the United States since August, when the Security Council called on all United Nations members to present evidence of breaches of the Geneva Convention to new war-crime commission.
The first American report was submitted in September.


Sousa Made Money as Well as Music
To the Editor:
Richard Mooney's "Semper Sousa," (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 3) pays tribute to John Philip Sousa on the occasion of a performance to mark the centenary of the Sousa Band's debut in Plainfield, N.J.
Mr.
Mooney tells us about Sousa's compositions, but chiefly why Sousa has long been known as the March King for works like "The Washington Post" march and "The Stars and Stripes Forever," which first played in his mind on a trans-Atlantic crossing.


Two for the Senate; Christopher Dodd for Connecticut
Christopher Dodd is a professional politician, and a good one.
As Congressman and Senator, he has served Connecticut well in Washington for 18 years.
We recommend his re-election to a third Senate term.
His record provides a good example of why Congressional terms should not be limited by law.
If such limits, on the November ballot in 14 states, were in force in Connecticut, the state would lose his experience and influence at the end of this year, not for any shortcomings but because an artificial clock had run out.


Congress Lets President Delay His Tax Bill Veto
President Bush will no longer be forced to make good on his intention to veto the recently passed tax and urban-aid bill before Election Day.
Instead of being sent quickly to the White House, as most bills are, the final version of the $27 billion legislation has been held on Capitol Hill since Congress adjourned.


Testimony in Sex-Abuse Trial Focuses on Acuity of Woman
Two witnesses in the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial drew sharp contrasts today between the mental acuity and the physical abilities of the young woman at the center of the case.
She had difficulty expressing herself, they testified.
But she was also portrayed as an able 17-year-old basketball player on the girls' junior varsity team at Glen Ridge High School at the time of the alleged assault in March 1989.


New American Music
Golden Fleece Ltd., the Composers Chamber Theater, will present three new works by American composers this weekend, tonight at 8 and tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M., at the Sanford Meissner Theater, 164 11th Avenue, at 23d Street, Chelsea.
The works are Thomas Fraioli's "Wishing Bone," a dance (choreographed by Todd Rosenlieb) with narration based on Cree Indian poems; Peter Foley's "Bear," based on Anton Chekhov's play of the same name, and "A Desperate Waltz," a commissioned opera about the conflicts in the lives of two married couples (score by John David Earnest; libretto by Mervyn Goldstein).
Tickets are $15; $12 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 691-6105.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Tuesday about the size of the Sun rendered a scientist's description of it incorrectly.
He called the Sun a yellow-white main sequence star, not a red dwarf.


Briefs
*
H.
J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, is offering $300 million of 6 3/4 percent noncallable notes due 1999 at a price of 100 through Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The issue is rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Satellite Technology Allows Campaigns to Deliver Their Messages Unfiltered
They may call it the year of talk-show politics, but more accurately, 1992 is the year of satellite dish politics.
Consider this Jetsonian scene, live, from East Lansing, Mich., on Monday night: Samuel K. Skinner, an adviser to President Bush, sits before a Bush campaign television camera, contending that his candidate fared best in that night's Presidential debate.
James Carville, an adviser to Gov.
Bill Clinton, sits before a Clinton campaign television camera, contending that his candidate fared best.


Utility Raising $204 Million
The Union Electric Company, a St.
Louis-based utility, is offering a total of $204 million of debt through two transactions, with Salomon Brothers as lead underwriter on both issues
For a $104 million issue of 30-year first mortgage bonds due in 2022, the coupon is 8 1/4 percent.
It is priced for sale to the public at 98.965, to yield 8.344 percent, or about 76 basis points more than the Treasury's bell-weather issue.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Reviews/Film; Invasion of Panama: Rooting Out the Reason
"The Panama Deception," opening today at the Village East Cinema, is a tough, provocative, highly opinionated and slickly produced documentary, an answer to the official United States Government line about the 1989 invasion of Panama.
Barbara Trent, the film's director; David Kasper, the writer and editor, and their colleagues say the principal purpose of the invasion was not to liberate Panama from the control of a ruthless dictator and to bring Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to trial on drug charges.
Rather, they say, it was to destabilize the country and destroy Panama's Defense Forces, creating a situation that would allow the United States to renegotiate the treaties, signed by President Jimmy Carter, under which the canal is to be turned over to the Panamanians by the year 2000.


American Telephone &amp; Telegraph reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ceridian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; A Caper Goes Wrong, Resoundingly
It's been an unusually good year for the discovery of first-rate new American film directors: Barry Primus ("Mistress"), Nick Gomez ("Laws of Gravity"), Allison Anders ("Gas Food Lodging") and Carl Franklin ("One False Move"), among others.
Now add to the list the name of Quentin Tarantino, the young writer and director of "Reservoir Dogs," a small, modestly budgeted crime movie of sometimes dazzling cinematic pyrotechnics and over-the- top dramatic energy.
It may also be one of the most aggressively brutal movies since Sam Peckinpah's "Straw Dogs."
"Reservoir Dogs" is about a Los Angeles jewelry store robbery masterminded by a tough old mob figure named Joe Cabot (Lawrence Tierney).
The principal characters are introduced in an extended precredit sequence in which the thieves are seen relaxing over lunch sometime before the job.


ARCO Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Tweaks His Foe
Bill Clinton poked fun at the Administration over a report that officials had searched not only his passport files but also his mother's.
Page A21.


Review/Theater; Wasserstein: Comedy, Character, Reflection
"The Sisters Rosensweig" is Wendy Wasserstein's captivating look at three uncommon women and their quest for love, self-definition and fulfillment.
Unified by their sisterhood, they are as different as only sisters (or brothers) can be, as each tries to live up to an image imposed by her family.
At the same time, each performs her own act of rebellion -- or is it penitence?
Because of their disparities, they are heroines to one another.
Ms.
Wasserstein's generous group portrait (at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater) is a not only a comedy but also a play of character and shared reflection as the author confronts the question of why the sisters behave as they do.
The immediate answer is that they are Rosensweigs and are only doing what is expected of them.
The play offers sharp truths about what can divide relatives and what can draw them together.


An Array of Americana On a Hudson River Pier
The Americana at this year's Fall Antiques Show moves from the sublime to the outrageous in a fair laced with whimsy as well as such staples as quilts, weathervanes and painted furniture.
The excitement at this year's show, which continues through Sunday at the Hudson River pier at 52d Street, comes from some new discoveries that could enlarge the boundaries of folk art.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; BUSH, CAMPAIGNING IN JERSEY, ASSAILS CLINTON AND PEROT
President Bush worked New Jersey bottom to top today, straining to erase Bill Clinton's lead in a vital state with more roundhouse attacks on the Governor's record and tax proposals.
But the President aimed equally harsh invective at the rival he had treated, until now, almost gently: Ross Perot.
In a television interview in Raleigh, N.C., before flying north, Mr.
Bush said Mr.
Perot had "some nutty ideas" about the economy and had made "crazy statements" about supposed White House dealings with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Amtrak to Introduce High-Speed Rail Travel


A Baseball Harbinger From the Catbird Seat
The Brooklyn Dodgers were the Boys of Summer, and Red Barber was the voice of summer, a warm and gentle zephyr, carrying the smell of magnolias and the sound of catbirds, and news of a ringing double by Roy Campanella.
Oh-HO, DOC-tor!
That was as boisterous as this soft summer breeze allowed himself to be.
Walter Lanier (Red) Barber, who died yesterday at the age of 84, was a radio man, and his job was to inform, and he was the model for the few wise ones in his business today.


Theory Tying AIDS to Polio Vaccine Is Discounted
A group of expert scientists said yesterday that a provocative hypothesis that AIDS originated as a contaminant in polio vaccines was highly improbable.
The group nonetheless recommended that vaccine manufacturing be changed, just to be safe in the future.
Viruses for vaccines are currently grown in tissues taken from newly killed animals.
The group recommended that instead they be grown in cells that have been cultured in the laboratory and can be more easily checked for the presence of contaminating viruses.


Executive Changes
ALTA GOLD CO., Salt Lake City, a diversified mining firm, named John A. Bielun vice president of finance and administration.
DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO., Farmington Hills, Mich., a supplier of automobile seats and body trim, named Harry A. Lomason 2d chairman.
He remains president and chief executive.
In addition, James H. Hoey and Robert T. Hill were named senior vice presidents.


Health Monopoly
To the Editor:
Having been a member of a health maintenance organization for about 30 years, I can well agree with "The Bush-Clinton Health Reform," your favorable editorial of Oct. 10.


Major Union Is Charged In Payoffs
Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that the biggest union for restaurant workers in New York was controlled by organized crime.
They said that for years, in exchange for payoffs, the union allowed restaurant owners to pay reduced wages and to avoid paying into health and pension funds for waiters, busboys and other workers.
The charges were filed along with a negotiated settlement, in which the leaders of Local 100 of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees International Union agreed to sever all ties to the union.
At the same time, Judge Robert P. Patterson of Federal District Court in Manhattan ordered a a complete reorganization of the union and a wide-ranging investigation into the corruption charges.


Alliant Techsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


METRO DIGEST
IN DIAPER WARS, DISPOSABLE WINS
The war over how to cover American baby bottoms has ended in a rout.
Exhausted by their failure to convince parents that the nation's landfills have turned into reeking mountains of disposables, many of the most zealous environmentalists have simply stopped trying.
An effort to require New York hospitals to inform new parents about cotton diapers died in a day.
A1.
WHAT IT TAKES TO PUT BUSES ON THE ROAD
New York State transportation officials testified at a Federal hearing that a bus accident in July that killed six people might have been avoided if the bus had been inspected within the past year, as is required under state law.
But the state's bus industry is largely self-regulating and government can do little more to bring operators into compliance.
B5.


Frederic A. Gibbs, 89, Neurologist And Top Researcher on Epilepsy
Dr.
Frederic A. Gibbs, a neurologist who brought relief to untold numbers of epileptics, died Sunday at the Whitehall North convalescent home in Northbrook, Ill.
He was 89 years old.
Dr.
Gibbs, who lived in Wilmette, Ill., died after a brief illness resulting from a stroke, according to Gibbs Laboratories Inc. in Wheeling, Ill.


U.S. Judge Tells Daily News And Printers to Resume Talks
A bankruptcy hearing yesterday at which Mortimer B. Zuckerman was expected to win approval to buy The Daily News was adjourned until this afternoon so the printers' union could continue negotiating with Mr.
Zuckerman's advisers.
Mr.
Zuckerman's disputes with the printers' union and the Newspaper Guild are believed to be the two sole remaining obstacles to the long-awaited sale.
The paper filed for bankruptcy protection last Dec. 5, a month after the death of its owner, Robert Maxwell.


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Topics of The Times; An Overdue Box Office Hit
New York's theatergoers who try to order tickets by phone have always deserved better treatment.
For years, Ticketmaster and Tele-Charge have refused to tell callers the location of their seats.
Now Ticketmaster, which handles phone sales for the Nederlander organization, offers that basic courtesy to customers for six Broadway shows.
A standing ovation is in order.
And let's hope the competition -- Tele-Charge and the Shubert and Jujamcyn organizations -- hear the applause and get the message that attention must be paid to Broadway's loyal customers.
They shouldn't be made to endure long lines on cold, hot or rainy sidewalks waiting for a few stressful moments at the box office window where they must make quick, hard choices costing big bucks.


A Secret Memo Hints Bush Was Close to Hostage Deals
A classified White House memorandum dated Nov. 26, 1985, shows for the first time how national security aides involved George Bush in their plans to use Terry Waite, the Church of England envoy, to win the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon.
The memorandum was prepared for John M. Poindexter, then the deputy national security adviser, by Oliver L. North, a National Security Council aide.
It was written to familiarize then-Vice President Bush with Mr.
Waite's hostage-release activities in advance of Mr.
Bush's hastily arranged meeting with the Anglican emissary on the afternoon of Nov. 26.


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In 'Signal of Hope,' Sarajevo Utilities Are Restored
In a step hailed by the United Nations military commander here as "the first signal of hope" for the relief of 400,000 civilians trapped since April, repair crews drawn from both sides in the Sarajevo siege have worked together to restore electrical power to 70 percent of the city and running water to a still wider area.
The repairs, begun three weeks ago, started to bring electricity and water back to the city sporadically and in widely scattered areas last week.
But in the last 48 hours, as major transmission lines damaged in the fighting have been repaired, utilities denied to hospitals, private homes and many other places for weeks, and in some cases months, have been restored.


On My Mind; Call In the D.A.
Now we have it plain and clear: the complete denial of the Bush Administration to accusations that its policies helped strengthen Saddam Hussein before the gulf war.
President Bush put forward part of his case in the last Presidential debate.
He said that international investigations had found not "one single scintilla of evidence" that any U.S. technology had been involved in the creation of Iraq's nuclear capability.


At the Bar; Proliferation of portable practices leads to a proposal: Number all the lawyers.
Clifton E. Hall Jr. of New York was disbarred in 1985 for stealing money from clients' trust funds.
But rather than go up the river, he went across it -- the Hudson River, to be precise.
He moved his practice to New Jersey, where he was also licensed, and where he was disbarred again five years later.
A Nashville lawyer, James B. Bell, was suspended from practice in 1979 after being convicted of falsifying loan applications.
He moved his livelihood a bit farther afield, to Chicago.
Here, too, a change in venue evidently brought no change in ethical standards; earlier this year, an Illinois court disbarred Mr.
Bell for a fresh batch of malfeasance.


Hungry Somalis Still Die but Crops Grow, Too
Three months after the world turned its attention to this epicenter of starvation, a battered red truck and a bus with peeling blue paint made the rounds of this town today, picking up shrouded bodies left by the road in the early-morning ritual of corpse collection.
The day's tally was 65.
Almost anywhere else, 65 people killed by hunger overnight, their bodies so flimsy they could be lifted easily onto makeshift stretchers fashioned out of food bags, would be shocking.
But here it was a cause for hope, for it was by far the lowest number of daily deaths in Baidoa since statistics started to be kept in August.


Cone, the Hired Gun, Hopes to Fire Blanks
Less than two months ago, David Cone had a 13-7 record with the Mets, and both were going nowhere.
But now the 29-year-old right-hander is going to Atlanta with an opportunity to pitch the Toronto Blue Jays to Canada's first World Series championship in Saturday night's sixth game.
"I welcome the challenge," he was saying after the Blue Jays' 7-2 loss tonight.
"All things considered, this would be a tremendous topper to it all."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  VODKA IS HAUNTING RUSSIA  The Russian authorities say the problems associated with too much vodka-drinking -- crime, absenteeism, lost production, sickness -- are worse than they were before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign against alcohol in the 1980's.
A1  The best vodka is made from the purest grain alcohol.
A10  GLIMMERS OF HOPE IN SOMALIA  Relief workers in Somalia see signs of hope for famine victims: one town's daily death toll has dropped and rains are feeding newly planted fields.
But civil war continues to rage in other parts of the country.
A1  BUSH TO DECIDE VALUE OF PHOTOS  President Bush said he would have to determine the importance of thousands of wartime photos from Vietnamese archives before deciding to move toward diplomatic recognition of Hanoi.
A3  EMPEROR'S VISIT REVERBERATING  A visit to China by the Emperor of Japan is stirring domestic resentment against the Chinese Government: Beijing is being accused of neglecting to demand apologies and compensation from Tokyo.
A3  SYRIA REJECTS ISRAELI PLANS  Syria dismissed Israel's latest peace proposals as "nothing new," as Arab and Israeli negotiators effectively began marking time until the American Presidential election.
A6  BILLIONAIRE PREMIER FOR LEBANON  A Muslim billionaire with strong connections to Saudi Arabia was named Prime Minister of Lebanon in a move intended to help the country out of its worst economic crisis since independence 49 years ago.
A7  JOINT EFFORTS FOR SARAJEVO  Repair crews from both sides in the Sarajevo siege are working together to restore electricity to 70 percent of the city and water to a still wider area.
A9  The U.S. gave the U.N. evidence of human rights abuses by Serbs.
A9  U.N.
PACT FOR KURDISH AID  The U.N.
Secretary General has approved an agreement with Iraq that is being described as "a green light" to resume relief shipments to Kurds northern Iraq.
A11  Kayelitsha Journal: Installing toilets and adding people.
A4  National A12-23  TWIN TARGETS FOR BUSH  Continuing his campaign tour, the President attacked not only Governor Clinton but also Ross Perot, whom Mr.
Bush had been treating with kid gloves.
A1  Behind the Bush stump speech: a party in transition.
A20  Plans for a Baker speech on domestic policy were scrapped.
A20  Bush won't receive the tax bill before Election Day.
A14  Bush, a memo and Terry Waite's mission to Lebanon.
A14  The campaign has now led Bush to promote the Osprey.
A14  Where Bush and Clinton stand on education.
A22  CLINTON TWEAKS HIS FOE  Stumping again in the West for Republican and independent support, Governor Clinton noted a newspaper report that said officials had searched his mother's passport files.
"It turns out," he said, "that the State Department was not only rifling through my files but actually investigated my mother -- a well-known subversive." A21  Eagleburger expanded the inquiry into the Clinton-file search.A21  It has become the year of satellite-dish politics.
A21  In a further TV autobiography, Perot portrayed himself a hero.
A20  The power of the religious right is being tested in Colorado.
A22  MISSISSIPPI DESEGREGATION PLAN  The trustees of Mississippi's eight-campus public university system proposed a desegregation plan that would close one of the state's three historically black colleges and merge another with a predominantly white university.
A1  RACE AND VIOLENCE  The Government is planning a five-year effort to combat violence by using public health techniques to supplement the criminal justice system.
But the plan has come under attack by some prominent blacks, who condemn it as racist.
A12  THE SHUTTLE BLASTS OFF  Columbia roared aloft with six astronauts on a science mission whose main goal is to deploy a $4 million, two-foot satellite and inaugurate a new kind of booster rocket.
A16  'THE IDEAL EXCHANGE STUDENT'  Yoshihiro Hattori, the Japanese exchange student shot to death by a startled homeowner near Baton Rouge last weekend, danced his way through the brief two months he spent in America.
A12  TAMOXIFEN AND THE RISKS  Thousands of healthy women taking part in a large-scale trial to see whether a potent drug can prevent breast cancer are being inadequately informed of the risks, critics told a Congressional hearing.
A23  Experts found no evidence of AIDS as a vaccine contaminant.
A16  A defect in a third chromosome was linked to Alzheimer's.
A16  The death of 1,470 children was laid to an aspirin-warning delay.
A12  Law Page B16  Interfaith divorce: a parting conflict over the children's religion.
At the Bar  Metro Digest B1  POLITICAL BATTLE AND DINKINS AIDE  In a drama played out against a backdrop of New York City mayoral politics, Randy Daniels, a newly appointed Deputy Mayor, and a former female subordinate traded charges and countercharges yesterday over her allegations of sexual harassment.
A1  ALBANY POWER IN A BATTLE  After 24 years in the Senate, Ralph J. Marino, whose budget wrangling unraveled Mario M. Cuomo's Presidential ambition, according to the Governor, is fighting for political survival in his affluent Long Island district against an unlikely combination of wealthy conservative Republicans and a youthful and popular Democratic county legislator, James F. Gaughran, calling for change in Albany.
A1  DISPOSABLE DIAPERS WIN  The war over how to cover American baby bottoms has ended in a rout.
Exhausted by their failure to convince parents that the nation's landfills have turned into reeking mountains of disposable diapers, many of the most zealous environmentalists have simply stopped trying.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-33  Film: Antonioni series.
C1  Art: Basquiat at the Whitney.
C1  Fall antiques show.
C1  Sports B8-13  Obituaries B6-7  Red Barber, Hall of Fame baseball broadcaster.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials  Robert Abrams for New York.
Christopher Dodd for Connecticut.
Topics: Jim Garrison, survivor.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Call in the D.A.
Anthony Lewis: Time for Justice.
Fedor Burlatsky: Castro wanted a nuclear strike.
Jerome E. McElroy and Herman Goldstein: Ending police abuse.


Devils At Work Night And Day
The Devils had a productive day on and off the ice today.
In the afternoon, the team signed Peter Stastny, the highly respected and skillful Czechoslovak.
Then tonight, the Devils posted a 6-5 overtime victory over the Blackhawks.


Two for the Senate; Robert Abrams for New York
From the day Alfonse D'Amato took office as New York's junior Senator 12 years ago, voters had reason to feel uneasy.
He raised money with unbecoming aggressiveness.
He played blatantly, at times even foolishly, for headlines.
And he grandly claimed credit for routine grants New York would have gotten anyway.
Still, during his first term, the Long Island Republican managed to quiet the doubts by adeptly working the system to New York's benefit.
The skills that won him the moniker he so values -- "Senator Pothole" -- overcame the reservations even of some Democratic skeptics.
The Times supported his re-election in 1986, acknowledging his practical achievements, as did leading officials of the city and state.
"The next question," we said then, "is whether he will turn his shrewdness and tenacity to larger ends."


For Children
'The Alice-in-Wonderland Game'  Hartley House Theater 413 West 46th Street Clinton (212) 666-1716 Recommended ages: 3 to 7 Through Nov. 15
Alice slides into a game show in this version of the Lewis Carroll classic presented by On Stage Productions.
With the help of a fast-talking Thelonious T. White Rabbit, Alice is introduced to the Cheshire Cat (who has a perfect grin), the Blue Caterpillar (slinky in her silky blue costume), the Queen of Hearts (far too fond of seeing heads roll), the Mad Hatter (mean and spiteful), the March Hare and the Mock Turtle.


More Doubts on Stempel at G.M.
John G. Smale, the leader of a group of General Motors Corporation directors pushing for rapid change, fueled speculation today that the chairman of G.M. is about to lose his job.
Mr.
Smale issued a brief statement that said the board "has taken no action regarding any management changes at G.M," but he offered no support for Robert C. Stempel, the chairman and chief executive officer.


New Attitude, Not New Boss, The Key, G.M. Watchers Say
For years now, the General Motors Corporation has suffered from a lack of car buyers, but no lack of advice from stock analysts, customers, dealers and automotive experts.
For its part, G.M. has announced some drastic plans in the last year, shedding thousands of workers and closing several plants so that it can operate profitably with a smaller share of the American auto market.


Review/Film; 2 Sides of a Love Story
"The Whole Truth," a hard-working comedy with a homemade flavor, is about love and Lancaster, Pa., not necessarily in that order.
Shot in Lancaster with a distinctively low-gloss look, it presents the lovelorn Dan (played by Dan Cohen, who also wrote and co-directed the film, and is its executive producer).
The flimsy setup sends Dan to court to defend himself against harassment charges brought by Vanessa (Dyan Kane), an ex-date who now considers Dan a nuisance.
With their debate moderated by a gavel-swinging judge, the two litigants present conflicting versions of their brief romance.
Dan, a sometime nightclub comic who sells magicians' supplies ("the rabbits got into the flash powder," he complains), tends to have the rosier memories.
He recalls his own amorous efforts as charming, while Vanessa characterizes him as a relentless pest.


Cardinal Distribution Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about offshore oil and gas rigs that withstood Hurricane Andrew misidentified the owner of drilling equipment that caused a spill of 300 barrels of oil and described the equipment incorrectly.
It was a rig, not a platform, and the owner was Wilrig of Lafayette, La., not Texaco Inc.


Art Is a Heavy Burden to Bear


Timing of Big Pact Aids Bush in Pennsylvania
After years of adamant opposition to the V-22 Osprey aircraft, the Bush Administration is promoting it in a campaign pitch in Pennsylvania.
Vice President Dan Quayle is expected on Friday to give details about a $550 million contract to develop the military aircraft at the Boeing Helicopters plant in Ridley Township, outside Philadelphia.
The appearance comes 11 days before Election Day in a hotly contested state that has 23 electoral votes.


Scotia McLeod Settles With Ex-Executive
Scotia McLeod Inc., one of Canada's largest brokerage houses, has settled a dispute with Simon Israel, the former head of its mergers and acquisitons department in New York, the parties said today in a joint statement.
Terms were not disclosed.
In a case that went to arbitration before a panel of the New York Stock Exchange, Mr.
Israel said he had been dismissed in 1990 after complaining about what he said were anti-Semitic statements by executives at the firm's New York office.


Diner's Journal
Cafe Greco and Beyond
Cafe Greco, at 1390 Second Avenue, near 72d Street, (212) 737-4300, was a forerunner of the Mediterranean food trend when it opened in 1987.
For a while it did a credible job, but then the quality dropped off.
A recent visit found that the decline has accelerated.
The place looks shabby, with smudged yellow walls and dusty, crumb-strewn floors, made more obvious by the severe supermarket lighting.
Even the lackadaisical staff looked unkempt.


Stocks in Tokyo
Stocks closed higher here today.
On the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues ended up104.61 points, or 0.61 percent, to 17,117.65.
On Thursday, the index lost 128.48 points.


Central &amp; South West reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
A small piece of theater history is being made in a ramshackle fringe theater in a back room at the King's Head Pub in the Islington section of London.
A 1931 Noel Coward play, "Post-Mortem," which has never been professionally performed, opened there this month and is to run through Nov. 6.
The production was made possible largely by NEIL TENNANT, the Pet Shop Boys singer, who helped finance it.


Natalie Paine, 62, Administrator at CBS
Natalie deWolf Paine, a television production administrator at CBS News and at the Columbia University Seminars on Media and Society, died on Wednesday.
She was 62 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
Mrs.
Paine's death was reported by her husband, Kenneth Paine, who said she died of cancer at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.


Data Switch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Felix Stephan Huber John Good Gallery 532 Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Nov. 7


Profits at A.T.&amp;T. and Southwestern Bell
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the world's largest telecommunications company, said yesterday that it had a third-quarter profit of $963 million, or 72 cents a share, compared with a loss of $1.8 billion in the corresponding period a year ago.
The Southwestern Bell Corporation, a regional Bell company spun off from A.T.&amp; T. in 1984, reported yesterday that its third-quarter earnings rose 6.2 percent from a year ago.


Aldus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Akihito Visit Stirring Bitterness Among Chinese
The visit of Emperor Akihito of Japan beginning on Friday is meant to symbolize friendship between China and Japan, but already it is stirring bitter memories of Japanese war atrocities as well as a measure of resentment against the Chinese Government itself.
As the visit approaches, some Chinese are saying that their leaders are so eager for international recognition that they are neglecting to demand apologies and compensation from Tokyo.
In a country where nationalism has long been a potent force, there are few worse things that can be said about a government than that it does not stand up to Japan.
Trade Is Growing
Balancing these feelings, China is becoming increasingly aware of its need for Japanese friendship right now.
The Government is concerned about its prospects for international support, particularly if President Bush, who has encouraged cooperation with China, loses the election in November.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Jim Garrison, Survivor
Jim Garrison's public life was full of turbulence, defeats and comebacks even before the movie "J.F.K." revived his fixation with conspiracies to murder President Kennedy.
He won, lost, then won back the office of New Orleans District Attorney.
He lost, then won election to the state bench where he served until shortly before his death this week at age 71.
His last revival was as turbulent as any.
The film brought new attention to his crusade to discredit the Warren Commission's finding that Lee Harvey Oswald alone killed the President.
It also served as a reminder that he had used extreme methods to make his case.


Review/Concert; A Scaled-Back Visit From the Old World
Expectations were high in Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night.
The La Scala Orchestra and Chorus was in town for the first time since 1976.
This visit, meant to commemorate Columbus's exploratory voyage, was to have been part of a full-scale national tour by the Milanese opera company, including four fully staged opera productions here in New York.
It was meant to be an offering for the New World from the Old, by an institution at the center of the Italian operatic tradition.
But economic problems and changes in the Italian Government (which picked up the tab for the tour), threw the plans into disarray.
The proposed tour of a half-dozen cities shrank to one, and the stagings were jettisoned.
What was left when the checks cleared were two performances of Verdi's Requiem (the second will be tonight at Carnegie Hall), conducted by the company's music director, Riccardo Muti.
Though Mr.
Muti has been heard quite often here in recent years, he left his post as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra last season; this was the first time he was heard in New York leading the La Scala company.


Strange School Ties
For a decade, the yellow-brick high school in East New York had been the center of Barbara Mendez's life.
It was where she had grown up as a student, where she had met her husband, where she had won a special teaching apprenticeship and where she had become a teacher.
And when everything seemed to turn sour -- her marriage crumbling and her health deteriorating from multiple sclerosis -- it was at the school, the police now say, that the young woman recruited a student to take her life.
Ms.
Mendez, a 23-year-old machine-shop teacher, had long been a protege of the faculty at the East New York High School of Transit Technology in Brooklyn.
She had been selected by her teachers in 1987 for a union-initiated program to train vocational students to become teachers and return to the high schools where they had studied.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: James Baker; Off-Again, On-Again Speech Is Off, Again
White House officials said today that they had scrapped plans for James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, to give a speech outlining the future domestic policies of the Bush Administration.
They said they feared that if Mr.
Baker gave such a speech, it would only raise questions why Mr.
Bush was not doing it himself.
The proposed Baker speech has had more ups and downs than the Arab-Israeli peace talks that Mr.
Baker helped to organize as Secretary of State.
In a period of two weeks the speech has been announced, postponed, canceled, revived and now canceled again, making it certainly one of the most talked-about speeches never delivered in recent memory.


Nothing's Less Simple Than a War Crimes Court
To the Editor:
The United States circulated to Security Council members a document proposing a Balkan war-crimes panel as a first step toward prosecuting accused war criminals, "perhaps before an international tribunal" on the model of Nuremberg, and the Security Council has adopted the proposed resolution (front page, Oct. 7).
But until decisions are made about who selects the judges and the prosecuting authorities, and how prosecutorial discretion can avoid polemical prosecutions, it seems hollow.


Dinkins Aide Trades Charges With Woman Over Advances
In a tangled, emotional drama played out against a backdrop of New York City mayoral politics, a newly appointed Deputy Mayor and a former female subordinate traded charges and countercharges yesterday over her allegations of sexual harassment.
The public surfacing of the five-year-old dispute between the city official, Randy Daniels, and his former assistant, Barbara Wood, reverberated against the mayoral ambitions of their former employer, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, and the man he would like to unseat, Mayor David N. Dinkins.





Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kurvers Demoted By the Islanders
The Islanders yesterday sent TOM KURVERS to their minor league team, the Capital District Islanders.
Kurvers, a veteran defenseman and power-play specialist, is also the team representative for the National Hockey League Players Association, a coincidence not overlooked by several players at practice yesterday as the team prepared for tonight's visit to the Capital Center and a game against the Washington Capitals.
Kurvers is also headed for a salary arbitration with the team management.
In three games this season, Kurvers has no goals and two assists.
He has sat out four games, and the team's power play has been struggling.
Tuesday night, in a 4-3 victory over Philadelphia, the Islanders scored one goal in eight times with the man advantage.
DON MALONEY, the Islanders' general manager, said he has been talking with several teams about a trade for Kurvers.


Blacks and Whites Condemn Plan To Integrate Mississippi Campuses
The trustees of Mississippi's eight-campus public university system today proposed a desegregation plan to a Federal District Court here that would close one of the state's three historically black colleges and merge another with a predominantly white university.
The United States Supreme Court ruled in June that Mississippi had not done enough to eliminate racial segregation in its state university system, and sent the case back to the lower court to hear new desegregation proposals.
Judge Neal B. Biggers Jr., who heard arguments for and against the proposal today, set no timetable for his decision.


Braves Nullify a Nemesis And Escape Across Border
It wasn't exactly that familiarity bred contempt, but it certainly has produced a certain amount of comfort among the Atlanta Braves in showdowns with onetime nemesis Jack Morris.
For two consecutive World Series, Braves batters have butted heads with the right-hander, first when playing the Minnesota Twins and now against the Toronto Blue Jays.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM ON EGYPT, New York University, Tishman Auditorium, 40 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Uris Auditorium, Fifth Avenue and 81st Street.
A two-day symposium on the contributions of American Egyptologists to the understanding of Egyptian archeology and literature, with scholars.
Sponsored by the American Research Center in Egypt.
Tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. at N.Y.U.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Met.
Admission: $85; $45 for members of the research center; $30 for students.
Information: (212) 998-7133 or 998-8890.
CARIBBEAN POETRY FESTIVAL, National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
A readings by poets from the Caribbean, featuring Derek Walcott, the winner of this year's Nobel Prize in Literature; Kamau Brathwaite; Hollis Liverpool; Edouard Glissant; Lorna Goodison; Cynthia James; Linton Kwesi Johnson; M. Nourbese Philip, and Pedro Pietri.
Sponsored by the Poetry Society of America.
Today at 7 P.M.
Admission: $10; $6 for members of the Poetry Society.
Information: (212) 254-9628.


How Vodka Is Produced
Galina I. Zaikanova, a chemist, is director of the laboratory at the Kristall distillery, which makes most of Moscow's vodka and well-known exports like Stolichnaya.
Each vodka has its own recipe, she says, but the main ingredients are simple: alcohol and water.
The best vodka is made from the purest grain alcohol, distilled from wheat or rye with a high starch content.


Critic's Notebook; Italy's Master Of Despair
WHEN Michelangelo Antonioni's cinematic masterpiece "L'Avventura" opened in New York City in the spring of 1961, art-film audiences identified passionately with a mood that had never been expressed on the screen with such poetic intensity.
Call it existential angst, erotic despair, whatever.
The film contemplated the modern world with a heart that was heavy and an eye that arranged the Italian landscape and architecture into exquisitely composed, if somber, visual metaphors for a profound spiritual malaise.
"L'Avventura" ("The Adventure") begins with a yachting trip by a group of friends to an uninhabited island off the coast of Sicily.
During the outing, one of the guests, a young woman named Anna, inexplicably disappears.
After a search that reveals no traces of her, the party returns to the mainland, where everyone soon forgets about her and the mystery is left unsolved.


Harry Williamson, 80, a Top Spy For the British, Prized by Hitler
Harry Williamson, a celebrated World War II double agent for Britain who was so successful that he won Hitler's Iron Cross award, died on Monday at a hospital in Watford, England, where he lived.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Sears Posts First Loss Since 1933
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said today that it lost $833.7 million in the third quarter, citing huge losses at its Allstate Insurance subsidiary because of Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and the costs of compensating consumers for unnencessary auto repair work.
The loss was the first to be reported by Sears since 1933, and it contrasted sharply to the company's net income of $229.2 million, or 67 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1991.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Textron Earnings Up
Textron Inc. said today that profits rose 15 percent in the third quarter, with gains in its commercial products and financial services sectors more than offsetting a loss in aerospace technology.
Net income rose to $86.8 million, or 98 cents a share, compared with $75.7 million, or 86 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenues for the quarter were $2 billion, up 7 percent from $1.9 billion.
Textron shares rose 12.5 cents today, to $37.25 in New York Stock Exchange trading.


Walter T. Lucking; Executive, 78
Walter T. Lucking, a former head of the Hackensack Water Company in New Jersey, died on Tuesday in the John C. Lincoln Memorial Hospital in Phoenix.
He was 78 years old and lived in Phoenix.
His death was reported by Martha Green, a spokeswoman for the Hackensack Water Company, who said Mr.
Lucking had died of emphysema.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
C. W. Post
Sean Sharkey, the St.
John's quarterback, might pay a little extra attention tonight against C. W. Post at Redmen Field in Queens.
The Pioneers are going to come at Sharkey with blitzes from inside and outside.
That was the formula against Iona's Billy Hyland last week and the Gaels' passer never had a chance.
There were 13 sacks by Post defenders and three passes intercepted in a 24-0 victory.
Tailback Joe Brusca, who had 218 yards rushing against Iona, will again be the spearhead of the Post offense.
St.
John's has its own super running back in Tony Russo, who has gained 820 yards in six games.


Delta Air Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thrifty Switches To CME KHBB
Thrifty Rent-A-Car System in Tulsa, Okla., said yesterday that it had moved its estimated $5.5 million account to CME KHBB Advertising in New York from Advertising Inc. in Tulsa, following a review.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's promise to freeze New York City's general corporate tax for the next four years described the city's progressive personal income tax incorrectly.
It is not the only such tax; at least one other city, Yonkers, has one.


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A statement by a G.M. director has added to speculation that the auto maker's chairman, Robert C. Stempel, may be asked to step aside.
The statement said the board "has taken no action regarding any management changes at G.M," but it offered no support for Mr.
Stempel.  [ Page D1. ]


Car Thieves Targeted
Law-enforcement authorities in Essex and Union counties announced new programs today to combat "carjacking" -- the armed robbery of motorists and the theft of their cars.
James F. Mulvihill, the Essex County Prosecutor, and Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., the Union County Prosecutor, pledged that every defendant 14 years old or older who is charged with the crime would be tried as an adult.


COMPANY NEWS: If I Were Defense Secretary . . .; An Essay Contest On the Peace Dividend
Peace contractors might never earn as much as military contractors, but a group of economists hopes to spread the rewards a bit more evenly.
Economists Allied for Arms Reduction, an international group based in New York, is pledging $25,000 for the best essay on how to convert from a military economy to a peacetime economy.
The organization hopes to prompt more thought about how Pentagon cutbacks can actually further economic growth, countering those who marshal economic arguments against a leaner military.
Considering the context, the prize money may not seem much of a motivator.
That $25,000 might not buy more than a few wrenches or toilet seats.


Calvin Klein Turns to Television
The provocative new advertising campaign for Calvin Klein Inc. in New York, featuring bare-chested images of the rap singer Marky Mark and the model Kate Moss, is adding television to the media mix.
Two commercials, directed by the photographer Herb Ritts, begin running Saturday on MTV, joining a series of print advertisements now appearing in many magazines.


American Medical Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Questions Raised on Drug Used in Breast Cancer Study
Thousands of healthy women taking part in a new large-scale trial to see if a potent drug can prevent breast cancer are being inadequately informed of the risks, critics asserted today at a Congressional hearing.
Opponents of the $60 million Federal study, designed to see if daily doses of the drug, tamoxifen, can prevent breast cancer in women with greater than normal risk of developing the disease, said the Government had not informed participants of recent research that cast doubts on the drug's safety.


No More Moral Victories: Braves Pitchers Get Real Thing
There have been precious few positive constants for the Atlanta Braves in the 1992 World Series.
Hitters' production ebbed, relievers stumbled, base runners ran into outs, batters sometimes used strange and faulty judgment at the plate.
But the one fraternity that could never be accused of missing one beat were the Braves' starting pitchers.
Other than moral victories, Tom Glavine, Steve Avery and John Smoltz might not have had much to show for their first efforts and, in Glavine's case, his second effort, against the Toronto Blue Jays.
But they knew they had, for the most part, done what was asked, only to be left without victories because the Atlanta offensive troops were registering averages well below baseball's infamous Mendoza line (so-called because Mario Mendoza, a former Pittsburgh infielder, hardly ever pulled above the .200 mark he made famous).
Reward Long Overdue
But lost in the Atlanta misery over its .185 batting average after four games was the fact that Smoltz, Glavine and Avery had often been brilliant and never slipped into mediocrity.
Tonight, that kind of pitching grit was finally rewarded.
Smoltz, once seriously competing with Glavine for the most snake-bitten player "honors" in the Series, finally saw his teammates roar around the bases in support, assuring his 7-2 victory.


Among the Earth Baby Set, Disposable Diapers Are Back
The war over how to cover American baby bottoms has ended in a rout.
Exhausted by their failure to convince parents that the nation's landfills have turned into reeking mountains of disposable diapers, many of the most zealous environmentalists have simply stopped trying.


I Shall Not Return, the Giants' Moore Declares
This should not come as a surprise.
Another Giant is unhappy.
Another Giant has harsh words about the coaching staff.
And this Giant -- right guard Eric Moore -- has decided that he wants out.
Today, Moore, a five-year veteran lineman, told reporters that he will not be wearing a Giants uniform next season.
He doesn't care if he has another year remaining on his contract.
He's not coming back.


Commonwealth Energy System reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Cards' Smith Is Golden for 13th Time
Ozzie Smith today was voted his 13th straight Gold Glove Award for his fielding prowess at shortstop, setting a National League record.
Then he gracefully fielded questions about his future with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Smith, who will be 38 years old next season, said he expected to become a free agent when the World Series ends because he did not think the Cardinals would make him a contract offer.


Glenn Appleyard, 70, Expert on 'Dial It' Lines
Glenn N. Appleyard, a leader in creating "dial it" telephone services, died on Wednesday at his home in Middletown, N.J.
He was 70 years old and had also lived in Boca Raton, Fla.
His son Glenn Jr., of Old Greenwich, Conn., said Mr.
Appleyard had died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.


TV Ratings Drop for Game 4
After peaking on Tuesday night with a 20.8 Nielsen rating for Game 3 of the World Series, CBS's broadcast of Game 4 sagged to an 18.9, 17 percent below the 22.9 measure for the comparable game last year between the Atlanta Braves and the Minnesota Twins.
Through the first four games, CBS's average rating stands at 18.9, down 12 percent from last season's 21.5.
Each rating point equals 931,000 United States television households.


Review/Art; Basquiat: Man For His Decade
JEAN-MICHEL BASQUIAT'S art may deserve a more thoughtful retrospective than the one that opens today at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
But this aggressive, jam-packed survey of 100 paintings and drawings -- artworks that are themselves often dense with the artist's jagged, glowering blend of language and image -- will give everyone plenty to think about.
The show, which includes many paintings that have not been seen in New York City before, is one of the better retrospectives that the Whitney has mustered in recent years, and it affords the first extended opportunity to assess one of the most sensationalized careers of the now notorious 1980's.
Arranged chronologically, it begins with the bang of the 1981 paintings, which made Basquiat an almost instant success.
It ends with a relative whimper, a handful of paintings from 1987 and 1988, the last two years of the artist's life, when he became increasingly distracted by personal problems.


U.N. Chief in Accord With Iraqis On Food and Medicine for Kurds
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has approved an agreement with Iraq that a United Nations official described as "a green light" to resume relief shipments to northern Kurds.
The agreement, which does not need Security Council approval, was signed today by Jan Eliasson, United Nations Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Nizar Hamdoun, Iraq's United Nations representative, a United Nations spokesman said.


TV Weekend; Friends Who Are Odd (Good Thing They're Rich)
"Masterpiece Theater" seems determined this season to grab every veteran actor in England for a dazzling twirl or two across the tube.
Last week, John Gielgud, Wendy Hiller and Patrick McGoohan endowed "The Best of Friends" with a shrewd elegance born of experience.
Sunday, on Channel 13 at 9 P.M., the youngest cast members in an adaptation of Muriel Spark's novel "Memento Mori" are Maggie Smith, in her late 50's, and Zoe Wanamaker, in her early 40's.
The rest are probably, give or take a couple of years, octogenarians, each and every one a wicked scene-stealer.


Dispute Threatens U.S. Plan on Violence
The Department of Health and Human Services is planning a five-year effort to combat violence in America the way it would fight an epidemic of smallpox, using public health techniques to supplement the criminal justice system.
But the Government's plans, known loosely as the violence initiative, have come under sharp attack by a crusading Maryland psychiatrist and some prominent blacks who say the effort is racist and genocidal.


Debentures Set By Fannie Mae
The Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae, priced a total of $1.3 billion yesterday in 5-year and 10-year debentures at par through various securities dealers.
For $800 million of 6.05 percent debentures due 1997, the yield will be about 23 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
These securities, underwriters said, would be redeemable on or after Oct. 27, 1995, with the first interest payment on April 27, 1993.


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Early Rauschenberg, Before He Became Infamous
The outstanding exhibition of Robert Rauschenberg's early works, which opens tomorrow at the Guggenheim Museum's SoHo branch, is full of the artist's spirit of invention and cheerful risk-taking.
Every young artist should see it.
In the years under review, 1949 to 1954, Mr.
Rauschenberg had yet to acquire the reputation of cultural saboteur for producing so-called combines like "Monogram," with its automobile tire wrapped like a Hula Hoop around a stuffed Angora goat.
But he was already turning out one work after another of remarkable daring, wit and energy.
And these works make clear that far from being a cynic or ironist merely bent on tweaking the establishment, Mr.
Rauschenberg from the beginning was an optimist wide open to new and divergent ideas, whether they came from the Bauhaus via Josef Albers, or from the New York School via Willem de Kooning and Robert Motherwell, or from the singular example of his friend and sometime mentor John Cage.


COMPANY NEWS
CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP., Philadelphia, is offering to buy back its stock from holders of fewer than 100 shares as of Oct. 21.
Holders pay no brokerage fee.
The offer expires Nov. 20.
KEYCORP, Albany, definitively agreed to buy Home Federal Savings Bank, Fort Collins, Colo., for $32 a share, or $17.6 million.


Khayelitsha Journal; Suburb for the Poor: Houses? Who Needs Houses?
From his front garden, Maxwell Qobo surveys a neighborhood that is, to a connoisseur of infrastructure, a model middle-class suburb.
The roads are immaculate expanses of white-lined asphalt, with perfect curbs and sidewalks.
The sewers are hidden and efficient, the streetlights bright and unvandalized, and the electric and telephone cables buried, eco-conscientiously, underground.


First Financial Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York Hospitals Faltering on TB, State Says
New York City hospitals are trying hard to respond to a resurgence of tuberculosis, but they are not doing well enough, a report by the State Health Department has found.
The report on a survey of 216 suspected cases at 20 hospitals found that more than 20 percent of the patients who have TB do not have their cases diagnosed until they have been in the hospital, and have been able to mingle with other patients, for more than 24 hours.


Blockbuster Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Argentina Turns Big Guns on Journalists
To the Editor:
"Argentina Retreats From Democracy" (Op-Ed, Oct. 3) by Horacio Verbitsky discusses President Carlos Saul Menem's efforts to undermine the independence of Argentina's judiciary and attack the press, but hardly mentions the proceedings against Mr.
Verbitsky himself, one of the nation's leading investigative journalists.


Aztar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Sun Microsystems Sales Up, But Its Earnings Drop 82%
Sun Microsystems today reported an 82 percent decline in earnings for its first quarter, but financial analysts said the company had met revenue targets and was poised to increase its market share.
The maker of engineering and scientific work stations, based in Mountain View, Calif., said it had revenue of $855.9 million, an increase of 13 percent from $754.9 million in the comparable period last year.
But net income fell to $4.8 million, or 5 cents a share, from $26.8 million, or 27 cents a share.


Corrections
An article yesterday about elderly entertainers misidentified the agency that allocates money for entertainers working for New York City.
It is the New York City Department for the Aging.


Pepsico Reaches Accord For Expansion in Ukraine
Pepsico Inc. signed an agreement yesterday that would greatly expand its presence in Ukraine, the second-most-heavily populated republic in the former Soviet Union.
The deal calls for Pepsico to use the proceeds from selling $1 billion worth of double-hull tankers built with Ukrainian joint-venture partners to build 100 Pizza Huts and 5 new Pepsi bottling plants in the country, whose population and size are roughly the same as in France.


Prosecutor Won't Charge Husband in Amy Fisher Case
Citing insufficient evidence and Amy Fisher's lack of credibility, District Attorney Denis Dillon announced today that he would not bring charges against Joseph Buttafuoco, the 36-year-old with whom Miss Fisher said she had an affair before she shot his wife.
Mr.
Dillon added at a news conference this morning: "We determined that the Buttafuoco family had suffered enough. To continue the investigation would only bring greater suffering to Mrs. Buttafuoco." A bullet remains lodged in the back of Mary Jo Buttafuoco's neck, and she has some facial paralysis.


He's Not a Lawyer, but if Ruffled, He's Likely to Sue; It All Started Over a Custody Case, and Now a Judge Has Barred Him From More Suits
In the last 17 years, Alfred Spremo Jr. has sued his neighbor, a mattress maker, a child-care agency, the company that repossessed his car, the shop that repaired his videocassette recorder, at least a dozen lawyers including his own and more than 30 state and Federal judges.
In 1986, he sued his mother.


3 Oil Companies Post Mixed Results
Three oil companies reported mixed quarterly results yesterday.
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said earnings declined 64.3 percent and Ashland Oil Inc. posted a $103 million loss.
But the Amerada Hess Corporation said it earned $8.7 million, in contrast to a loss of $7.5 million in the 1991 quarter.


Baseball as Politics: Chasing Wild Pitches
In the boonies this week, eating breakfast on drugstore countertops, I kept making errors while fielding that second cuppa question: "Who you think's gonna win?"
I'd start to say, "It's all pitching," and stop as eyes rolled up and down the counter.
Someone would clear a throat and say, "For president."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle  TODAY: 7:10 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today Show." SUNDAY: 11 A.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Business World."


Books of The Times; Who Said What and What They Said
Familiar Quotations  A Collection of Passages, Phrases and Proverbs Traced to Their Sources in Ancient and Modern Literature 16th Edition  By John Bartlett  Justin Kaplan, general editor. 1,405 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $40.
The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations  Fourth Edition  Edited by Angela Partington. 1,061 pages.
Oxford University Press. $35.
The New York Public Library Book of 20th-Century American Quotations  Edited by Stephen Donadio, Joan Smith, Susan Mesner and Rebecca Davison. 622 pages.
Stonesong Press/Warner Books.
It's too soon to guess which one-liners will become part of our national memory after the 1992 Presidential campaign.
Meantime, the newly revised 16th edition of Bartlett's Familiar Quotations is filled with enough political wisdom to please even the most professional speech writer and spin meister.
Justin Kaplan, the biographer of Walt Whitman and Mark Twain, has performed a service for students of language and literature by bringing Bartlett's up to date for almost the rest of the 20th century.
As general editor, he has shaken up good old Bartlett's (the first edition came out in 1855) and let its "self-evident propositions, ceremonial boilerplate, gassy platitudes and fortune-cookie sentiments" fall out.
While retaining material essential to our culture -- Shakespeare leads with 1,960 quotations and the Bible follows with 1,591 -- he has added hundreds of items from the movies, books, theater, television (which turned out to be a slim source of originality), public affairs and politics.


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bank of England Criticized on B.C.C.I.
The Bank of England was neither alert nor inquisitive enough in responding to the huge fraud that led to the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a special British inquiry whose results were released today found.
The 15-month investigation, carried out by Lord Justice Bingham, a senior judge, recommended sharpening internal bank procedures and regulatory controls with an eye to tighter supervison of banks that cloak their operations in secrecy.


Lead Testing Continues in Brooklyn


Critic's Choice; From Clubs To Town Hall For a Gala
The economically fragile world of cabaret has always needed all the help it can get.
And in the Mabel Mercer Foundation, an organization devoted to nurturing and showcasing cabaret talent, it has found an invaluable supporter.
For the last three years, the foundation, established by Donald F. Smith, a cabaret promoter and friend of Mabel Mercer, has sponsored an annual fall convention that brings together performers and club owners from around the country.
The focus of the convention is a series of low-priced gala concerts at Town Hall whose goal is to attract a young urban audience.
This year's events began at Town Hall on Wednesday with a tribute to Sylvia Syms, and continued yesterday evening with a songwriters' showcase.
This evening's concert is a tribute to Mae Barnes, a cabaret legend who will give a rare performance.
Miss Barnes, who is now 85 years old, became a fixture in the New York nightclub scene in the late 1930's, and during the 50's appeared regularly at the Bon Soir in Greenwich Village.
She is known for her robust voice, her mischievous patter and her signature song, "I Ain't Gonna Be No Topsy," a playful affirmation of black pride that was ahead of its time.


Businessman to Lead New Lebanese Cabinet
Rafik al-Hariri, a Muslim billionaire with strong connections to Saudi Arabia, was named Prime Minister of Lebanon today in a move intended to help the country out of its worst economic crisis since independence 49 years ago.
President Elias Hrawi issued a decree asking the 48-year-old businessman to form a Cabinet after the new Parliament is organized.
The 128-member legislature held its first session on Tuesday; consultations on a Cabinet are to begin Monday.


In 'Signal of Hope,' Sarajevo Utilities Are Restored; Yugoslav in Appeal
The Yugoslav Prime Minister reiterated his call for an end to the United Nations trade embargo against his country today, saying it weakened him in his political struggle against the forces of reactionary Serbian nationalism.
The Prime Minister, Milan Panic, also warned that continuing the blockade would cost the West a lot of money because it would be obliged to begin an expensive new humanitarian relief operation to help his people this winter as supplies run low.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Town Meeting; Bush Relishes Being on Stage, Alone in Front of an Audience
With the debates behind him, President Bush arranged to have the television stage to himself this evening as he answered the questions of 175 New Jersey residents for an hour.
Mr.
Bush appeared on WWOR-TV's "American Again" program in a town-meeting format suggested by White House aides who had called the station last week to ask for the program.
Although the station broadcasts in the New York metropolitan area, its programs go out over a cable network to 26 million homes in 49 states and to Puerto Rico, Guam and the Virgin Islands.
Only Idaho is not a member.


Cleavon Little, Award-Winning Actor, Dies at 53
Cleavon Little, the actor best remembered for his role as a black sheriff hired to save a redneck town in Mel Brooks's 1974 comedy "Blazing Saddles," died yesterday at his home in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
He was 53 years old.
He died of colon cancer, said David C. Pollick, his publicity agent in Los Angeles.


Inquiry on Effort to Find Files on Clinton's Mother
Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger today ordered an investigation to see if the department had done anything wrong in searching its files for information relating to Gov.
Bill Clinton's mother.
The State Department officials, confirming a report in The Washington Post, said they had made the search after receiving a request for information about Governor Clinton.


Nothing's Less Simple Than a War Crimes Court; A Great Opportunity
To the Editor:
The Security Council is to be congratulated for taking the first step to halt "ethnic cleansing" and other crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
The resolution of Oct. 6, asking the Secretary General to establish a commission of experts to gather evidence of war crimes, is only a beginning.
Without an impartial court to try the accused, the condemnation of their crimes would mock the victims.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Presents His Autobiography, Part II, in 30-Minute TV Program
Ross Perot portrayed himself as a self-effacing civic and corporate hero tonight in the second half of a television autobiography that highlighted the formative years of his computer company, his work on behalf of American prisoners of war in Vietnam, his company's rescue of two employees held hostage in Iran, and his philanthropy for education projects.
The 30-minute presentation, the fourth of its kind during Mr.
Perot's revived Presidential campaign, was broadcast on ABC, opposite the fifth game of the World Series.
It cost $370,000.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Penguins Win Again
Mario Lemieux scored three goals to extend his goal-scoring streak to eight games and the Pittsburgh Penguins remained undefeated with a 9-6 victory over the visiting Detroit Red Wings last night.
Lemieux has at least 2 points in every game this season.
He leads the National Hockey League with 27 points, 11 goals and 16 assists.
It was his 28th career hat trick and third five-point game this season.
Lemieux scored with 1 minute 32 seconds left in the game to offset a power-play goal by Dino Ciccarelli.
Rick Tocchet scored midway through the third period and Shawn McEachern scored twice in eight seconds as the defending Stanley Cup champions improved their Patrick Division-leading record to 6-0-2.
Lemieux is one short of the Penguins record for goals in consecutive games.
Paul Gardner had 10 goals in nine consecutive games from Jan. 23 to Feb. 6, 1982. (AP) Whalers 5, Senators 1: In Ottawa, Pat Verbeek scored two goals 25 seconds apart and added an assist as Hartford handed the expansion Senators their sixth straight loss.
Murray Craven also had a goal and two assists for the Whalers, while Nick Kypreos and Randy Cunneyworth each scored a goal.
The Whalers improved their record to 3-5-0, with two of their three victories coming at the expense of their troubled Adams Division expansion rival.
Ottawa got its goal from Jamie Baker on a power play late in the third period.
The Senators haven't won since opening their first season with a victory over the Montreal Canadiens at the Civic Center. ws(AP)


Clinton: Attacking Policy on Foreign Businesses
The Clinton campaign began broadcasting this 30-second commercial in select markets yesterday.
The campaign refused to give specifics about where it will appear.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with black letters on a white screen and the announcer says, "This is the $825 billion question."
Cuts to video of foreign cars rolling off the boat after shipment.
These words appear on bottom of the screen: "Foreign corporations in U.S. took in $825 billion. IRS Bulletin, 4/8/92."


Student's Trust in People Proved Fatal
Yoshihiro Hattori was a young man who danced his way through the brief two months he spent in America.
Lithe and athletic, the 16-year-old Japanese exchange student danced in the halls of McKinley High and danced in the roomy kitchen of his American host.
"What Yoshi liked to do was move," Holley Haymaker remembered sadly this week, sitting in the spacious, comfortable house that was the young man's temporary home here.
Not speaking much English, he expressed himself through playful movement.
On Saturday, the trusting Yoshihiro Hattori moved, fatally, toward Rodney Peairs, a frightened suburban householder whose door he had mistaken for another.
Mr.
Peairs aimed his .44-Magnum pistol at Yoshi and shot him dead.


Topics of The Times; State Aid for Keeping Businesses
In the Letters column today, Vincent Tese, New York State's Director of Economic Development, points with justifiable pride to the state's contributions toward keeping critical businesses in New York City.
State officials have participated in the delicate negotiations with companies that are considering leaving the city.
And they have offered substantial financial incentives to complement those granted by the city.


On Stage, and Off
New From Hwang
A Broadway season off to a lethargic start is showing a sign or two of life.
"It looks like we'll have a season after all," Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn Theaters, said this week.
The occasion for his optimism was the announcement that David Henry Hwang's new play, "Face Value," would begin previews on March 9 at, as expected, a Jujamcyn house.
He wouldn't say which one, but a process of elimination leads to the O'Neill.
"Guys and Dolls" and "Jelly's Last Jam" currently occupy, respectively, the Martin Beck and the Virginia.
The Walter Kerr is probably too small for a production budgeted at $2 million.
The fifth Jujamcyn theater, the St.
James, was among four scouted last week by the director and set designer of "Tommy," the rock opera most recently at the La Jolla Playhouse in California.
Further, Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of "Five Guys Named Moe," which is at the O'Neill, has told Mr.
Landesman that though he would like to keep the show on Broadway, he would consider moving it to another house in the spring.


Doskocil Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Panel Gives Charter Ideas to S.I. Secessionists
If Staten Islanders choose to pull away from the four other boroughs, they should hang onto the city's form of government, a state commission said yesterday as it released the first draft of a charter for a potential City of Staten Island.
The draft calls for a strong mayor, a strong 15-member City Council and a comptroller -- not much different from the big-brother government across the bay.


Abroad at Home; Time for Justice
The entire Federal Government is ripe for reform.
But of all the agencies in Washington, the one that most desperately needs renewal is the Department of Justice.
For many years, through Administrations of different parties, the Justice Department held to a tradition of excellence and incorruptibility.
It attracted the brightest law school graduates.
It took the long view of the law, seeking not just to win cases but to live up to its motto that the United States prevails when justice is done.


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Fiserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


The Draft of 1863
To the Editor:
During the Civil War, the North adopted a conscription act March 3, 1863, providing that all able-bodied men 20 to 45 years old were subject to being drafted for three years.
The law also provided that a man could pay a "commutation fee" of $300 or hire a substitute to serve in his place.
It was a rich man's law, but apparently no opprobrium attached to those who exercised the two options.


Mideast Talks Settle Into a Wait for the U.S. Vote
Syria dismissed Israel's latest peace proposals today as "nothing new," as all the Arab and Israeli negotiators settled into a mode of marking time until the American election.
"There is no change in the situation," said Mouwafak al-Allaf, the chief Syrian negotiator.
"The gap concerning the essential issues is still very wide."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"DANCING AT LUGHNASA," Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street.
Brian Friel's drama about about five unmarried sisters and their missionary brother, set in Ireland in the 1930's.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $45.
Information: 239-6200.


U.S. BANKRUPTCY JUDGE CLEARS PHAR-MOR FINANCING PACT
A Federal bankruptcy judge approved a financing agreement yesterday that is intended to allow Phar-Mor Inc. to retain control of its operations.
Judge William Bodoh's order guarantees the discount drugstore chain will have the money it needs to buy merchandise, especially during the Christmas season.
But more important, Phar-Mor officials said, the agreement should calm vendors who have been reluctant to offer credit to Phar-Mor.
Under the pact, Phar-Mor will get a $150 million line of credit from a group of 22 banks and 11 insurers -- the group providing Phar-Mor its current interim financing.


Richard P. Hunt, 70, a Journalist In the Middle East and South Asia
Richard P. Hunt, a retired foreign correspondent for newspapers, radio and television, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.
He died of complications of cancer, his family said yesterday.


Honors for Blind Man and His Dog


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Vulnerable, Bush Makes A Last Effort to Connect
A Presidential candidate's stump speech in the final days of the campaign is a freeze frame of the man, the party and the times, and so it was for President Bush as he rolled through the South this week.
Amidst the one-liners, the sound bites and the applause lines was the portrait of a party in transition, trying to retrofit itself for life after the cold war, for a nation obsessed with the problems at home.
Behind the attack lines and the digs at his opponent was a President making one last attempt to connect with a restless electorate, a President who is offering, as much as any big idea or philosophy, himself.


Two Officers Are Arrested In a Beating
Two police officers were charged yesterday in the beating of a Bronx man last week, the police said.
Officers Thomas McCaffery and Anthony Febus of the 46th Precinct in the Bronx were charged with official misconduct and suspended without pay, said Sgt.
Edward Burns, a police spokesman.
Officer McCaffery was also charged with third-degree assault.


Art in Review
Francesco Clemente  Gagosian Gallery 136 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 31
Francesco Clemente is one of the few high-profile painters around whose best work is in watercolor.
He has fully mastered the technical difficulties of the medium and puts them to dramatic use in this show of recent work.
All the paintings are dated 1992; none are titled.
They are divided into two groups: a series of over a dozen large paintings on paper executed in Jamaica and about 50 smaller works, many no more than a few inches in height, done in India.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Marlboro Man Is Missing in Action in New Campaign
THE noticeable absence of cowboys from an intensive new promotional campaign for Marlboro cigarettes is stirring speculation about the future of what has been called the world's most familiar, and powerful, advertising image.
The advertisements in the campaign from Philip Morris U.S.A. urge smokers 21 years old and over to enter a contest to join a "Marlboro Adventure Team" in the fall of 1993; 10 winners will spend 11 days hiking, biking, rafting and horseback riding through 600 miles of Colorado and Utah.
"This is the West," gushes the text, "where you find your adventure, you don't wait for it to find you."


Amerada Hess reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds increased by $1.21 billion, to $389.86 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 379 taxable retail money market funds rose $2.48 billion, to $312.37 billion, while the assets of the 230 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $1.27 billion, to $77.50 billion.


People
*
Ronald H. Wong was promoted to executive vice president from senior vice president at the Schechter Group, New York. *
Lisa Lachowetz was named promotion manager at House Beautiful magazine, New York, succeeding Judy Sharlach, who became marketing manager at Redbook.
Ms.
Lachowetz had been promotion manager at European Travel &amp; Life, which closed.


Review/Film; Giving Up The Glitter Of Success
It's lonely at the top.
Success is a misery for Dusty, a ponytailed country-music star so famous he doesn't need a last name.
The screaming fans and the fancy stage lighting have lost their appeal.
So has Dusty's manager, Lula (Lesley Ann Warren), who wears too much leather and screeches things like "Cute guys like you who sing are a dime a dozen." So at the start of "Pure Country," Dusty decides to get a haircut, escape his fame and rediscover the simple life.
"I'm tired of all the smoke and the lights," declares Dusty, played by the singer George Strait with a monotone and a wooden grin, in a performance that is all cowboy hat.
"It ain't me." So he embarks on a search for his simpler self, the kind of voyage also attempted (a lot more successfully) by John Mellencamp in his recent "Falling From Grace." For Dusty, this means going miraculously unrecognized in a small-town coffee shop and meeting a nice girl at a honky-tonk, then finding himself trapped in a parking-lot brawl.
See "Thelma and Louise" for a much livelier take on similar scenes.


Pictures of Violence in Los Angeles
Don't expect much dissection or examination from "Los Angeles: Anatomy of a Riot," but this hour's worth of pictures of lootings, beatings and fires from last spring's outburst does have shock value.
Bill Kurtis, who narrates, points up what is not always clear from the amateur videos on the screen, for example, the unpreparedness of the police for the explosive reaction to the acquittal of the officers charged with beating Rodney G. King.
What comes through most powerfully is a sort of racial randomness to the violence.
Any white or Asian person who happened to be caught in the wrong neighborhood could expect to be robbed and beaten; the luckier ones might be helped by black passersby.
Although Korean-owned shops received particular attention from arsonists and looters, Sears did not escape.


Finger Pointing Raised to Art Form
"Calm down, Tim," I muttered to my television in the crucial eighth inning of Game 4 of the World Series.
McCarver was, shall we say, harsh, not his usual folksy, incisive, pun-searching and witty self.
First, he castigated Blue Jays catcher Pat Borders for the wild pitch by Duane Ward that allowed Otis Nixon to reach first after a third strike.
Then he compared it to the infamous third-strike passed ball by the Dodgers' Mickey Owen to the Yankees' Tommy Henrich in 1941.
It was an unfair comparison, unless the Ward pitch was catchable, although perhaps only Johnny Bench might have snagged it.


How Loud Is Loud? Try a Drum Contest
Listening to 15 drummers in a row, all showing off, sounds about as enticing as being stuck in a noisy subway train.
Bam, bam, bam.
Thump, thump, thump.
But if history has anything to do with it, the Thelonious Monk International Jazz Drums Competition this weekend at Lincoln Center, part of its new jazz program, should be both a lot of fun and terrifically informative.
The competition's semifinals are to be held at Alice Tully Hall tomorrow afternoon and the finals at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday.


Morris Has Gone South, and So Will the Series
The Jack Morris who pitched in 1991 post-season games did not show up tonight.
Instead, the Atlanta Braves saw the Jack Morris who has pitched in this year's October encounters.
As a result, the Braves prevented the Toronto Blue Jays from winning the World Series on Canadian soil (even if it's artificial turf).
With their hitters emerging from an autumnal hibernation, the Braves battered Morris for seven runs before the fifth inning was over and whipped the Blue Jays, 7-2.


Accounts
*
Motorola Cellular Subscriber Group, Schaumburg, Ill., to J. Walter Thompson Chicago, for its worldwide advertising account with billings of $8 million.
Thompson was awarded the account in a review that excluded the incumbent, Eisaman, Johns &amp; Law, Chicago; the other participants were DDB Needham Chicago and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Chicago. *
American Marketing Association, New York, to Veeder Creative Ventures, to produce and promote the 1993 Effie Awards ceremony.
Billings were not disclosed.


Cleveland Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commercial Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Coachmen Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russia's Elixir -- A special report.; Vodka, Scourge and Balm At Center of Russian Life
"Daddy, now that vodka is so expensive, will you drink less?"
"No, my son. You'll eat less." -- Russian joke
According to the Kievan Chronicles, Vladimir I, who converted Russia to Greek Orthodoxy at the end of the 10th century, rejected Islam on the grounds that he would never get Russians to stop drinking alcohol.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHINA AND BRITAIN FEUD ON HONG KONG
China warned Britain today that if it pushed ahead with plans for broader democracy in Hong Kong, Beijing would dismantle them and install its own government when it took control in 1997.
The Chinese rebuke reflected a sharp deterioration in relations between Britain and China over Hong Kong.
Less than five years before Britain is to return the territory to Chinese control, it is clear that there are still fundamental disagreements over how the transition will be arranged, and that these threaten to undermine stability and investor confidence.


Drivers' Leader Held on Charge By Parole Unit
Douglas LaChance, president of the newspaper deliverers' union, who served five years in prison in the 1980's for racketeering and extortion, was arrested by United States marshals in Rockville Centre, L.I., Thursday night on charges of violating his Federal parole.
Officials of the United States Parole Commission, which issued the arrest warrant, declined to detail the charges, citing Mr.
LaChance's privacy.
But other law-enforcement officials said he had failed a cocaine test last month and failed to appear for a second test.


Guidepost; Bread for Fiber
Carbohydrates are king of the culinary world.
Bread is in.
But the assortment of breads available in the ordinary supermarekt is staggering and confusing.
Bread should be a basic source of fiber in the diet, but if most of the bread you eat is white bread, then the fiber, or bran, as well as the vitamins and minerals, have been removed.
The vitamins and mineals are generally put back and then the bread is called enriched, but the bran is not.


Vincent R. Fitzpatrick, A Retired Lawyer, 75
Vincent R. Fitzpatrick, a retired lawyer, law professor and twice an unsuccessful candidate for Congress in the 1950's, died yesterday.
He was 75 years old.
His family said he had a heart attack at his home in Grasmere, S.I.


Classical Music in Review
Florence Gould Hall Chamber Players Florence Gould Hall


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: President Bush TODAY: 1:30 P.M., CNN, "Newsmaker Saturday." TUESDAY: 7 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today." WEDNESDAY: 8 A.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Good Morning America," interview.
FRIDAY: 7 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today," interview.
Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Both Sides with Jesse Jackson." MONDAY: 8 A.M., CBS (Channel 2 in New York), "CBS This Morning."  Gov.
Bill Clinton MONDAY: 8 A.M., CBS (Channel 2 in New York), "CBS This Morning," interview.
WEDNESDAY: 7 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today."  Vice President Quayle SUNDAY: 11 A.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Business World." MONDAY: 7:09 A.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Good Morning America."


Pressure for School Board Reform
Public squabbling among members of New York City's Board of Education has reached dismaying levels.
The harsh divisions are rendering the board ineffective, costing it credibility with political, financial and educational leaders.
That's the bad news. The good news is that things have gotten
so
bad that the State Legislature may be pressed to revamp the board.


Watkins Glen Killings Called Planned
Eight days after John T. Miller killed four child-support workers and then himself in a county building in nearby Watkins Glen, the county sheriff said today that he believed Mr.
Miller had never planned to return home to Ohio.
Sheriff Michael J. Maloney of Schuyler County said that two days before the Oct. 15 killings, Mr.
Miller purchased a one-way bus ticket from Cleveland to Elmira, a city 20 miles away from Watkins Glen.
Yet when Mr.
Miller arrived in Watkins Glen, he told a motel manager and a taxi driver that he was in town because his truck had broken down.


HANOI SAID TO VOW TO GIVE M.I.A. DATA
President Bush said today that Hanoi had agreed to turn over to the United States all documents, pictures and personal effects relating to American servicemen during the Vietnam War.
Administration officials said the pledge was likely to lead to a review of American policy toward Vietnam.
The move is the most decisive and far-reaching Vietnam has made in nearly two decades to meet American demands for the fullest possible accounting of the missing.
For years, Vietnam denied that there was any more to show or tell, and Washington refused to establish diplomatic relations with the Hanoi Government and blocked international aid to one of Asia's poorest countries.


Bridge
Most players can recall making a thoroughly vile slam, in which the fates have smiled, if not beamed, on over-optimistic bidding.
A strong candidate for the worst slam of all time to come home is the diagramed deal, played at the Philip Morris European Mixed Championships held in Ostend, Belgium, in March.
The hero, in the play if not the bidding, was David Burn of England, who sat in the South seat.
His partner's one no-trump was the weak variety, and he eventually plunged into six clubs.
This would have been an inspired decision if the dummy had produced the spade queen, and he would have settled for the jack.
As it was, he was apparently doomed to lose one spade and one diamond trick.


Monday's Lament: Where Is That Hour?
Tonight, the dream of all harried Americans will come true: They will be given an extra hour, free.
In addition to this 60-minute gift from daylight time, the country gained 24 hours in February by dint of a leap year.
And in June, a second was added to the nation's master clock at the United States Naval Observatory in Washington to reflect an infinitesimal slowing of the earth's rotation.
Adding up what happened in February and June, this year has had 86,401 extra seconds, making it the longest year since the same thing happened in 1972.
But is Mr. or Ms.
Too-Much-to-Do basking in a Zenlike calm, feasting on the manna of additional moments?


No Headline
In the long history of relationships between our two countries, there was an unfortunate period in which my country inflicted great suffering on the people of China.
About this I feel deep sadness. -- EMPEROR AKIHITO of Japan.  [ 1:2. ]


Corrections
The Art Market column in Weekend yesterday misstated the price of a fifth-century mosaic being shown by Michael Ward until Thursday at the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show, at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan.
The price is $185,000, not $500,000.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Apathy Leads the Ballot In Struggling Gary, Ind.
In this city of abandoned stores and hard-to-remember good times, the Presidential campaign seems as far away as prosperity.
One of the only political posters up in downtown these final days is four years old and says, "Ministers for Jesse Jackson for President."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. and the European Community marched closer to a trade war today, as the Americans threatened to impose huge import taxes on $350 million of mainly French wines and cheeses unless the Europeans immediately agreed to reduce farm subsidies.  [ Page 35. ]  Germany and Britain broke ranks with France and urged the European Community to resume negotiations with the U.S. on a global trade agreement.  [ 48. ]  Companies
General Motors plans to consolidate its six large-car engineering groups into four as part of its efforts to reduce its work force.
It will also close 21 plants.  [ 35. ]  The failure of the Chevrolet Caprice is the latest in a series of miscalculations that have hurt G.M.  [ 35. ]  Sales of domestically built cars and trucks jumped 27.1 percent in mid-October.  [ 36. ]
Beringer Vineyards has received rare Government permission to use labels that claim a link between drinking red wine and improved health.  [ 35. ]
Exxon's earnings rose 1.8 percent in the third quarter, while Mobil's profits rose 13.2 percent.
Both giant oil companies benefited from higher natural gas and crude oil prices in the U.S.  [ 37. ] .
William F. Farley resigned as chief executive of West Point-Pepperell, which he acquired in a highly leveraged takeover and which has since sought bankruptcy protection.  [ 37. ]
Conner Peripherals agreed to acquire the tape-drive producer Archive for $11.25 a share, or about $210.4 million.  [ 37. ]
The Walt Disney Company can use one of Hollywood's most enduring emblems, the MGM name and lion logo, at its studio tour in Florida and other theme parks, a judge has ruled.  [ 39. ]
The New York Times Company reported a third-quarter loss of $33.9 million, reflecting a write-off for the closing of a suburban Atlanta newspaper and start-up costs for a New Jersey plant.  [ 48. ]
Markets
The Chicago Board of Trade banned Lee B. Stern &amp; Company from doing business at the exchange and suspended the memberships of Mr.
Stern and two associates in the wake of a barrage of suspicious options and futures trades.  [ 35. ]
The stock market picked up small gains in a drifting session.
The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials rose 6.76 points, to 3,207.64, finishing the week with a net gain of 33.23 points.  [ 38. ]
Bond prices fell in light trading.
The Treasury's 30-year bond fell 9/32 of a point; the yield rose to 7.63 percent.  [ 38. ]
The dollar rose against most leading currencies in a bullish market swept up in rumors about interest rates.
Gold gained 50 cents, to settle at $343.60 an ounce on the Comex.  [ 45. ]
Grain and soybean futures settled lower on the Chicago Board of Trade, with the weakness of wheat leading prices down.  [ 45. ]  The Economy
Two senior bank regulators criticized a study that contends that the banking system is on the brink of a new wave of failures that could cost taxpayers $95 billion.  [ 36. ]  Today's Columns
A new study of mutual-fund performance shows that conservative equity-income funds have been the hands-down winners over the last 20 years.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 36. ]
An 85-year-old inventor has patented a device that he says makes it much easier to distinguish natural pearls from cultured pearls.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 39. ]


Canadians Will Choose to Reweave the Constitution or Risk Its Unraveling
Canadian voters face a crucial national referendum on Monday to determine whether to confer special status on the country's French-speaking minority in Quebec and thwart a new separatist campaign.
Voters across Canada are being asked to say "yes" or "no" to a complex unity package, reached by political leaders two months ago in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, that would amend Canada's Constitution in order to meet, among other things, some of Quebec's longstanding demands for greater autonomy.


Add Mason's Name To Pleasant Surprises
The more playing time Anthony Mason gets at small forward, the more he seems to enjoy it.
Mason led the Knicks with a preseason-high 25 points in their last game, a 107-104 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers on Tuesday night.
It has been an impressive preseason for Mason, who at a muscular 6 feet 7 inches and 250 pounds, has proved he has the agility and quickness to play effectively at both small forward and power forward.


Soap Opera Assures a White Christmas for Viewers


Giant Worry: What Will the Neighbors Say?
It has gotten this bad: Pepper Johnson won't take out his garbage.
The Giants' performance this season has been dismal.
The internal sniping has been worse.
And some of the players' neighbors do not want reminders of anything to do with their local pro football team.
Johnson's mood is so bad he cannot make conversation with his neighbors.
He stays in his house.


Ancient History? Burkett Says Yes
Chris Burkett played in 58 games, 34 as a starter, for the Buffalo Bills, until he was suddenly dropped in September 1989.
The Jets picked him up as a free agent, and Burkett has been a reserve wide receiver and a star on special teams.
He has never talked about why he was dropped by the Bills, but whenever the Jets prepare to meet Buffalo, their opponent on Monday night, the subject is revived.


Forest Mining Plan Protects Property Rights
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration proposal on coal mining in sensitive areas will not "open millions of acres of national parks and forest to strip mining for coal," as you state in "U.S. Set to Open National Forests for Strip Mining" (front page, Sept. 28).
The proposal seeks to re-establish the constitutional protection of private property rights for those who had a valid right to mine the coal reserves before the Federal surface mining law.


William Masselos Is Dead at 72; A Pianist Who Loved Diversity
William Masselos, a pianist admired for his incisive, individual performances of contemporary and American music, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, said Anahid Ajemian, a friend.


Redundancy of Cultures
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 7 report on a Paris exhibition on the civilization of the Etruscans ends: "Today, French classrooms are taught about 'our ancestors, the Gauls.' If the exhibition's sponsors had their way, the children would perhaps soon add ' . . . and the Celts and the Vikings and the Etruscans.' " Such a reference to the Celts would be redundant in the extreme.
The Gauls were the ancient Celtic inhabitants of France and spoke the most archaic Celtic language of which linguists have any direct written evidence.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York, Oct. 8, 1992


Corrections
A map in The Metro Section on Thursday showing New York's 18th Congressional District had incorrect boundaries for the district, which covers parts of Westchester, the Bronx and Queens.
A corrected map appears on page 28.


Review/Dance; A Speeded-Up Butoh, Without the Gloom
Butoh, the dominant experimental dance style from Japan, has generally been distinguished by its slow-moving performers and a sense of devastation.
Cycles of death and rebirth, subliminally linked to images of Hiroshima, make up its essential themes.
Yet in the Hakutobo company's performance on Thursday night, the dancers were not afraid to scoot around the stage at a fast clip, and there was not a hint of cataclysm in the wings.


Times Co. Reports a Loss Of $33.9 Million in Quarter
The New York Times Company reported a third-quarter loss of $33.9 million yesterday, reflecting a write-off for the closing of a suburban Atlanta newspaper and start-up costs for a New Jersey plant.
The loss is in contrast to a profit of $1.9 million, or 3 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1991.
Revenues for the recent quarter totaled $429.7 million, up 9.2 percent from $393.4 million a year earlier.


For Looking Beyond the Obvious


A Correction
Above are the boundaries of the 18th Congressional District.
A map on Thursday showed incorrect boundaries.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAUSCH &amp; LOMB, Rochester, signed a multimillion dollar multiyear sponsorship agreement with the National Basketball Association.
The package will include promotional programs, trade hospitality programs and an extensive media package.
KASLER CORP., Highland, Calif., said it had won a $51.4 million highway construction contract in Los Angeles and San Bernadino Counties from the California State Department of Transportation.


Editorial Notebook; Inside the C.I.A.
It was called, simply, the First Intelligence History Symposium, and its subject was the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
What was unusual was the location -- C.I.A. headquarters at Langley, Va. -- and the participation of 14 agency officials, most of whose names still mean nothing to Americans they served so well 30 years ago.
Several hundred of us gathered on Monday in a large auditorium nesting in a bubble-shaped structure.
The atmosphere was that of a college lecture hall set in a tidily landscaped campus.
A sign at the visitors' entrance even said "Welcome to the Cuban Missile Crisis Symposium," just like an alumni weekend.
What was distinctly uncollegiate were instructions not to bring tape recorders, cameras or briefcases.


A Day of Character Questions
William Kristol, Vice President Dan Quayle's chief of staff, read excerpts of taped conversations between Bill Clinton and Gennifer Flowers at a gathering of Republicans in Alexandria, Va., yesterday.
In a similiar vein, Mr.
Kristol, who accompanied Mr.
Quayle on a campaign swing through Pennsylvania and Delaware, complained to reporters that the Democrats "totally waive" what he called the "Tower test" for their own nominee.


Don Cahalan, 80, Dies; Studied Alcohol Abuse
Don Cahalan, who did early research on alcohol abuse, died on Tuesday at his home in Laguna Hills, Calif.
He was 80 years old.
His family said he died from cancer.
Dr.
Cahalan, a retired professor at the University of California at Berkeley's School of Public Health, received his doctorate in social psychology from George Washington University in 1968.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Tips for Young Politician-in-the-Making
When Gov.
Bill Clinton campaigned the other day in Chicago, an aide, Roy Neel, brought along his 12-year-old son, Tucker.
Back home in Washington, Tucker is in the sixth grade at Lafayette Middle School and is scheduled to play the Governor in a mock debate.
Mr. Clinton sent for the youngster.
Governor: "Let's do some debate prep."


Corrections
An obituary headline on Wednesday about a conductor, composer and violinist rendered his name incorrectly.
He was Werner Torkanowsky.


Sticking With One of Their Men; Clinton-D'Amato Is the Ticket for Many Reagan Democrats
Here in Erie County, many Reagan Democrats are finally drifting back to their party in this Presidential election.
But a hardier species, which also came to life in 1980, survives: the D'Amato Democrat.
A striking number of Democrats who plan to vote for Bill Clinton on Nov. 3, after supporting Ronald Reagan and George Bush, say they will switch over to the G.O.P. column to vote for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Corrections
The Real Estate column on Wednesday, about the transformation of the Sutton Hotel on East 56th Street, referred incorrectly to the architectural firm that designed the renovation.
It is Brennan Beer Gorman.


Dinkins Keeps at a Safe Distance As Aide Responds on Harassment
Mayor David N. Dinkins and his top advisers met yesterday to assess the risks of keeping Randy Daniels, the newly appointed Deputy Mayor, in his City Hall position as Mr.
Daniels waged a furious public campaign to save his job.
Mr.
Dinkins appeared to have seized on two clear tracks: distancing himself from the politically explosive allegations of sexual harassment that have been made against Mr.
Daniels, and leaving Mr.
Daniels with the task of responding to criticism.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  JAPAN'S EMPEROR VISITS CHINA
Opening the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, Emperor Akihito acknowledged that Japan's wartime occupation had "inflicted great suffering on the people of China." But he stopped short of the apology demanded by many Chinese.  1  HANOI PROMISES ALL FILES
President Bush said Vietnam had agreed to give the United States all documents, pictures and personal effects relating to Americans who fell into Vietnamese custody during the war in Indochina.  1  The families of missing G.I.'s alternate between hope and despair.  2  FRANCE CONVICTS 3 IN BLOOD CASE
A French court convicted three former health officials on charges of distributing tainted blood that infected more than 1,250 hemophiliacs with the virus that causes AIDS.
Already 273 of them have died.  1  3 MAIN FOES MEET IN BOSNIA
Commanders of the three main forces in the Bosnian war met for the first time at the Sarajevo airport and began talks that the United Nations hopes will clear the way for a winter relief operation.  3  1997 WILL COME, CHINA WARNS
China warned Britain that if it pushed ahead with plans for broader democracy in Hong Kong, Beijing would dismantle them and install its own government when it takes control in 1997.  3  POPE SAYS HE WILL GO TO ISRAEL
The Pope accepted an invitation to visit Israel.
Emotionally, he spoke of his "burning desire to one day be able to be a pilgrim in that region, and above all the Holy Land and Jerusalem." 3  VOTE IS NEAR ON QUEBEC'S STATUS
Canadians will vote Monday in a referendum to determine whether to confer special status on the country's French-speaking minority in Quebec and thereby thwart a separatist campaign.
Polls have shown the "no" side leading.  5  Maputo Journal: Art galleries flourish in a war-weary capital.  4  National 6-10  PEROT STEPS UP THE PACE
Suddenly the heretofore safe notion that the Democrats next month would win both of California's Senate seats seems much less than certain.
Bruce Herschensohn, an avowed "constitutionalist" who would eliminate or cut back virtually every Federal agency, is rallying against Barbara Boxer.  1  THE TIME OF OUR LIVES
Tonight you get an extra hour, courtesy of the return to standard time.
Not only that: because of leap year and a one-second adjustment to the nation's master clock, 1992 has 86,401 extra seconds, making it the longest year in two decades.
Not that you'd ever notice.  1  THE CAPITAL SHUTTERS UP
The District of Columbia shut down most of its local government, seeking to balance its budget by embarking on one of the toughest employee furlough programs in the country.
The one-day shutdown was the first of 12 that will be imposed over the next 12 months.6  COCAINE EMERGENCIES SOAR
The Administration reported that the number of people entering hospital emergency rooms with adverse reactions to cocaine had reached a record level.  6  A MISSION ACCOMPLISHED
Six astronauts ejected a mirrored Italian satellite from the space shuttle Columbia, and an attached rocket lofted it into orbit nearly 4,000 miles above Earth.  7  Atlanta Journal: Is this an international city?  6  Religion Notes: Many people vote according to faith.  7  The big California earthquake that wasn't.  6  An S.A.T. cheater was sentenced to jail for perjury.  6  Metro Digest 25  DINKINS ASSESSES APPOINTMENT
Mayor Dinkins and his top political advisers met to assess the risks of allowing Randy Daniels, the newly appointed Deputy Mayor, to keep his job.
Mr.
Dinkins appeared to have seized on two clear tracks: distancing himself from the politically explosive allegations of sexual harassment that have been made against Mr.
Daniels, and leaving Mr.
Daniels with the task of responding to criticism.  1  Business Digest 35  Consumer's World 12  Ordering takeout?
Chew on this first.
For book lovers, browsing by mail.
Covering yourself against an unhappy landing.
William Masselos, pianist.
Janet Viertel, a photographer of underwater life.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Pressure for school board reform.
Spying on Bill Clinton's mother.
Canada makes baseball history.
Karl E. Meyer: Inside the C.I.A.
Letters  Russell Baker: Those vile few.
Adam Gopnik: Saul Steinberg's New York.


A Job Switch At Salomon
James L. Massey will leave the Salomon Brothers executive committee at the end of the year to become a senior managing director, the firm announced yesterday.
Mr.
Massey, 49 years old, was chairman of Salomon Brothers Europe from 1988 until this year.
He has recently overseen the firm's investments in such areas as real estate and merchant banking.


Maputo Journal; In the Midst of War, Art Is Thriving
At a crowded, stylish art opening here guests could have been forgiven for thinking they were at a SoHo gallery in Manhattan in the go-go years.
Patrons circulated around bold canvases and sophisticated sculptures in a split-level loft.
A video of painters at work played in one corner.
And the hottest artist in town, a mysterious woman from the provinces known simply as Renata, wearing 1950's pink sunglasses and a blue pants suit trimmed with safety pins, showed off her ceramics to adoring clients.


Canada Makes Baseball History
Canada's first entry into the World Series is not the only baseball history being made this week.
It's an enduring historical irony that "America's favorite pastime" was first racially integrated in Canada -- and that Canada continues to lead U.S. teams in racial fairness as the series unfolds.
In 1945 the Brooklyn Dodgers signed Jackie Robinson and sent him to the Royals, their farm club in Montreal.
He played there before coming up to the major leagues to be the first black player.
The Royals were an imposing team in minor league history and were the object of what one baseball historian called "fanatic affection" from their fans.


Four Vying to Sort Out Clerk's Office
County clerks' offices are a bit like suburban lawns: when well-tended, they go unnoticed.
But in Nassau County, four candidates are vying for a post that could arguably promise more glory than anonymity.
The $92,800-a-year post became available last month when Harold W. McConnell stepped down after 23 years as County Clerk under criticism for the lengthening backlogs in his office.
The backlogs meant millions of dollars in taxes and fees were undeposited, stuffed in envelopes while the county struggled through a fiscal crisis, and led to lawsuits by the Nassau County Bar Association and the New York State Land Title Association, a title-insurers' group.


G.M. Will Consolidate Engineering Groups
The General Motors Corporation, in the midst of a vast slimming of its North American operations, said today that it would consolidate six large car-engineering groups into four.
The move will help G.M. cut its white-collar work force to 71,000 by the end of 1993, a reduction of 20,000 jobs from 1991, when the auto maker first said it would close plants and reduce its work force.


Classical Music in Review
Simon Estes Bass-baritone Juilliard Theater


Clearing Firm Is Suspended By Chicago Board of Trade
In the wake of a barrage of suspicious options and futures trades at the Chicago Board of Trade that unsettled Treasury bond markets on Thursday, the commodity exchange said yesterday that it had banned the firm of Lee B. Stern &amp; Company from doing business at the exchange and suspended the memberships of Mr.
Stern and two associates.
The board said it took the action because the firm had failed to come up with about $9 million to back the positions taken yesterday by a trader for whom it provided order-entry and record-keeping services.
Lee B. Stern &amp; Company is one of more than 120 member firms that provide such clearing services.
They are required to maintain sufficient capital margins to insure the completion of all trades cleared through them.


Classical Music in Review
Montreal Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


A Votre Sante, From Bureau of Alcohol
The next time a wine maker toasts your health it will be with Federal approval.
Beringer Vineyards of St.
Helena, Calif., is the first winery to receive permission from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to use labels that claim a link between drinking wine and improved health: in this case, between red wine and reduced incidence of heart disease.
Starting next month, Beringer will be looping "neck hangers" around its bottles -- tags that bear a partial transcript of a CBS "60 Minutes" segment last year by Morley Safer.
He reported that "it's been all but confirmed" that "alcohol, particularly red wine, reduces the risk of heart disease."


Religion Notes
Voting Your Religion
Not surprisingly, Americans put the economy ahead of all other issues in determining how they will vote this year for President.
But in a new national poll sponsored by the VISN interfaith television network, 10 percent of respondents said the determining factor would be religion.


Spying on Bill Clinton's Mother
The State Department at least had a fig leaf to explain its curious search of Bill Clinton's passport files: Members of the news media had requested information about Mr.
Clinton's travels abroad.
No such excuse is available in the case of Mr.
Clinton's mother, Virginia Dell Kelley.
It now seems that her files were rifled as well.
That's an outrage, further reinforcing suspicions that Bush appointees used the media requests as a cover while searching for information damaging to Mr.
Clinton.


Brooklyn Youth Said to Be Competent
In the last day of testimony in the trial of a black teen-ager charged with murdering a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights, a psychologist said yesterday that the defendant had difficulty coping with his emotions but was mentally capable of understanding his legal rights.
The psychologist was called by the prosecution to rebut earlier testimony, elicited by the defense, that the defendant, 17-year-old Lemrick Nelson Jr., had learning disabilities.
The defense contends that Mr.
Nelson's arrest was illegal because he was unable to understand when police officers told him of his right not to answer their questions without a lawyer present.


Cuomo Lists Public Works Bond Act Would Finance
For almost a year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been touting his $800 million jobs bond act as a way to help pull New York State out of its deep recession by creating tens of thousands of jobs.
But not until yesterday did his office release a list of the projects it said would be financed by the bond act, which is to be put before the state's voters on Election Day.
The release of the list, the subject of painstaking negotiations between the Governor, the Democratic-controlled Assembly and the Republican-led State Senate over the last few weeks, was clearly timed to help bolster the Governor's case for the bond act, Proposal 1 on the Nov. 3 ballot.
And in this year of scarce resources, it provides the state's lawmakers something to dangle before their constituents as the election approaches.


Bush: Playing the Crisis Card
President Bush's campaign began broadcasting this 30-second commercial yesterday in various cities around the country.
Campaign officials would not specify where.
ON THE SCREEN
Images from television news of Scud missiles, a jet fighter taking off, blindfolded hostages and President Boris Yeltsin of Russia alternate with labels: "The Persian Gulf Crisis -- 1991," "The Coup Against Gorbachev -- 1991," "Today's Unknown Threat."


Review/Music; Joan Baez Goes Back To Her Folk-Club Roots
Midway in the late show of her one-night engagement at the Bitter End on Thursday evening, Joan Baez put down her guitar, stepped away from the microphone and sang a rendition of "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" that sent a charge of excitement through the room.
Slowly moving from one side of the tiny stage to the other so as to make contact with everyone in the club, she treated the classic spiritual as an intimate call for communal deliverance.
At age 51, Ms.
Baez is singing about as well as she ever has.
Her throbbing folk alto has grown in size and thickened in texture.
And if the voice has lost some of its soaring ethereality, its aura of embracing maternalism is more commanding than ever.
Her singing is also remarkably flexible.
And the tricky melismas with which she embellished "Swing Low" were flawlessly executed.


Donald E. Oberg, 76, Tool-and-Die Expert
Donald E. Oberg, an internationally known tool-and-die expert, died on Oct. 10 at his retirement home in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 76 years old.
His family reported his death yesterday and said the cause was cancer.


Life Sentence for Scourge of Chinatown
They fashioned themselves after gangster movies, young Vietnamese refugees with spiked hair, dark sunglasses and dressing in black suits.
They carved their turf on Canal Street in Chinatown but quickly built a reputation for robberies, extortion and murder throughout the city, in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx, and as far away as Georgia and Canada.
They called themselves Born to Kill, and for more than three years, law-enforcement officials and prosecutors say, they seemed intent to live up to their name, preying on Asian merchants, shopkeepers and restaurateurs with a ferocity that shocked the police and even the older, established Chinese gangs.


Victory Breathes New Life Into Braves
Whatever the Braves did or didn't have -- and they can't agree among themselves -- they have life, and a chance to tie the Toronto Blue Jays Saturday night in the sixth game of the World Series.
The Series will resume here because the Braves battered Jack Morris Thursday night, won by 7-2 behind Lonnie Smith's grand slam and reduced the Blue Jays' lead to three games to two.
Now, as Morris said in the aftermath of his second Series loss, "Atlanta's in trouble because I don't pitch again."


East Timor Majority Sought Indonesia Link
To the Editor:
"The Cemetery Called East Timor" (editorial, Sept. 25) casts aspersion on the speech by President Suharto of Indonesia to the General Assembly and implies that the East Timorese have been denied self-determination and basic human rights.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday about the quarterly earnings report of Tenneco Inc. referred incorrectly to a restructuring charge of $427 million.
The charge against earnings was taken in the third quarter of 1991, not in this year's third quarter.


Islanders Make Winning A Habit
Without a lot of fanfare, without a lot of fuss, the Islanders are off to a solid start this season.
Despite playing only two of their first eight games at home, they have won half of their games, the fourth one being a 5-2 victory over the struggling Washington Capitals tonight before 16,123 onlookers at the Capital Centre.
Ray Ferraro scored two goals for the Islanders, who have won four of their last five games and are now over .500 (4-3-1) for the first time this season.
Pierre Turgeon, Derek King and Steve Thomas, who make up the top line, each scored a goal.
Peter Bondra scored twice for Washington, which is last in the Patrick Division and 0-5 against divisional foes.


Washington What? In the Rose Bowl?
The subject is still so forbidding that Mike Price, the coach of undefeated Washington State, wouldn't dare speak the words "Rose Bowl" when he conversed with reporters the other day.
The best he could do was use initials.


Forest Mining Plan Protects Property Rights; Socking It to Taxpayers
To the Editor:
"U.S. Set to Open National Forests for Strip Mining" (front page, Sept. 28), on the Government's reported plan to expand the rights of those who own coal in national parks and forests, is the newest verse in a dishearteningly long song.


Waves of Rangers Wash Over Impervious Montreal Goalie
Having thrown the kitchen sink at Montreal goaltender Patrick Roy, Ranger Coach Roger Neilson tried Tony Amonte.
That did not work either last night, as the Rangers were stuck with a 3-3 tie against the Canadiens at Madison Square Garden.
But Neilson's move provided further insight into how respectfully the coach views Amonte, and how he is not yet entirely comfortable with rookie Aleksei Kovalev.


Cuomo Defends Abrams Tactics
The Senate race in New York is "an awful campaign," and the Democratic candidate, Attorney General Robert Abrams, has had to engage in "disgustingly necessary self-defense," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today in a joint appearance with Mr.
Abrams here.
Mr.
Cuomo then gave an essentially effusive endorsement of the Abrams campaign, saying that Mr.
Abrams was "the greatest attorney general in the country."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Corporate Taxes; Clinton Seeks Taxes on Hidden Profits
Gov.
Bill Clinton's proposal to collect billions of dollars in taxes owed by foreign-controlled companies would tap into one of the richest, but also one of the most elusive, potential sources of new revenue available to the Government.
By aggressively enforcing existing tax laws, the Democrat would stop international corporations from avoiding taxes by shifting their profits overseas.
He says he could raise $45 billion this way in four years.
If his figure is wrong, one of the pillars of his plan to cut the Federal deficit will be seriously undermined.


Mayor's Murky Path; Amid Divisive Allegations, Dinkins Faces Demands of Loyalty and Rigor
The storm swirling around Mayor David N. Dinkins's newly appointed Deputy Mayor, Randy Daniels, presents the Mayor with an excruciating political challenge: Balancing the need to show a resolute response to charges of sexual harassment with the desire to remain true to a well-connected friend who is expected to play a critical role in Mr.
Dinkins's political future.
Absent a clear finding of fact, Mr.
Dinkins has been asked to do what may be impossible -- addressing concerns raised by the accusation while remaining sensitive to Mr.
Daniels's supporters.


A Caprice That Chevy Couldn't Sell
Kathy Graham, who oversees market research for new designs at the General Motors Corporation, still recalls the excitement of that day, back in 1989.
"I was told, 'Run out to the front of the building! It's coming!' "
After two years behind locked doors, the 1991 Chevrolet Caprice Classic LTZ sedan, with its curvy lines and voluptuous rear end, was ready for a test drive.
The consensus of Ms.
Graham and her co-workers was that Charles M. Jordan, G.M.'s design chief, had a winner.


Conner Set To Buy Tape Drive Maker
Conner Peripherals Inc., a maker of computer disk drives, said today that it had agreed to acquire the Archive Corporation, a tape-drive producer, for $11.25 a share, or about $210.4 million.
Finis Conner, Conner's chairman and chief executive, said the purchase is in line with the company's plan to become a top "storage solutions company." Disk drives and tape drives both are media for storing computer information.
Archive's products, including removable media tape drives and tape drive subsystems, "are an excellent strategic fit" for Conner, he said.


Review/Pop; Big-Band Classics With Stars As Soloists
For its inaugural concert, the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band chose an odd niche of jazz: the sound of the post-1950's big band, plushly harmonized and brassy with a touch of be-bop syncopation.
The music is full of musicianly flourishes, attempting to reclaim the drive of the swing era while acknowledging more complex harmonies.
But choosing it for the debut of a new ensemble was rather like opening a design exhibition with a collection of Danish-modern furniture and Earth shoes.
The concert, called "Saxophone Summit," was saved by its guest soloists -- the tenor saxophonists Flip Phillips, Buddy Tate, Plas Johnson and Grover Washington Jr. (who also played alto saxophone) -- and by solos from band members including Jon Faddis, Earl Gardner and Lew Soloff on trumpets and Lew Tabackin on tenor saxophone.


Exxon Profits Up 1.8% and Mobil Advances 13.2%
The Exxon Corporation's earnings rose slightly, by 1.8 percent, in the third quarter while the Mobil Corporation's profits rose by 13.2 percent.
Both companies, the nation's two largest in oil, said they had benefited from higher natural gas and crude oil prices in the United States, and continued to generate the bulk of their profits abroad.
Operations in gasoline and other petroleum products in the United States remained weak because of the economy and thin profit margins in the Midwest and East.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; Republican Imperils Tide Of Democrats in California
In the volatile 1992 election year, at least this has seemed certain: Gov.
Bill Clinton will win California big, and he will bring with him two female Democratic Senators, Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein.
But an upset could be in the making.
By painting the liberal Ms.
Boxer as a free-spending Washington insider, a 60-year-old conservative Republican who has never held elective office before is swimming against the rushing Democratic tide.
Poll takers say he has surged in recent days, shaking the Boxer camp and feminists nationally.


Bring On David Cone, Say Fearless Braves
The Atlanta Braves spoke about David Cone today after their victory over the Blue Jays in Game 5 of the World Series Thursday night in Toronto, but it sounded as if they were discussing Wally Whitehurst.
There was no fear in their hopeful eyes and no edge in their inspired voices.
The Braves sounded pleased to be opposing Cone on Saturday at home in Game 6.


Covering Yourself Against an Unhappy Landing
It's one of those things that nobody likes to think about.
Whenever you fly on a commercial airline, there is a possibility, a very slim possibility, that the plane will crash and passengers will die or be seriously injured.
Many travelers buy flight insurance to protect themselves against such a possibility.
This type of protection is a category of special-risk life insurance and pays benefits for accidental death and dismemberment.
Often it is packaged with other insurance for travelers, like trip cancellation and medical insurance.


Gamache, a Local Hero, Hopes to Add to Maine's Boxing Folklore
For a fleeting moment in May 1965, this mill town in the southwestern part of the state was in boxing's spotlight.
In the 6,000-seat Central Maine Youth Center, Muhammad Ali defended the title he won as Cassius Clay by knocking out Sonny Liston one minute into the first round with a punch that even in slow-motion replays seemed suspect.


Dance in Review
Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company Joyce Theater


Emergency Rooms' Cocaine Cases Rise
After nearly doubling Federal spending to combat illegal drugs in the last four years, the Bush Administration reported yesterday that the number of people entering hospital emergency rooms with adverse reactions to cocaine had reached a record level.
The Administration said 30,103 people sought help in the first three months of 1992, a 12 percent increase over the previous three months and a slight rise over the previous record of 29,939 in the summer of 1989, when Mr.
Bush stepped up his antidrug campaign.


Transactions
Baseball National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Connie Kowal director of minor league business operations.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Rene Lachemann manager and signed him to a three-year contract.
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Named Reggie Williams director of community affairs for the 1993 Super Bowl.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Chuck Thomas, center. Hockey National Hockey League
NHL -- Suspended Sylvain Turgeon of the Ottawa Senators for one game for getting two major stick fouls in a game Thursday night.


U.S. Has Long Supported U.N.'s Work; Time to Pay Up
To the Editor:
It is ironic that the United States, a superpower and the creator of the United Nations idea, has fallen $733 million in arrears in its treaty obligation to the world body.
When the United States joins the world in asking for more peacekeeping operations, what is more logical and fundamental than to provide the money for the United Nations to do its job?
It is not a very large sum for the United States, but is vital to keep the United Nations going.


For Book Lovers, Browsing by Mail
For ardent book lovers, few pleasures can rival the bookshop browse.
For convenience, price and diversity, however, readers are increasingly turning to mail-order companies as well.
"Mail order has long been a part of the bookselling business," said Charles Robinson, current president of the American Booksellers Association, who owns Village Books, in Bellingham, Wash.
"Technology and the consumer's demand for convenience have made it more important."


Review/Film; Dotty Doctor Amid Vacuous Victims
"Dr. Giggles" is a horror film about a pudgy, mad, very general practitioner (Larry Drake) who is inclined to giggle in moments of stress, which are frequent.
After escaping from an asylum, he returns to his hometown to kill everybody in one seemingly endless night.
The job is not as difficult as it might seem: his victims have very small brainpans.
Nobody ever turns on a light, looks behind a door or walks home in the company of someone else.
The screenplay is stitched together from variations on cliches used by or about the medical community.
As the mad doctor removes a bullet from his own stomach, he chortles, "Physician, heal thyself." At another point, just before strangling a victim, he announces: "Reflexes normal. Now let's check the blood pressure." A few minutes later, he observes while affecting great surprise, "Either you're dead or my watch has stopped." So it goes as the bodies accumulate.


What Episcopal Church Can Do About Sex Abuse by Priests; Society's to Blame
To the Editor:
It was inevitable that the reported cases of pedophilia among priests would be the springboard for an attack on the celibacy of the Roman Catholic clergy.
In "Priests Who Prey" (Op-Ed, Sept. 26), Paul Wilkes faults the church because it lacks a married clergy and women priests, as if marriage or gender prevents pedophilia and other sex abuses.


Washington Furloughs City Workers
The District of Columbia shut down most of its local government today, seeking to balance its budget by embarking on one of the largest government-employee furloughs in the country.
The one-day furlough -- the first of 12 that will be imposed over the next 12 months -- put 43,000 people out of work and shut down schools, day-care centers, garbage collection and other services considered nonessential to the public's health and safety.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Plays to TV Cameras To Sell Image of Momentum
President Bush is waging a two-front war in the closing days of this campaign: to win over a vast bloc of still-undecided voters, and to counter the image, pervasive in the national press, that his cause is hopeless.
Today he fought in two states on each front.
Mr.
Bush flew early today to London, Ky., on the fringes of coal-mining country, for a rally designed as much to convey the televised image of national momentum as to win new votes.


Accord Is Urged by 2 Nations
Germany and Britain, breaking ranks with France, urged the European Community today to resume negotiations with the United States on a long-stalled global trade agreement with a view to averting a damaging trade war.
France, however, shows no signs of budging.
Its Finance Minister, Michel Sapin, said today that the community could not go beyond the farming subsidy cuts agreed to as part of changes in its common agricultural policy earlier this year.
"That was already a lot," he said.


Hanoi Photos Leave Families of U.S. M.I.A.'s Astir
Barbara Cleary O'Connor wants to know precisely what happened 20 years ago when her husband disappeared without a trace over Hanoi during the final few minutes of what was to have been his last mission as an Air Force pilot.
"Was he hit by anti-aircraft fire? she said yesterday from Wayland, Mass., where she lives with her second husband. "Did he eject?
I know it sounds gruesome to want all the details, but I do.
In that 15 minutes, I want to know exactly what happened."


INSIDE
A Harder Stance on Trade
The United States threatened to impose huge import taxes on wines and cheeses unless the European Community reduces subsidies on vegetable oils used in animal feed.
Page 35.
Critical Vote in Canada
Canadian voters face a crucial referendum to determine whether to confer special status on the French-speaking minority in Quebec.
Page 5.
The Capital Shutters Up
Most of Washington's local government shut down in the first of 12 one-day employee furloughs aimed at balancing the municipal budget.
Page 6.
Salinger Unchanged by Fire
J.
D.
Salinger remained as reclusive as ever despite a fire that destroyed much of his New Hampshire home.
He would not comment.
Page 13.


N.H.L. Cautious on Olympics
Rangers General Manager Neil Smith, who is on a National Hockey League committee that is examining possible participation by N.H.L. players in the 1994 Winter Olympics, said last night that the USA Hockey federation supports the idea.
But he added, "We've still got a lot of work to be done on it."
Smith said that a monthlong shutdown of the league after the All-Star Game on Jan. 21, 1994, "is a huge question mark" and that the odds of the N.H.L. interrupting its season are no better than 50-50.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; PEROT TO EXPAND EFFORTS AS RACE SEEMS TO TIGHTEN
With signs that the Presidential race is tightening, at least partly because of his influence, Ross Perot announced today that he was intensifying his efforts with new purchases of television time and his first conventional campaign foray.
Mr.
Perot, whose only public appearances during his 23-day campaign have been at the three Presidential debates, said today that he would attend rallies on Sunday in Flemington, N.J., and Pittsburgh.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.96
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.92
4.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.16
5.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.38
6.33
7.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.63
7.61
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.67
8.67
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.62
6.58
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Franks Gets a Lift From an Opponent
Even supporters of Representative Gary Franks, the first black Republican elected to Congress since the 1930's, describe his first term as inauspicious.
But the 39-year-old former alderman from Waterbury is now considered the front-runner in his re-election bid -- helped, oddly enough, by his most vitriolic opponent's decision to stay in the race.
Mr.
Franks, who won his nomination through something of a fluke in a six-way race, is benefiting from Connecticut's three-party politics.
A Connecticut Party, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s independent vehicle, has provided a home for State Representative Lynn Taborsak, a 49-year-old plumber from Danbury and the unexpected loser in a bitter Democratic primary fight.


Atlanta Journal; Another Homer to the World-Serious
In addition to concerns about Tom Glavine's arm and David Justice's hitting slump, two questions are throbbing beneath the surface of the first international World Series, which returns to Atlanta on Saturday for Game 6.
The first is whether Atlanta is A Truly International City.
The second is whether anyone truly cares.


CHRONICLE
In the Clinton camp, there hasn't been more so much talk about music since the candidate played his saxophone on television.
On Monday a group of 200 women calling themselves The Clintones will crowd into a studio in Manhattan to record two songs: a reworded version of "Michael, Row the Boat Ashore" and "America the Beautiful" with one phrase altered (". . .and crown thy good with brother- and sisterhood").
Then tapes will be rushed to 30 cities in the United States and 7 abroad for torchlight parades on Wednesday for the Clinton-Gore ticket billed as "Women Light the Way for Change."
"We decided to do this thing in a hurry, like the invasion of Normandy," said JUDY COLLINS, the singer, who helped start the Clintones.
"We got together a big gang from the theater, from pop music and cabaret. We are recording the two songs on Monday, then we hope to do a bigger record by and about women."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  5 Points for LaFontaine  Pat LaFontaine assisted on Buffalo's first three goals and scored the next two as the Sabres came from behind three times to beat the San Jose Sharks, 5-4, last night in Buffalo.
LaFontaine scored the winning goal on a power play with 1 minute 10 seconds left in the game, taking a kicked pass from Yuri Khymylev and beating Brian Hayward with a 10-foot wrist shot. (AP) TENNIS  Graf Routs McNeil  Top-seeded Steffi Graf was a 6-0, 6-2 winner over an injured Lori McNeil yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Midland Bank championships in Brighton, England.
Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez defeated Nathalie Tauziat, 6-4, 6-3.
Graf won eight games before McNeil, playing with a strapped left thigh, won her first game in the 59-minute match.
Today, Graf will face Anke Huber, and Fernandez will meet Jana Novotna. (AP)


Judge Rules in Disney Favor On MGM Name and Logo
The Walt Disney Company can use one of Hollywood's most enduring emblems, the MGM name and lion logo, at its studio tour in Florida and other theme parks, a judge ruled today.
In addition, Superior Court Judge Curtis Rappe decided that the $1 billion MGM Grand Hotel and Theme Park under construction in Las Vegas can also use the name and a stylized version of the logo as long as its theme park is not based on the movies like Disney's.


Classical Music in Review
Celebration of Song Merkin Concert Hall


Observer; Those Vile Few
There's a new book out taking the hide off Hollywood.
Sex and violence are saturating screens, video as well as silver.
You know it.
I know it.
We all hate it.
But we can't escape, can we?
And do you know who's to blame?
Hollywood.
The cultural elite.
Those filthy swine.


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight time starts and ends.
The date this fall is tomorrow.


U.S. Threat To Europe Over Trade
The United States and the European Community marched closer to a trade war today, as the Americans threatened to impose huge import taxes on $350 million of mainly French wines and cheeses unless the Europeans immediately agreed to reduce their subsidies on vegetable oils used in animal feed, American officials said.
If neither side retreats, the price that Americans pay for brie, Cognac and other luxury European foods could double or even triple by spring.
If vermouth is included in the list, for example, a bottle of this minor but necessary ingredient of dry martinis could rise in price to $15 or $20, from $7.


Nelson Buhler, 77, Baruch Estate Lawyer
Nelson Buhler, a lawyer who helped to establish the Baruch Foundation on the environment and was a prosecutor in a Japanese war crimes trial, died on Tuesday.
He was 77 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
His family said he died of a heart attack at North Beach Hospital in Fort Lauderdale.


School Safety Is Debated After Violence
The spate of recent shootings and other violence in and around schools has reignited the fierce debate over how safe New York City's nearly one million students really are.
After three teen-age students were shot and wounded on Thursday outside Intermediate School 50 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, the United Federation of Teachers charged yesterday that the Board of Education had understated the seriousness of school violence.
It released a list of 17 gun-related incidents in the six weeks of the current school year, and said the board tended to count too few such incidents because its definition embraced only acts on school grounds.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
THE MAYOR KEEPS HIS DISTANCE
Mayor Dinkins summoned his top political advisers to City Hall to discuss strategies for handling a sexual harassment charge against a new Deputy Mayor and let the appointee, Randy Daniels, rally support for himself through the press.
Page 1.
A quandary for Dinkins. News analysis, page 26.  GANG LEADER IS SENTENCED
They called themselves Born to Kill, and for more than three years, law-enforcement officials and prosecutors say, they seemed intent to live up to their name.
But now the gang's presence -- along with the fear it created -- has largely evaporated.
Yesterday, a Federal judge sentenced its leader to life in prison.
Page 27.
FOR DAILY NEWS EMPLOYEES, WEARINESS
On a Daily News loading dock, a delivery driver this week chalked across a blackboard: "Welcome to the NEW N.Y. Daily News!" It was an upbeat slogan, but with the paper's destiny in the hands of a bankruptcy judge, anxieties continue for employees.
Page 27.
LEADER OF DRIVERS' UNION IS ARRESTED
Douglas LaChance, president of the newspaper deliverers' union, who served five years in prison in the 1980's for racketeering and extortion, was arrested Thursday night on charges of violating his Federal parole.
He was being held yesterday at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan pending a hearing.
Page 27.
REGION
DETAILS EMERGE IN MASS SLAYING
Before he shot four child-support workers in a county building near Watkins Glen, N.Y., John P. Miller bought a one-way bus ticket to New York State from his home in Ohio, indicating that he had never planned to return, law-enforcement officials said.
Page 29.
RECYCLING COMPANY OFFICIALS CONVICTED
The operators of a New Jersey recycling company were convicted of environmental and financial crimes in connection with a raging trash fire three years ago that caused a section of Interstate 78 to buckle.
Page 29.
THE RACE FOR COUNTY CLERK
In Nassau County, four candidates are vying for a post that usually goes unnoticed: county clerk.
This year is different because the office has fallen so far behind in recording legal documents that it resulted in a lawsuit.
Page 29.
AN ABDUCTION ATTEMPT IN CONNECTICUT
A man tried to force a 7-year-old girl into his car in Plainville, Conn., adding to a list of incidents across the state that have frightened parents and baffled the police.
Page 29.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


Review/Theater; The World of American Indians and Feminism
Past, present and future, seen through the prism of American Indian culture and feminism, mingle on the stage of Lepercq Space at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where Spiderwoman Theater is performing the New York premiere of "Power Pipes" through tomorrow in the Next Wave Festival.
Spiderwoman, which takes its name from the Hopi goddess of creation, was founded by three American Indian women, including Muriel Miguel, who directed "Power Pipes" and is a member of the cast.
"Power Pipes" roams from ancient culture to current crimes in an evening of drama, comedy, music and sisterhood presented by an engaging cast that is as likely to achieve moments of rollicking humor as it is to slog through a shaggy-dog story.


What Episcopal Church Can Do About Sex Abuse by Priests
To the Editor:
You report the resignation from the Episcopal priesthood of the Rev.
Wallace A. Frey, after allegations involving sexual abuse of young male parishioners (news article, Oct. 7), as if such things are something new in the Episcopal Church.
They aren't.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Settles Into Theme Of Inclusion and Consensus
Settling into the groove of the traditionally long but cautious final days of a Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton spent his third day in a row carrying a message of inclusion and consensus to states that appear to be either solidly behind him or hold the possibility of upset victories.
Both the geography of the Democratic Presidential nominee's day and the unpartisan, somewhat Presidential tone of his speeches are indicators of his sense of the shape of the race, where it appears clear that the margin of victory in a three-way contest between Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Bush and Ross Perot will be decided by independent and Republican voters.


Fire Fails To Shake Salinger's Seclusion
Not even a fire that consumed at least half his home on Tuesday could smoke out the reclusive J. D. Salinger, author of the classic novel of adolescent rebellion, "The Catcher in the Rye." Mr.
Salinger is almost equally famous for having elevated privacy to an art form.
His fastidiously preserved seclusion was threatened on Tuesday when his third wife, Colleen, reported a fire in their home to the volunteer fire department.
Within minutes, the blazing house was surrounded by fire trucks and emergency vehicles from Cornish, the New Hampshire towns of Plainfield, Meriden and Claremont, and two small towns in Vermont, Windsor and West Windsor.


U.S. Has Long Supported U.N.'s Work
To the Editor:
Siddharth Dube's "U.S. vs. U.N." (Op-Ed, Sept. 28) broadly misrepresents true circumstances.


About Consumer's World
Starting next Saturday, the Consumer's World page will be replaced by Your Money, a two-page weekly guide to personal investing and financial planning.
The new pages will be found ahead of Business Day.


Ordering Takeout? Chew on This First
Just blame the children.
After all, before they were born, it was easy to go out to a restaurant.
There was no fretting, no babysitters; the only decision was what kind of food to eat.
Then
they
arrived, and dining out has never been the same.
Especially since dining out now so often means dining in, eating food delivered from a restaurant in front of the television.


Sanders Does the Bump and Play
After averaging 27 home runs, 86 runs batted in and 33 stolen bases over the last three years, and after playing 153 of 162 games during the 1992 regular season, left fielder Ron Gant has been benched for three of the first five World Series games in favor of a part-time baseball player.
And that routine is expected to continue in Game 6 Saturday night, when the Braves will go with left-handed Deion Sanders against right-handed David Cone, Toronto's starter.


Dance in Review
Douglas Dunn and Dancers Bessie Schonberg Theater


Pope, Meeting With Israeli, Accepts Invitation to Visit
Pope John Paul II accepted an invitation from Foreign Minister Shimon Peres today to visit Israel and spoke emotionally of what the Vatican called his "burning desire to one day be able to be a pilgrim in that region and above all the Holy Land and Jerusalem."
The 45-minute meeting between the two men at the Vatican was the first high-level contact since the two sides agreed in July to begin negotiating full diplomatic relations.
It signified a further move toward normalizing ties that have often been strained.


E. F. Denison, Economist, 76; Devised G.N.P.
Edward F. Denison, an economist who was an expert on national income and production, died yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 76 years old.
The cause of death was not determined, but he had suffered from heart disease, his family said.


Sports of The Times; The Guess That Scars Managers
TO the second-guesser, the second guess is never really a guess.
No matter what, the second guess is never wrong.
But for a manager, it's seldom fair.
And as the World Series resumes, the second guess has scarred the psyches of both Bobby Cox and Cito Gaston.
If the Braves don't win, Cox is sure to be second-guessed for not having started Charlie Leibrandt, an experienced left-hander with a 15-7 record this season, in order to give Tom Glavine and John Smoltz another day of rest.


Review/Film; When a Bank Opens a Branch for Sperm
When Zach Shepard (Corbin Bernsen), a dumb junior executive from a big Los Angeles bank, is sent to run one of its branches in northwestern Oregon, he hasn't a clue that the place is really a sperm bank and not a financial institution.
This makes for many smirking double-entendres when he first encounters its strait-laced young manager, Dr.
Grace Murdock (Shelley Long).
An ultimate male chauvinist, Zach conceives the notion of increasing the bank's deposits by holding a stud-of-the-year contest, its $100,000 winner being the entrant with the highest sperm count.
At a packed-to-the-rafters pep rally in the high school, teen-age cheerleaders shout the do's and don'ts for increasing one's count.
One of the do's is sexual abstinence, and when business drops precipitately at the brothel, the angry prostitutes picket the bank until they are hired as "nurses."


Contrary to Guidebooks, The Bronx Proves Safe
IT was breakfast time at the youth hostel at Amsterdam Avenue and 103d Street, and a few dozen mostly foreign travelers were writing postcards and discussing sightseeing plans.
Stefan Krumrei, a 29-year-old Berliner starting his third day in the city, mentioned that he had walked down Broadway to South Ferry, seen Fifth Avenue and Lincoln Center.
"What I really would like to do now is visit Harlem and the Bronx," he said.  'But I am not so crazy to go alone."
When none of the other tourists took up the idea, this columnist, who was hanging around in search of material, volunteered to provide company and transportation.


Patents; Cloning Volumes Of Receptor Genes
A small pharmaceutical research company has patented the genetic code for two molecular switches that could help unravel the secrets of a chemical in the brain associated with mood disorders, sleep problems and even sexual appetite.
The target of the invention is serotonin, a powerful messenger chemical in the brain with a rainbow of effects.
Pharmaceutical companies around the world have been racing to develop drugs that modulate serotonin.
One of the most successful efforts has been the new antimigraine drug Migran, produced by Glaxo Holdings P.L.C.


West Point-Pepperell Buyer Steps Down as Its Chairman
William F. Farley resigned yesterday as chairman and chief executive of West Point-Pepperell Inc., a company he bought in 1988 for $1.5 billion in a highly leveraged hostile takeover, which ultimately led West Point to seek bankruptcy protection.
Mr.
Farley, who is 50 years old, also resigned as chairman and chief executive of Valley Fashions Inc., the parent of West Point-Pepperell.


France Convicts 3 in Case of H.I.V.-Tainted Blood
A French court convicted three former health officials today on charges of distributing tainted blood that resulted in the infection of more than 1,250 hemophiliacs with the virus that causes AIDS.
Already 273 of them have died.
The case stirred outrage in France after an official investigation showed that senior health officials had ordered the continued use of the blood-clotting factor that hemophiliacs need even though the officials knew it to be contaminated at a time when procedures to detect and eliminate the virus were already available.


Tension of Waiting at The Daily News
A Daily News delivery driver, working on a loading dock this week, chalked across a blackboard: "Welcome to the NEW N.Y. Daily News!" It was an upbeat slogan, but with the newspaper's destiny in the hands of a bankruptcy judge, anxieties continued to weigh on the tabloid's employees.
"We've been in a constant state of crisis for three years," Juan Gonzalez, a Daily News columnist said on Friday.
"We're so thoroughly demoralized that we're just working on automatic pilot."


Rival Bosnia Commanders Meet for First Time
After seven months of fighting, commanders of the three main forces in the Bosnian war met for the first time today in a room at Sarajevo airport and began talks that the United Nations hopes will clear the way for a winter relief operation on a scale not seen in Europe since the Berlin airlift of 1948.
The talks immediately ran into an obstacle that could cause further holdups in the already badly delayed relief operation: an acknowledgment by all involved that military measures crucial to the shipment by truck of hundreds of thousands of tons of supplies are not likely to be agreed on until there are breakthroughs in political negotiations in Geneva on the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Janet Viertel, 77; Took Photographs of Underwater Life
Janet Viertel, an underwater photographer, died on Wednesday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco.
She was 77 years old and lived in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
She died of complications from breast cancer, her family said.


Steinberg's New York
Saul Steinberg arrived in New York City 50 years ago and has been observing and drawing the Manhattan landscape ever since.
Steinberg once said he was at first puzzled by an apparent contradiction: the city's light didn't seem to match its temper.
He found himself in the midst of a Northern potato-and-whisky, guilt culture, yet one illuminated by the light of the Costa Del Sol -- a tropical Edinburgh.
Tracing the latitude of New York across the Atlantic, Steinberg made the fundamental discovery that it is on a line with southern Portugal, the heel of Italy, the cities of Asia Minor and the Levant.
Far from being the Northern, Presbyterian, Dutch and English city it had been attempting to be for so long, New York was secretly in cahoots with Naples.
Geography is fate, and New York pined for the shores of the Mediterranean.
Armed with knowledge of this alignment, Steinberg has watched the city achieve its Mediterranean destiny as it has lost its Northern European inhibitions.
In most art, decline or confusion is represented by darkness.
In the accompanying drawings (from a new collection with an introduction by Arthur C. Danto, "The Discovery of America," published this week by Alfred A. Knopf), the reverse has taken place.
As the city has grown more menacing and dangerous, Steinberg's notation of it has become brighter.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 86th Street and 96th Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Mitchell-Lama Street Festival.
TOMORROW
Eighth Avenue will be closed between Bleecker Street and 14th Street, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Eighth Avenue street fair.


Judge in Sex-Assault Trial Assails 'Loose Woman' Defense Tactics
In a stormy courtroom confrontation, the presiding judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today accused defense lawyers of trying to malign the alleged victim by depicting her as a "loose woman." Angry defense lawyers shot back that the truth was being kept from the jury.
The outburst -- the most dramatic moment so far in the six-day-old trial -- centered on a pretrial decision by the judge to lift some of the protections that New Jersey's rape-shield law provides for the reputation and character of victims of sexual assault.


Patents; Way to Tell If a Pearl Is Natural
FOR 80 of his 85 years, Kenneth M. Russell has nurtured a special love for natural pearls.
As a child he helped his father rummage for them in shellfish from the Mississippi, and his parents made the down payment on a house with money from a $600 pearl.
As an adult, he has collected thousands of pearls, a few each year, and devoted much of his spare time to studying their mysterious luster.
Mr.
Russell, now a retired trade association executive who lives in Bethesda, Md., says the Bible refers to pearls 10 times, while diamonds rate only 3 mentions.
"A diamond is like a piece of glass," he said.
"Pearls are soft and have a quiet elegance. It is the one gem that cannot be improved by man."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the environmental battle against disposable diapers misstated the position of Judy Enck, a senior environmental associate at the New York Public Interest Research Group.
She and the organization strongly support the use of cotton diapers.


Reginald Harmon, 92; Led Air Force Lawyers
Maj.
Gen.
Reginald C. Harmon, retired, the first Judge Advocate General of the United States Air Force, died on Monday.
He was 92 years old and lived in Arlington, Va.
His death was reported yesterday by his daughter, Susan Harmon Meyer, who said he had died as a result of an automobile accident in Washington.


CHRONICLE
With little fanfare, a portrait of PRESIDENT BUSH appeared in the Yale Club of New York City on Wednesday, hung over a fireplace in the main lounge.
Some people walked right by it, not noticing that Chauncey Depew had been moved to the opposite side of the door to make way for the President, class of '48.
Others stopped suddenly, doing double takes at the sight of the life-size portrait by EVERETT RAYMOND KINSTLER.
"He looks pretty good, better than on TV," said one grad who, discretion being the better part of valor at the Yale Club, would identify himself only as a Perot fan.
"I guess that on Jan. 20, he will be sitting in front of this portrait because he won't be in the White House."


Dinkins's Painful Choice
In the Randy Daniels case, the Mayor must balance responding to harassment charges with supporting a friend.
News analysis, page 26.


Your Money; Conservative Path Has Fewer Thorns
IN investing, regardless of where one stands politically, a strong case can be made for following a conservative path.
A new study of mutual-fund performance in the last 20 years found that conservative equity-income funds were the hands-down winners.
An investment of $10,000 made on Sept. 30, 1972, would have grown to $105,417 at the end of last month, compared with $87,136 if the money had been placed in growth funds, a more aggressive breed, and $87,831 if invested in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Despite Economy, Clinton Sets Record for Funds
Despite their earlier fears that the recession would discourage contributors, Democratic fund-raisers have collected $62 million for the Presidential campaign, exceeding their record money drive of 1988 by about 20 percent, a senior Democratic official said today.
Rahm Emanuel, Gov.
Bill Clinton's finance director, also said the party planned to spend $12 million, much of it in the final days of the race, on advertising that does not use the candidates' names but will nonetheless hammer home the party message, reminding voters of the stagnant economy.
Four years ago, Mr.
Emanuel said, the party spent $1 million for such advertising, which is not restricted by campaign spending laws.


Japan's Emperor Tells China Only of His 'Sadness' on War
Emperor Akihito, opening the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, acknowledged today that Japan's wartime occupation had "inflicted great suffering on the people of China," but he stopped short of the apology demanded by a growing number of Chinese.
The Emperor's statement, made shortly after his arrival, unambiguously placed the blame on Japan for its wartime aggression, marking the clearest acceptance ever by Tokyo of responsibility for its conduct in the 1931 seizure of Manchuria, the 1937 invasion of China and the brutal occupation that followed.


Are Those Game Sites Neutral or Indifferent?
Under international law, a flag flown upside down is a signal of distress.
While this certainly wasn't the intention during a World Series game in Atlanta last Sunday, the National Hockey League might consider flying the Canadian flag southside up as a commentary on its marketing problems north of the border.
The reason: Canadians seem to have grown cool to hockey, their national passion, at least as evidenced by the first two regular-season games played at neutral sites in this season's bold marketing experiment.
Last week, in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, the Calgary Flames and the Minnesota North Stars drew only 8,783 customers, leaving a relatively small arena about one-fourth empty.
Tuesday night, in Hamilton, Ontario, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Ottawa Senators sold only 7,168 tickets, leaving the arena less than half full.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Environmental Policy; BUSH TO ANNOUNCE ENVIRONMENT PLAN
The White House is planning to announce a series of environmental regulations next week to focus attention on President Bush's environmental program just before the election, Administration officials and critics of the Administration said today.
Although the announcements appear to be aimed in part at fending off assertions that the White House has undermined clean-air laws, some of the rules may lead to additional criticism of the Administration's environmental record.


Madonna's Book: Sex, and Not Like a Virgin
FIRST, THE FACTS: MADONNA'S new book, as even your butcher knows by now, is simply, classically titled "Sex." It comes sealed in a Mylar bag (much as condoms do) with a label reading "Warning! Adults Only!" and a price tag of $49.95.
Reportedly she does not want it open in bookstores, but HMV Records at Lexington and 86th Street will let anyone who gives a donation to Lifebeat AIDS see one page, for one minute, in a mock confession booth.
Warner Books, a Time Warner company, is the publisher (Ice-T must not have been enough trouble for one year).
A million copies went on sale in five countries and five languages on Wednesday, attended by a good deal of deliberately decadent hoopla.
The profit on the first printing could reach $26 million.
Any questions?


Going With the Grain
When the public psyche is confident, no one really notices grains.
Wheat, corn, rice and other cereals are refined until they're rendered almost obsequious, a staff of life that can then be assumed.
In Asia, rice was polished over the centuries, until it was eventually milled into fine flour.
By the time Hernando Cortes reached Mexico, corn was already being dried and ground for tortillas.
Around the Mediterranean, wheat was concocted into couscous and other pastas and, finally, bread.
As cultures progressed, they pushed their grains from primitive gruels into refined but subordinate ingredients.
Some anthropologists see this harnessing as a man-over-nature kind of thing.


Where Every Landmark Tells a Story
SINCE it has been lavishly blessed by nature with beauty, wealth and clear, clean skies, it is hardly surprising that the Greek island of Chios has attracted a great many visitors over the years, most of them uninvited.
The first was Poseidon, who seduced a local nymph, thus begetting the handsome boy Chios or Snow, who gave the island its name.
Then came Pelasgi, Lelages, Carians, Ionians, Persians, Athenians, Macedonians, Romans, Saracens, pirates, Venetians, Genoese, Franks, Catalans and, of course, the Turks, who stayed over 300 years and committed one of the most gruesome massacres in modern European history.
But the latest invasion has some way to go before it wreaks any significant damage.
At the airport in Samos, the island just to its south, jets from Frankfurt or Berlin never seem to stop unloading their human cargo.
But the main arrivals in Chios are still the propeller plane from Athens and the steamer from Piraeus.
New vacation hotels are being built, others planned, but mostly on the beaches in and around the characterless village of Karphas, in the southeast.
Chios is one of the larger Aegean islands, 33 miles long and at its widest point 15 miles across and most of its 50,000 people, among them some of the richest and most distinguished in Greece, have other things to do than sell postcards and ice cream to the Germans and the British.
That is good news for those in search of a peaceful yet stimulating vacation, especially those able to avoid the months of July and August.
You might reserve a room at the Kyma on the southern edge of Chios Town, a family mansion expanded into a family hotel, and historically important as the place where a treaty with the departing Turks was signed this century.
A balcony room there, or in the more luxurious but less intimate Chandris next door, brings with it the lapping of waves and a view directly across the strait that narrowly separates the island from Turkey.
Then rent a motorcycle or a car, neither of which is expensive by Greek standards, and drive to the medieval villages of Mesta and Pirgi in the south or to the wilder north, where you will find no more than the occasional passing motorist.
You may even find that you are only one of two or three visitors to the monastery of Nea Moni, looking at mosaics rated among the very finest in Greece.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
I wonder if the Mann children's insistence that The Times photographer take a picture of their mother naked represents their own subconscious resentment of her naked photographs of them.
If Emmett, Jessie and Virginia have objections to being photographed naked, how can they, as children, express those objections to a parent who is practicing "art"?
JEAN H. SCHNEIER
Huntington, L.I.


The Case of the Missing Bumper Stickers
To the Editor:
We were driving, my wife and I, from one end of Connecticut to another on Columbus Day weekend, talking about the coming Presidential debate.
Suddenly, I noticed something odd: there were virtually no political bumper stickers on the cars speeding along Interstate 95.
Through the 1970's and 80's bumper stickers were a distinctive part of American popular culture.
Paul Harvey, on his daily radio broadcast, would announce the best of those his listeners had spotted across the United States.
But now that phenomenon is palpably in decline.


BEST SELLERS: October 25, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) To prove he is still a hero among the living dead, Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
2
1
2
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)
3
3
6
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
4
5
33
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
2
22
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
6
4
9
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
7
11
2
THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.) Book Four of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
8 *
6
15
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
9
9
2
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
10
7
11
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
11
8
9
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
12
8
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
13
10
2
LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains; a sequel to the 1984 novel "Cold Sassy Tree."
14
12
3
THE SILKEN WEB, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $16.95.) Kathleen Haley faces a difficult choice: marriage to a well-to-do man or to an old flame.
15
6
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) A television star encounters romance and shades of her unhappy childhood.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
3
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
4
8
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
3
22
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
5
5
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
6
7
19
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
7
8
11
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
14
20
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
9
10
12
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918.
10 *
6
2
THE SENATOR, by Richard E. Burke with William and Marilyn Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The recollections of a man who served as an aide to Edward M. Kennedy for 10 years.
11
9
8
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
12 *
11
17
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
13
13
3
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
14
1
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
15
5
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
2
2
15
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
45
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
3
4
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
5
5
34
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
NATURAL HISTORY, by Maureen Howard. (Norton, $22.95.) Bridgeport, Conn., is the central character of this abundant, immediate novel, a meditative chronicle of the members of a family as they win, lose or draw in the pursuit of happiness.
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Arkady Renko, the Moscow police detective of Mr.
Smith's "Gorky Park," sleuths once more, this time in the gray new world of post-Communist Russia and its reborn criminal entrepreneurs.
SLIM'S TABLE: Race, Respectability, and Masculinity, by Mitchell Duneier. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) A sociologist's fascinating report on the codes of decent behavior that govern the lives of working-class black men he got to know in a cafeteria.
ARCADIA, by Jim Crace. (Atheneum, $20.) A witty, self-aware, polished stylist's cautionary novel of urban development in the new dystopia, where the nastiest capitalist generally wins.
AFRICAN LAUGHTER: Four Visits to Zimbabwe, by Doris Lessing. (HarperCollins, $25.) A piercing account of the distinguished novelist's visits to her deteriorating homeland, a country that can never really be her home again.
NATIVISM AND SLAVERY: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the 1850s, by Tyler Anbinder. (Oxford University, $39.95.) The history of a weird and awful period in American politics, when a powerful anti-Catholic movement became, for a while, the most effective antislavery movement as well.
GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Mr.
Gleick, who knows how to portray scientists and dramatize emerging ideas, takes on one of the greatest of physicists, the pioneer of quantum electrodynamics.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 133,000
481 Bayport Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,700.
Farmingdale 142,000
44 Bird Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,500.
Levittown 160,000
32 Elbow Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, vinyl siding; taxes $4,100.
North Massapequa 138,000
579 North Suffolk Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining area, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Oakdale 135,000
5 Jeffery Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; den, dining area, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,500.
West Islip 125,000
3 Perry Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,800.
OTHER AREAS Clinton, Conn. 172,500
144 Liberty Street. 4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 110-year-old renovated Cape Cod; sliders to patio, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,608.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 203,000
26 Ridge Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $5,084.
Maplewood, N.J. 353,000
17 South Crescent Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; rec room, 2-car garage, living-room fireplace; taxes $6,772.


NO BURDEN TO BEAR
I nestled my grandmother's head in my arms, as she died in a Los Angeles hospital in 1964.
As the eldest grandchild, I was the one to plan the funeral.
After choosing a burial plot and the music, and writing the eulogy, I was left with the task of selecting the pallbearers.
We didn't have a large family: there were two sons and a few distant relatives.
I selected five people and told the funeral director that I would be the sixth.
He informed me that it would not be proper for a woman to carry a coffin in an Orthodox funeral.
As I sat with the rabbi before the funeral, I told him what the funeral director had said.
Knowing how I felt about my grandmother, he said, "Although you are not permitted to carry the coffin, you can carry her all the days of your life in your heart."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DANCING 'DRACULA'
If you loved the book, adored the play and swooned over the movies, its time to take a look at "Dracula" the dance.
The Hartford Ballet has produced a version of the 1897 Bram Stoker novel, which is having its premiere on Halloween weekend.
Performances are scheduled for Friday and Saturday at 7:30 P.M., and Sunday at 1 P.M., in Bushnell Hall in Hartford.


Making a Difference; The Grower of Grease-Eating Bacteria
For most people, fast food is as American as french fries.
Unfortunately, over time, the oils used to prepare fast food can have the same clogging effects in drain pipes as they do in human arteries.
But for Bill Hadley, president of Environmental Biotech Inc., a Florida-based franchise network that grows bacteria, grease disposal is just a matter of unleashing microscopic bugs that consume and digest grease.


Along the Mosel River, Riesling's Domain
THE happiest fellow in the Landesmuseum in Trier, Germany's oldest city, is a grinning oarsman on a wine ship carved in sandstone.
For him, it isn't important that the fragment, excavated in Neumagen-Dhron, just up the Mosel River, is part of a third-century Roman grave marker.
He is spending eternity alongside a barrel of German wine.
Conventional wisdom holds, reasonably, that the emergence of unified Germany inevitably will whet Americans' interest in Germany's undervalued riesling wine, the world's most versatile food companion.


Jeanine Fox and William Sullivan
ACCORDING to many who live there, the Woodlawn section of the Bronx might as well be a small town in Ireland.
This seems particularly true inside Seera's Hair Designers, a pink beauty shop in the center of Woodlawn where most of the hairdressers are young women from Ireland who dress in jeans and hip footwear.
The woman who shampoos Seera's customers wears an apron that reads, "I've got Irish roots."


Gaggle of Drivers Still in Hunt for Winston Cup
Alan Kulwicki, one of the six drivers who are now in the closest Nascar Winston Cup championship race ever, was someplace entirely less promising five weeks ago.
After a crash during a 500-mile race in Dover, Del., on Sept. 20 left him in 34th place, Kulwicki was 268 points behind Bill Elliott, the leader in the race for the $1 million bonus for the seasonlong title.
With a driver able to gain only about 4 points per finishing position in each race, Kulwicki's chances looked poor with only six races left at that time.


Al Gore's Double Life
On a balmy August night in Waco, Tex., as moths swarm around the floodlights above a sea of banner-waving Democrats, Al Gore is on a stem-winding, give-'em-hell roll.
Standing in shirt sleeves on an improvised stage, Gore whips the assembled thousands hard as he charges the Bush Administration with ruining the economy.
"What time is it?" he yells, echoing the rhetorical flourish he first used during his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention.
Waving his arms like an orchestra leader, he leads the crowd in a shouting, chanting denunciation of George Bush and Dan Quayle: "It's time for them to go!"
And then, after the slight pause of a speaker who knows how to connect with his audience, Gore moves to the meat of his message: "Do you have the courage to change?" he cries, punching the air as sweat pours off him.
"You have to have the courage to change. You have to reach out for something different."
It is a good night for Gore, who seems entirely at home with this rural, blue-collar crowd.
And yet, the next morning, a very different Gore is on display.
Standing beside Bill Clinton at an impromptu news conference at a power station outside Waco, Gore looks wooden and startlingly aloof; his arms dangle awkwardly like a department store mannequin, and his demeanor is so icily serious that he could easily pass for a Secret Service agent.


Deirdre Curtin, Thomas Hommel
Dr. and Mrs.
Brian J. Curtin of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deirdre Claire Curtin, to Thomas Edward Hommel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore E. Hommel of Long Beach, L. I. An April wedding is planned.
Miss Curtin, 29 years old, is a systems analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father, who retired as the surgical director of the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, is an associate clinical professor of ophthalmology at Columbia University.


Nonworking Bulb Can Indicate a Defective Circuit
WHEN an ordinary ceiling light with an incandescent bulb flickers or will not light, tightening or replacing the bulb often solves the problem.
But when it does not, there are easy tests for determining what is wrong, as well as easy remedies.
To avoid shock when handling a bulb in a fixture, turn off the switch before touching the bulb.


Glittering Mayhem
At the Folies-Bergere, a benefit helps people with AIDS, Oct. 19.


Creditable Credit
To the Editor:
We enjoyed Benedict Nightingale's article on Simon Gray, "Notes From the Front Lines of Life"  [ Sept. 20 ] .
But why omit "After Pilkington" from the discussion of Mr.
Gray's plays and television scripts?
We have watched "After Pilkington" more than once on cable TV and consider it nothing less than a masterpiece of dark humor.
ROSALIND and SANFORD GABIN Vestal, N. Y.


Girl Left Alone Fatally Injured in Fire
A 3-year-old girl left alone in her family's apartment in Brooklyn died yesterday afternoon after a fire broke out in the apartment, the police and fire officials said.
Firefighters found the girl, Iti White, lying unconscious in the apartment on the first floor of a six-story tenement at 179 Linden Boulevard in Flatbush, a Fire Department spokesman, Richard A. Kuzniewski, said.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
My feelings are not colored by religious or ethical mores concerning adult sexuality, and as an artist, I employ nudity in my painting.
Rather, my outrage is due to Mann's willingness to exploit her children in ways that clearly jeopardize their emotional growth.
Childhood sexuality is not, as she rationalizes, an "oxymoron." It is an emotional reality that requires nurturing and respect if her children are to become fully sexual and loving adults.
Instead, with few visible qualms, she has used her artistic ability to emotionally, if not physically, sexualize her relationship with her children, their "consent" notwithstanding, by exploiting their need to please their parents.


Making a Difference; Two Guides Who Untangle New York
Even a life-long resident of New York City knows how harrowing it can be to try to hail a taxi during rush hour.
Imagine being a newcomer who doesn't even yet know what the lights atop the cabs mean.
Kathy Mayer Braddock and Tory Baker Masters thought about that problem and other Manhattan maladies in putting together their new book, "The Intrepid New Yorker." In it they describe ways to untangle the maze of day-to-day life -- from hiring a handyman to getting the first appointment of the day for phone or cable installation.


In Editorials, 5 Major Papers Back Clinton
Five major newspapers, including The New York Times and The Daily News, endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton for President on their editorial pages today.
Other endorsements were in The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Denver Post and The Kansas City Star.


Brooklyn's Neighbors to the Mob
Residents along a tidy boulevard in Bath Beach awoke last week to the unsettling discovery of two corpses, shot in the head and gazing vacantly, slumped in the seat of a parked car, apparently the latest victims in a year of Mafia infighting that has left at least 13 people dead and 23 injured across south Brooklyn.
Huddled against the chill morning wind off Gravesend Bay as they watched officers string a police tape and remove the bodies, neighbors of the largely Italian neighborhood spoke to one another in hushed tones about the continuing violence.


Leaving Commercial Fruitcake Behind
PEOPLE either love or hate fruitcakes.
I think the reason so many people dislike them is that they have been subjected to the commercial variety -- heavy, dried-out cakes made with supermarket candied fruits that are dyed alarming colors and often have a strange, soapy taste.
Calvin Trillin's most often quoted joke is that there is only one fruitcake and it is sent on from year to year.
Russell Baker felt the same way; he once wrote that his dislike of fruitcake dated from a Christmas dinner when at the age of 15 he dropped a small piece of fruitcake and shattered every bone in his right foot.


Lopez's Lightweight Title Hits Home for Gamache
Tony (The Tiger) Lopez is a world champion again.
It wasn't easy.


Judith Dickstein, John Remondi
Mr. and Mrs.
George Dickstein of West Nyack, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Judith Barbara Dickstein, to John Francis Remondi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Remondi of Boston.
A March wedding is planned.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Sept. home sales, millions, annual rate
3.34
3.47
Tuesday
Third-quarter G.D.P., percent change
1.5
1.9
October consumer confidence index
56.4
55
Wednesday
Sept. durable goods, percent change
-0.1
0.4
Sept. personal income, percent change
-0.5
0.2
Sept. consumer spending, percent change
-0.1
0.3
Thursday
Late Oct. jobless claims, thousands
368
375
Friday
Sept. new home sales, percent
-6.1
2.9
Tuesday: Johnson Redbook survey on October retail sales  Wednesday: Treasury two-year note auction  Thursday: Treasury five-year note auction *
Germany's Bundesbank council meets


Jill M. Katz, Philip L. Wolf
Jill Melissa Katz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Katz of River Vale, N.J., was married last evening in Pearl River, N.Y., to Philip Leonard Wolf, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Wolf of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski performed the ceremony at the Pearl River Hilton.
Mrs.
Wolf, 26 years old, is a market research analyst at the Bases Group, a market research company in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


Attacks on U.S. Aid Program Alarm Caribbean
Whether they arrived 100 years ago or in 1980, Dominican economists say, foreign visitors to their country would have found a largely agricultural nation that lived almost entirely from its production of sugar, tobacco and coffee.
But in little more than a decade, the aggressive promotion of light assembly industries, strongly aided by American programs known as the Caribbean Basin Initiative, has completely changed the country's landscape, making manufacturing the largest sector of the economy.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook; After Commercials Full of Grim Statistics, Perot Now Offers Softer Image
One thing you have to give Ross Perot: he's not just another pretty television face.
And his half-hour prime-time specials, which have become hits of the political season without even a regular slot or channel, are devoid of sex and violence.
Does their appeal represent a heartening upsurge of political concern or only the latest demonstration of voter volatility, not to say gullibility?
Mr.
Perot is bringing new meaning to made-for-television campaigns.
Before his promise to attend rallies today in Flemington, N.J., and Pittsburgh, he has hardly been visible in the flesh since his return to politics.
And except for the Presidential debates, he has shunned programs where interviewers get to ask questions that interest them more than they may interest him.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 4 about Blennerhassett Island, W.Va., referred incorrectly to Walt Whitman.
He was not a guest of Harman and Margaret Blennerhassett at their mansion.
Whitman was born in 1819 and the mansion burned in 1811.
There is a local story, which some dispute, that the poet visited the island in 1849.


Reconsidering the Rules on Charter Flights
IF you are one of the estimated 4.5 million people who have taken a charter air trip in the last 10 years, you probably received papers specifying your rights.
Your payment should have gone into an escrow account, so it was recoverable if your trip did not depart, or worse yet, if you got to your destination but could not get back.
Escrow accounts have been part of the Federal charter rules for 10 years, despite deregulation of the rest of the airline industry.
One result, as a banker involved with the charter business pointed out, was that travelers holding regular Eastern or Pan American tickets probably lost their money when those lines stopped operating, while travelers left with tickets for charter trips on the same airlines had a way to recoup.


At Work; The Missing Issue in Campaign '92
It may be the year of the woman, but women's issues have been curiously inconspicuous during the Presidential campaign.
True, when pressed in the final debate last week, George Bush cited his appointments; Bill Clinton cited his appointments and his award from the National Women's Political Caucus; Ross Perot cited one appointment and his wife and four "beautiful daughters."
But the income issues women's groups used to filter into campaigns, in the last few years via the hapless Democrats, have been obscured this year.
The Presidential tickets have been too busy lobbing family-value bombs back and forth, and women themselves have been busy running for office in record numbers.
"Women are focused on getting women elected," said Heidi Hartmann, director of the Institute for Women's Policy Research, a Washington economic research group.
"There's less energy for the national campaign."


SURFACING
HOBBY --
Sky diving:
What agents and producers in Los Angeles now do on weekends. FAMILY --
Beepers for parents:
So the baby sitter can reach you in an emergency. FASHION --
The biker ski parka:
Made of nylon, for riding the chairlift. By Ralph Lauren. ACCESSORY --
The undershirt:
It's now de rigueur to show a bit of white. RETAILING --
Levi's Original Jeans Store:
To compete with the Gap and Banana Republic; arriving soon at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue.


Washington, Hanoi and Realpolitik
The announcement last week of Vietnam's pledge to release all photographs and other archival material on missing American servicemen illustrates the new dynamics of the post-cold war era, as well as the old dynamics of American politics.
President Bush said the Vietnamese move -- confirmed in a mission to Hanoi last weekend led by retired Gen.
John Vessey -- was a breakthrough, but "only a beginning" toward normalizing relations and ending the trade embargo of Vietnam.


All About/Sports Stadiums; It's Boom Time for the Playing Fields Across the Country
So maybe consumers are not buying a whole lot of cars.
And, yes, businesses have cut back on first-class airline tickets and four-star lunches.
But there is at least one area of conspicuous spending in these recessionary times: sports stadiums.
Domes, parks, yards and coliseums (few seem to be called stadiums or arenas anymore) are being built or remodeled across North America at a pace not seen in two decades.


In Praise of More Retirement Coverage
To the Editor:
In "Pensions -- or Perks for the Affluent?" (Forum, Sept. 20), David Mermelstein and Norman Stein address an important issue.
However, the picture is incomplete.


Noises On (Cameras, Too)
WITH the elections at hand, it's been a particularly noisy month.
People have had to strain to listen for anything that sounds like the truth.
Last Monday,at a gala to benefit Lincoln Center -- a few minutes after the Presidential candidates finished going at each other in East Lansing, Mich. -- the delicate voice of the soprano Kathleen Battle stunned chattering guests and the waiters buzzing around them into a silence that comes from hearing the truthfulness of beauty.
Accompanied by Wynton Marsalis and the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra, Ms.
Battle sent the notes of Duke Ellington's wordless "Creole Love Song" out across the cavernous Grand Promenade of the New York State Theater, which had been decorated to suggest the Savoy Ballroom of the 1940's.
Pure and unburdened by ideology, the notes drifted past men in starched white shirts and women in spangled dresses seated at lamp lighted tables.


Abrams Seems Mired Despite His Advantages
Robert Abrams stands as the record vote-getter in New York State.
He is allied with a national Democratic ticket that seems headed for a sweeping victory here.
In a year of deep anti-incumbent feeling, he is facing a two-term Republican dented by years of official inquiries into his ethical conduct in office.
So why, by all accounts, is Mr.
Abrams stuck in a competitive race with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato?


Tobacco Industry Fights Anti-Smoking Tax Plan
Doctors and health-care advocates are locked in a heated battle with the tobacco industry over a ballot initiative in Massachusetts intended to stop teen-agers from smoking by increasing the cigarette tax by 25 cents a pack.
If the measure passes -- and its supporters say their most recent poll shows it ahead by a small margin -- Massachusetts will have the highest state cigarette tax in the nation, at 51 cents a pack. (The District of Columbia now has the highest, at 50 cents a pack.)


In Village Under Ax, British Miners Feel Betrayed
Like his father and his grandfather before him, Thomas Mallin is a miner, and for the last 18 years he has carved coal from the seams that run like black rivers deep beneath the low rolling hills of South Yorkshire.
But last week, Mr.
Mallin and thousands of other miners across England and Wales were told they were nearing the end of the line.
Faced with shrinking demand for British coal, the Government declared it would shut down production at Grimethorpe and nine other mines at the end of the month, while it studies whether to close them permanently.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Touring in Midwest, Clinton Plays Up an Outsider Image
Gov.
Bill Clinton used a trip through the rural Midwest today to cultivate an image for himself as a Washington outsider who, like his independent opponent, Ross Perot, can be trusted to change everything voters do not like about the national capital.
Clinton campaign officials, who have been closely following a variety of national polls that show their lead slipping to as few as five percentage points, or expanding to as many as 19, have been searching for a steady rhythm that they can use to absorb good as well as bad news.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Oct. 4 about the easternmost point in the United States misstated the location of West Quoddy Head, Me.
It is on the mainland, not on Machias Seal Island.


OCT, 18-24: Prehistoric Penguins; French Cave Revealed As Stone Age Gallery
France got its first stunning view this weekend of a grand, prehistoric cave, decorated by people who lived as many as 20,000 years ago.
Half-flooded and difficult to reach, the cave was filmed by researchers and shown yesterday on television in its full majesty -- a hall of great stalagmites, its walls studded with more than 100 paintings and engravings.
The cave, deep inside an underwater tunnel that runs through a cliff on the Mediterranean coast 7.5 miles southeast of Marseilles, was discovered by deep-sea divers last year.
No cave art had been found before in eastern France.
Historians believe the cave was used as a sanctuary where the hunting people of the paleolithic era met for religious or magic rites.
Some Cro-Magnon participants left behind hand prints on the walls; 26 such charcoal stencils have been found.


The Empress Has No Clothes
SEX
By Madonna.
Photographs by Steven Meisel.
Edited by Glenn O'Brien.
Unpaged.
New York: Warner Books. $49.95.
THE MADONNA CONNECTION Representational Politics, Subcultural Identities, and Cultural Theory.
Edited by Cathy Schwichtenberg.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Cloth, $55.
Paper, $17.95.


The Recording Industry Hedges Its Bets and the Superstars Sign On
CYNDI LAUPER clearly understood rock singers when she recorded her hit "Money Changes Everything." In the past months, Prince, Madonna and ZZ Top have announced huge record contracts.
Will the economics of those deals affect the choices available to music fans?
It's not immediately clear that they will.
Interestingly, politics could play a stronger role in what is heard.
In the wake of Warner Brothers rapper Ice-T's "Cop Killer" -- which angered many policemen enough to stage a boycott -- a number of record companies have become more stringent in evaluating the songs they release.


Land Ho


Talking: Budget Time; For Co-ops, Rising Fees And Taxes
RISING fuel, insurance and water costs will need special attention during the 1993 budget preparation process now in full swing at most New York City co-ops.
Also needing study will be the impact of revenue shortfalls because of increasing delinquencies among shareholders and the decline of flip-tax revenue because of slower sales.
Co-ops may also have to set aside funds for taxes that could be due under Section 277 of the Internal Revenue Code.


A Mall Halloween: Trick-or-Treating for a Distrustful Time
SOME 12,000 ghosts, goblins, ghouls and assorted superheroes are expected to descend upon the Garden State Plaza mall here this week -- so many that for the first time the management is spreading its Halloween welcome over three nights, ending Saturday.
The young trick-or-treaters wandering through the cavernous 200-store complex will be entertained by actors dressed as Batman, Joker and Cat Woman.
The candies, holiday stickers and prizes that will be given out, and the services of the actors, will cost the management $25,000, said Debra Gilson of Glen Ridge, the regional marketing director of Westfield Inc., a Los Angeles-based concern that owns the plaza and six other malls like it around the country.


Once Again, Buckley Takes On Bach
"SHAME on anyone who plays me badly," warns the inscription on the top of William F. Buckley Jr.'s harpsichord.
Undaunted, the writer, lecturer and host of the television program "Firing Line" sat down in his music room overlooking Long Island Sound, and gave a respectable rendition of Bach's "Chromatic Fantasy."
Mindful of the harpsichord's expectations -- which a visitor suspected are Mr.
Buckley's as well -- the 66-year-old resident of Stamford practices 45 minutes each day in preparation for something he loves to do: performing a Bach harpsichord concerto with an orchestra.


Alice T. O'Rourke, Fellowes M. Rodd
Alice Theresa O'Rourke, a daughter of Andrew P. O'Rourke of Somers, N.Y., the County Executive of Westchester County, and Alice T. O'Rourke of Crestwood, N.Y., was married yesterday to Fellowes Morgan Rodd, a son of Thomas Rodd of Bradford, N.H., and the late Wendy M. Rodd.
The Rev.
Herbert Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rodd is a strategic planning consultant with the New York State Power Authority in New York.
She and her husband founded the New York law firm of Rodd &amp; O'Rourke.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and received a law degree from Fordham University.


Jane Moos, David Cohen
Jane Moos, an architect at Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill in New York, was married in Chicago last evening to David Cohen, a business consultant with the Hampton Consulting Group, a financial-consulting concern in New York.
Rabbi Herbert Bronstein officiated at the Standard Club.
Mrs.
Cohen, 40 years old, graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in architecture from Pratt Institute.
She is a daughter of Clifford Moos of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Naomi Moos.
The bride's father is the president of the Economy Folding Box Corporation, a packaging concern in Chicago.


Every Inning a Late Inning, and Baseball's the Loser
YAWNS and vacant stares.
That was the World Series picture, and not a very pretty one, in the Toronto airport at 8:30 A.M. on Friday, only nine hours after the final out of the fifth game.
The lounge for the New York flight was jammed with blue-blazered television heavies, executives from baseball's home office and club officials, some stopping in New York, some continuing to Atlanta for the sixth game.
They all looked numb, worn down from the modern "fall classic," when games begin at 8:30 P.M. in the East and meander on toward the next day.
The lateness of the Series is another example of what is wrong with baseball, along with synthetic conditions and runaway commercialism.


POSTINGS: At the Trade Show; A Silver-Lining Seminar
Sensing a hint of economic recovery in the air, the Community Housing Improvement Program will feature at its annual trade show on Wednesday a seminar entitled, "Can You Profit from Disaster? Investing in Housing in New York City."
Dan Margulies, the executive director of CHIP, a trade organization for apartment building owners, said the seminar's panelists would include building owners and investors like Rubin Pikus, who, after staying out of the city housing market for four years, recently bought three distressed rental properties.


The Changing Faces Of Arthur Ashe
They were seated around the kitchen table -- Arthur Ashe; his wife, Jeanne, and their daughter, Camera, now 6 years old.
This was a short time ago and the conversation was unremarkable, about what Jeanne and Arthur had done that day, and what Camera was doing in school.
Jeanne looked at Camera and then casually turned back to Arthur, and saw that he had begun to cry.
"Camera didn't question it, because she knew that her father had been troubled, though I don't think she was quite sure of the depth of it," Jeanne Ashe recalled.
"Then Arthur reached over and held her hand. And I rubbed his back. It was one of the few times I have ever seen Arthur cry.
"Nothing was said."


World Series; GAME 6
Toronto 4 Atlanta 3
In baseball's 89th World Series, the Blue Jays reigned as the first team from Canada to win the championship.
They captured the Series, four games to two, but not before the Braves rallied to send Game 6 into extra innings.
The Blue Jays won in the 11th as Dave Winfield drove in the decisive runs with a two-run double.


Lisa Saltzman, Charles Solomon
Lisa Ann Saltzman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Saltzman of New York, was married last evening to Charles Solomon, a son of Anne Solomon of Brooklyn and the late Arthur Solomon.
Rabbi Leonard Gordon officiated at the Pierre Hotel in New York.


Wendy B. Greenberg and Jay I. Sabin
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Greenberg of New Vernon, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Beth Greenberg to Jay Ira Sabin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sabin of Rivervale, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Greenberg, 27 years old, is a social worker in New York at District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner at Budd Larner Gross Rosenbaum Greenberg &amp; Sade, a law firm in Short Hills, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Greenberg, is a kindergarten teacher in Maplewood, N.J.


The Army Gets Into Position as China Awaits Change
CHINA'S new leadership team emerged in public a few days ago, with one member the odd man out.
As the six others relaxed in their Western suits, Gen.
Liu Huaqing stood ramrod straight in his green uniform, older than those around him and resembling nothing so much as a stern chaperone.
General Liu's promotion to the Politburo Standing Committee reflects the army's growing influence in political affairs, and perhaps its future role as a kingmaker after the death of Deng Xiaoping.


Where Are All the Happy Endings?
HOLLYWOOD VS. AMERICA
Popular Culture and the War on Traditional Values.
By Michael Medved. 386 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


Chez de la Renta . . .
The designer's Paris fashion show, Oct. 20.


POSTINGS: 123 Apartments for the Needy; A New Life for Gouverneur
For nearly 20 years, the eerie-looking shell of the former Gouverneur Hospital, between Water Street and Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive on the Lower East Side, stood empty as one plan after another to redevelop it fell apart.
But on Tuesday a ceremonial groundbreaking will signal the start of work to transform the 91-year old building into 123 apartments for people with special needs.
The project is being developed by Community Access, a nonprofit organization that provides housing and support for the mentally disabled.


Re-Creation


Stompin' at the Fillmore
BILL GRAHAM PRESENTS
My Life Inside Rock and Out.
By Bill Graham and Robert Greenfield.
Illustrated. 568 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $24.


Diana Blough, Stephen Geck
Diana Jay Blough, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Foster W. Blough of Hanover, N.H., was married there yesterday to Stephen Charles Geck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Geck of Avon, Minn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald M. Mackenzie Jr., a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ at Dartmouth College.
Mrs.
Geck, 32 years old, is a sales specialist for national accounts at Random House in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College.
Her father, who is retired, was a budget officer at Dartmouth.
Her mother, Barbara Blough, retired as the director of alumni affairs at the Dartmouth Medical School.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday about the Southern states' voting record in Presidential elections misidentified two Democratic nominees in some copies.
The nominee in 1968 was Hubert H. Humphrey; in 1972 it was George McGovern.


Baker, Informing Iraqis of Credits, Asked for Help With Palestinians
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d sent a message to Iraq in November 1989 telling the Iraqis that the United States had just approved new grain credits and seeking Baghdad's influence in persuading Palestinians to take part in peace talks with Israel, a newly declassified document shows.
Although the message from Mr.
Baker, now the White House chief of staff, does not explicitly link the farm loan credits to Iraq's intervention with the Palestinians, it provides the clearest evidence to date that the United States wanted something in return for the guarantees.


Town Furious at New York's Settlement With Developer
For years, public officials and environmentalists here have fought to preserve a rocky bluff known as Barcelona Neck.
But now that the state has struck a deal to do just that, the same people are furious.


Rachel Barzey, Jason Huemer
Rachel Deborah Barzey, the daughter of Lloyd and Beverly Barzey of New York, was married yesterday to Jason Robert Huemer, a son of David and Barbara Huemer of San Mateo, Calif.
Associate Justice Joseph P. Sullivan of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Mrs.
Huemer, 29 years old, is a writer in the equity-research department of Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a mathematics teacher at Public School 207 in Manhattan.
Her mother is a speech pathologist in Manhattan for the Visiting Nurse Service of New York.


Power of Russian Parliament's Leader Is Becoming Vexing Issue for Yeltsin
It is instructive of the vagaries of Russian politics that the man who has proved probably most vexing to President Boris N. Yeltsin -- Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the Speaker of Parliament -- is not Russian, has no constituency, and was not long ago an ardent Yeltsinite.
A native of Chechenya in southern Russia and a virtual unknown before he was elected to the Russian legislature in 1990, the former academic was at Mr.
Yeltsin's side during the failed coup in August 1991, and he ran for Speaker as the President's man, barely squeaking past the Communist candidate.


A Dispute on Warning to Iraq
Before Iraq invaded Kuwait, Pentagon officials sought to block a Presidential message they viewed as a weak warning to Baghdad.
Page 14.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Least noteworthy in Mann's portraits is her children's nudity.
She chronicles with her camera some of the most powerful emotions that parents and children experience.
Those who see only exploited, naked children should question their vision rather than the photographer's.
CLARK S. BENBOW
Providence, R.I.


Only Her Hypnotist Knows for Sure
VOODOO, LTD.
By Ross Thomas. 282 pp. New York: The Mysterious Press. $19.95.


Ellen Rossen, Av Westin
Ellen Rossen, a freelance television producer in New York, and Av Westin, the senior vice president of Time Telepictures Television, a unit of Time Warner Inc. in New York that produces documentaries and television programs, were married last evening.
Cantor Ellen S. Math officiated at the Lotos Club in New York.
Ms.
Rossen, who is keeping her name, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a daughter of Sue Rossen of Los Angeles and the late Robert Rossen.
Her father was a director and writer whose film "All the King's Men," which he wrote, produced and directed, received an Academy Award in 1950 for best picture.


SALVADORAN PANEL SEEKS ARMY PURGE
A confidential list of Salvadoran military officers to be purged or transferred next month for human rights violations and other reasons names the Defense Minister, his deputy and more than 110 other officers, according to people familiar with the document.
The unexpectedly long list, and the inclusion of the powerful Defense Minister, Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, have created one of the most serious tests of civilian authority since elections in 1984 ended years of direct and de facto military rule.


No 'Just Say No' Sloganeering For Alice in Chains
As a matter of careerbuilding, most up-and-coming rock bands probably wouldn't choose to devote their second album to unremittingly bleak, unmistakably direct songs about heroin addiction and death.
But that's exactly what Alice in Chains has done on "Dirt" (Columbia 52475; CD and cassette), an album that zoomed into the Top 10 upon release.
With titles like "God Smack," the band's songwriters, Jerry Cantrell (guitar) and Layne Staley (vocals), don't hide behind euphemisms; in "God Smack," they tell an addicted friend, "Can't get high, or you will die."
Alice in Chains emerged from Seattle at the end of the 1980's, alongside Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Temple of the Dog and Mudhoney.
Like its fellow grunge-rockers, the band is steeped in late-1960's, early-1970's hard rock from the era before heavy metal's conventions hardened.
Guitars, buzzing and wailing and chomping through wah-wah pedals, are the core of the music; with slow-grinding riffs and long-suffering lyrics, Alice in Chains is closest to Pearl Jam among its local compatriots.


Alaska Railroad
To the Editor: On Sept. 6, you published an article about the Kenai Penninsula of Alaska and Denali National Park ("Two Not-Too-Remote Lodges," by Florence Fabricant).
My wife, Rhoda, and I read the the article with great interest that day, sitting on a plane flying to Anchorage to visit those very places.
Your article accurately portrayed the sights and sounds of Alaska.
It did, however, leave out a hidden gem -- the Alaska Railroad.
We took a wonderful trip from Anchorage to Seward and two days later from Anchorage to Denali.
The coaches were sparklingly clean and comfortable, and the on-board guides were particularly informative.
The meal service was superior, as well as being reasonably priced, and the views from the broad windows could not be beat.


A Malaga Beach Boy Named Pablo Picasso
One of the more unexpected cultural reversals of the last half-century in Europe is the appearance in Malaga, on the Mediterranean coast of Spain not far from Gibraltar, of a large and serious exhibition devoted to paintings, drawings, etchings and sculptures by Pablo Picasso.
Backed by the Junta of Andalusia, it is the joint achievement of Carmen Gimenez, a Spanish curator now on the staff of the Guggenheim Museum in New York, and Gary Tinterow of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Florio's Naming of G.O.P. 'Jobs Czar' Wins Wide Praise in Trenton Truce
For the next year or so, he will be one of the most powerful members of Gov.
Jim Florio's cabinet, overseeing a billion dollars worth of public and private projects in an effort to bring jobs to New Jersey.
What makes Robert E. Hughey's appointment particularly interesting is that the Democratic Governor has chosen a Republican to try to stimulate economic growth while Republicans and Democrats, locally and nationally, are blaming each other for the depressed state of the economy.


For Sale: The World and All of Its Charms
"THE Power of Maps," the new exhibition at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, presents maps not as innocent documents that tell you where to get off the highway, but rather as instruments of propaganda.
"Like advertisements," an exhibition sign says, "they present information selectively, reflecting particular points of view."
At the museum's gift shop, tucked under the grand oak staircase in the entrance hall of the neo-Georgian mansion, the point of view is mostly sales.


Making a Difference; A Little Republic's Negotiator
The Republic of Kyrgyzstan is a relatively poor little country.
It is betting that Arnold A. Saltzman can help change the poor part for its five million people.
The republic, known as Kirghizia when it was part of the Soviet Union, is about the size of Britain and is nestled up against China.
Mr.
Saltzman, who knows his way around the region, is a businessman-diplomat based in New York.
Kyrgyzstan has hired the 76-year-old Mr.
Saltzman to do all its negotiating for contracts to develop the nation's resources.


Gina Azzinaro, Bart Breakstone
Gina Azzinaro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Azzinaro of Woodstock, Conn., was married last evening to Bart Laurence Breakstone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Breakstone of Stamford, Conn.
Cantor William Walton officiated at Channing Memorial Church in Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
William Naughton, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted.
Mrs.
Breakstone, 31 years old, is an account executive with Ogan Dallal Associates Inc., a public relations company in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.


Data Bank/October 25, 1992


Mother of Invention
"It turns out that the State Department was not only rifling though my files, but actually investigating my mother, a well-known subversive." -- GOV.
BILL CLINTON on reports that the State Department had searched its files for information on his mother, Virginia Kelley.


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed and activated Mario Bailey, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Waived Craig Veasey, defensive end.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Placed Steve Wright, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Signed and activated Rich Stephens, offensive tackle, from the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Waived James Brooks, running back.
Activated Rogerick Green, defensive back, from injured reserve.
COLLEGE  PRATT -- Announced the resignation of Ronnie Roddy, strength and conditioning coordinator, and Michael McGovern, supervisor of athletic facilities.


Where Recycling Is Raised to a Folk Art
Today's Latin American folk art -- quirky handmade toys, colorful masks, giant carnival figures and exuberant shop signs -- is among the richest in the world, reflecting the traditions of the region's colonial and ancient past.
Many historical connections can be seen in "Visiones del Pueblo: The Folk Art of Latin America," an exhibition of 280 items from 17 countries at the Museum of American Folk Art through Jan. 3.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
121.65
119.50
131.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5280
1.4814
1.7000
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2483
1.2448
1.1263
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6218
1.6489
1.7130
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$343.20
$342.20
$360.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Chrysler Tries to Build Traffic With Its New LH Sedans
IT was a perfect New York scene, with a neatly turned-out pedestrian threading his way through the automobiles and talking into his black cellular phone.
Hollering, actually, trying to make himself heard above the blaring horns and general mess of well-jammed traffic.
I caught part of what he said because the street was narrow and I was part of the problem.


Unstoppable Miami Is Just That Again
With their beloved Hokies battered, bruised and mired in another losing season, most of the Virginia Tech fans in the crowd of 51,423 came to Lane Stadium this afternoon to see how long their team could stand up to Miami, one of the nation's two top-ranked football teams.
How long? Not long.


WHO TRUSTS WHOM?
William Safire's preference for "pocket-pickings" over the State Departments "pick-pocketings" seems justified, but then he concludes with the astonishing assertion that "nobody pockets picks."


In Spain, an Exhibition For Kasparov to Note
IN September, about the time the Bobby Fischer-Boris Spassky match began in Yugoslavia, a second exhibition match was staged, in Linares, Spain.
It made no pretention to being a world title contest, as Fischer continues to claim his is, and had no official status.
Its prize, $2,000 and an automobile, was a far cry from the $5 million purse for which Fischer and Spassky are struggling.
But it brought together two grandmasters who have attracted attention as possible future challengers for the world champion, Gary Kasparov: Viswanathan Anand of India, the No. 5 player in the International Chess Federation's rankings, and Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine, No. 2.
Anand won 3, lost 1 and drew 4 to win by 5-3.
The Indian took a 2-0 lead based on his end-game skill, but in this final game, he nailed down the victory by pounding Ivanchuk into overstepping the time limit.


Behind Congress Races, The Presidential Factor
AS if the redrawing of Congressional districts, the loss of a Congressional seat and the retirement of four incumbents aren't enough, candidates for New Jersey's 13 seats in the House of Representatives this year find themselves in the middle of a role reversal.
Usually the Republican Presidential candidate has held the lead in the closing weeks of the campaign while Democratic candidates for Congress tried to come up with strategies to divorce their campaigns from what was happening at the top of the ballot.


Fashion Crushes
YOU'D think they were giving something away.
People line up by the thousands, sometimes patiently, but often pushing and shoving.
Those without tickets beg, borrow and steal them.
All to get into fashion shows.
Fashion shows.
That's Paris at certain seasons for a certain segment of the world whose lives revolve around names like Chanel, Dior, Montana, Valentino.


Sally Schweitzer, Stuart L. Singer
Sally Anne Schweitzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Schweitzer of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there last evening to Stuart L. Singer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen L. Singer, also of Scarsdale.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Singer, 28 years old, is the manager of publications at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father, Peter Schweitzer, is an investor in New York.


High Cost of Medicine
To the Editor:
Congress has voted to override President Bush's cable television veto (a luxury people can easily do without, if pressed), while there is no regulation of the prices pharmaceutical companies charge for medicines patients need to stay alive.


Pro-Communist Rally in Moscow


Ibero Proves Too Fast In the N.Y.R.A. Mile
The road to Florida may have been crowded with horses headed for the Breeders' Cup yesterday, but seven other runners of distinction traveled instead to Aqueduct to take a shot at another target, the $500,000 N.Y.R.A.
Mile.
The most successful traveler of the day was Ibero, who won the race by three lengths after flying East from his home base in California with precisely that in mind.
Ibero's agenda does not include the Breeders' Cup for good reasons, most notably his seven-race losing streak since February.
But he came East with his own trainer, Ron McAnally, and his own rider, Laffit Pincay Jr., and gave new meaning to the word "shipper," a horse who pinpoints one race far from home and ships in to bag it.
And at Aqueduct lately, with many hometown horses already bound for the Breeders' Cup, the shippers have been winning in forays.


'Killing of Sister George' Revived
AS a 1966 British export to Broadway, "The Killing of Sister George" was said to be audacious.
It was.
After all these years, it is nervy for the group Wordplay II to be taking on a nasty little play that, in its own good time, redeems itself with the playwright's compassionate afterthought.
Say that the local production at the Schoolhouse is revealing the wrong reasons for doing Frank Marcus's play and some of the right ones.
Sister George, the moped-driving, hymn-singing district nurse of "Applehurst," the name of an English soap opera, is being bumped off after six years, a victim of a 4 percent dip in ratings.
Away from the wireless, she is the dominator and lover of Alice, otherwise known as a "flatmate" in a sadomasochistic relationship that has Alice, a consenting "Childie" (as she is called) of 34, doing unspeakable acts of obeisance.


Talking Bacon And Business
Over breakfast at the Carlyle on Tuesday, Viscount Linley, the furniture-designing son of Princess Margaret, was worrying whether his bacon would be crispy.
"You can't get this in England," he said, a bit weary after being honored the night before at a benefit at the Rainbow Room for London's Royal Academy of Arts.
"It's never as good as this. It's not crispy."


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Sally Mann's pictures of her children not only show her love for them, but invoke the innocence and sensualness of being a child ("The Disturbing Photography of Sally Mann," by Richard B. Woodward, Sept. 27).
If there are those who see her pictures as "disturbing photography," as the title of your article suggests, perhaps we need to look inward at ourselves.
Children looking at her photographs would not find them disturbing in the way some adults do, because we're reading our own fears into them.
Censorship of artistic expression will not protect children from being abused and manipulated.
Only responsible adults can do that, by educating themselves and their children, empowering them to speak out freely when they feel that something doesn't seem right.


New Policy Is Aimed at Preventing Date Rape on Campuses
SEXUAL assault is increasingly recognized as a serious problem on college campuses in Westchester.
Federal legislation, which went into effect this month, requires any school receiving Title IV aid to institute a formal policy on preventing sexual assault and providing services to victims.
As schools grapple with the issue, they are confronting the sensitive subject of what has come to be known as date rape.
It is a crime to which students are particularly vulnerable, and college administrators, faculty and security forces as well as experts on crime are attempting to reduce that type of offense through stronger policies, education and increased counseling on campus.


An Author in Search of 2 Characters: Himself
IN "THE NORMAL HEART," LARRY Kramer's 1985 drama about the early days of the AIDS crisis, one of the characters charges the playwright and activist, or at least his on-stage surrogate, with having "a big mouth."
You might as well cite a leopard for its spots.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 25, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
39
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
5
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
2
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
5 *
28
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
6
1
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
7
4
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $12.50.) A countess and a British soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
8
5
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
9
5
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
10
5
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
11
9
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
12
39
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
13
1
RELICS, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.99.) Capt.
Montgomery Scott returns in a new "Star Trek" tale.
14
19
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
15 *
1
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
3
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The Democratic candidates detail their program for "changing America."
3
27
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington and Wall Street have benefited only a few Americans.
4
2
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
75
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6
468
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7 *
2
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
8 *
13
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
9 *
1
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
10 *
67
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
11 *
9
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
63
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
92
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
111
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
2
THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1993. (Yankee Publishing, $3.95.) The 201st annual edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


In Ex-Soviet Lands, Gangs Fill Vacuum
To the Editor:
The Red Mafia (as the Russians call it) is taking over the former Soviet Union, as may be seen in "Arkady Meets Moscow's New Mafia" (Op-Ed, Oct. 7), your excerpt from the new Martin Cruz Smith novel.


Grammys


What Has Ron Gant Done Lately? He Has Little Chance to Answer
Managers will probably argue that they don't run their teams all that differently in post season than they did in the 162 games that were played to get them into baseball's final four.
Their moves are probably just picked apart, analyzed more.
That argument would probably be lost on a host of players who saw their regular jobs lost in the shuffle that managers sometimes engineer in an effort to assure victory for a day, if not a series or an entire post-season.
Ask Ray Oyler.
Or Dick Tracewski, Tom Matchick or Ray Knight.


Durie A. Leidner, Taugh G. Lynch
Durie Ann Leidner, the daughter of Ann D. Westerfield of Rumson, N.J., and Thomas W. Leidner of New York, was married yesterday to Taugh Gerard Lynch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Lynch of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Jerome M. Nolan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven, N.J.
Mrs.
Lynch is an account executive at Lavey Wolff Swift, an advertising division of the Omnicom Group, in New York.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.


What Primaries Could Mean for G.O.P.
On Sept. 17, 1992, David A. Levy, the Republican Party's machine-selected candidate for Congress, said, "If you don't have the organization behind you on Election Day, there is no way you can be successful." Unfortunately, Mr.
Levy still believes that the bosses should pick the candidates and not the people in free open primaries.
Well I've got news for Mr.
Levy.
We forced the primaries this time and we will do it again.
Yes, Mr.
Levy beat Dan Frisa in the primary, and Peter King beat me.
But Peter King did no campaigning outside the party because he knew that if the average Republican found out there was a primary he would have lost.
And because they were able to keep me in court on two technicalities -- I beat them twice 5 to 0 in the appellate court -- I did not know for sure that I was on the ballot until the Thursday just four days before election.
Mr.
Levy and Mr.
King, you did win the battle, but the war is far from over, and I intend to keep fighting.


Uh-Oh, Perot; His Message And Money Drive The Race Again
HARDLY anyone seriously expects that Ross Perot will be elected President next week.
But as the events of the last week have once again demonstrated, this is no reason to underestimate his impact on the 1992 campaign.
On Monday, when the Presidential debate marathon ended with George Bush still huffing and puffing to catch up to Gov.
Bill Clinton, many political analysts declared the campaign all over except for the voting.
Then the post-debate polls were tabulated, and they told a different story.
Almost without exception, they showed Mr.
Perot steadily gaining support, while Mr.
Clinton's lead was starting to shrink.


A Temporary Setback
ANITA PAGE, a 41-year-old solo sailor from Santa Rosa Beach, Fla., yesterday abandoned her plan, at least temporarily, to become the first American woman to sail nonstop around the world.
Page, who set sail from New York City Oct. 14, decided to turn back after her vessel was disabled by hurricane winds 350 miles southwest of Bermuda.


Alyssa Kelly and John O'Donnell
Alyssa Anne Kelly, a sales assistant at the investment banking firm of Morgan, Stanley &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to John Alan O'Donnell, the chief investigator for the House Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment in Washington.
The Rev.
Damien Pickel performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Stone Church in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Mrs.
O'Donnell, 24 years old, graduated from Marymount College of Virginia.
She is a daughter of William and Pamela Kelly of Yorktown Heights.
Her father is an investment adviser in New York and the chairman of the New York Foundation, a nonprofit charitable organization.
Mr.
O'Donnell, 33, graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
He is a son of Thomas N. O'Donnell of Rochester, Mich., and Judith S. Ent of Indianapolis.
His father, who is retired, was a group director for safety and labor relations at the General Motors Corporation in Detroit.
The bridegroom is a stepson of Marylou O'Donnell of Rochester and Daniel Ent of Indianapolis.


Japanese Emperor Goes to China


But Who Won on Language?
After the first Presidential debate, not a single
spin
meister
worked the pundit crowd on the subject of the best use of language.
Thus, wholly uninfluenced, and with the all-unimportant English teacher vote at stake, I will undertake the linguistic (in contrast to the political) analysis.
1.
Split Infinitives
.
Only the cultural elite goes out of its way to avoid inserting an adverb between the leaves of an infinitive.
The people -- ultimate arbiters of usage -- happily split away, and all three candidates were willing crassly to pander to this inclination.


Perspectives: Industrial Space in Queens; A Pleasant Time for Tenants on the Move
"MY pet peeve is the occupancy tax," said Richard Zirinsky in the hearty voice of a man happy to describe himself as a salesman.
"To pay 6 or 7 percent for the privilege of renting industrial or commercial space is silly."
With little prompting, this 77-year-old developer and owner of industrial and commercial space in Queens will take a swipe at electricity costs and taxes in New York City as well.
They have pushed industrial tenants out of the city, he said.


OCT, 18-24: Counterfeiters Prosper; Law Fails To Protect And Curtail Migrants
In 1986, Congress tried to curb illegal immigration, mostly from south of the border, with a law that granted amnesty to three million unauthorized laborers already here and that established sanctions for employers who hire unauthorized newcomers.
Congress created a commission to assess the law.
After slowing for a few years, the flow of illegal immigrants appears to be climbing back to its mid-1980's levels, although no one knows the real numbers.
Last week, the final draft of the commission's research showed that the Immigration Reform and Control Act has failed in just about every way feared or expected.


In Jamesport, a Reminder of Yesteryear
THE Jamesport Manor Inn looks like Halloween every day of the year.
The landmark, which dates from the mid-19th century, would be a suitable abode for the Addams family.
It is a typical haunted house, Hollywood style.
Despite its appearance, the restaurant is anything but chilling.
North Fork friendliness, warmth and down-to-earth attitudes team up to provide a homey atmosphere.
Waitresses are hard working, speedy and smiling.
Service is casual, rather than polished.


The Last Stewardess
The world's most profitable airline does not employ anyone called a flight attendant.
Feminism has been slow in coming to Singapore Airlines, and the exotic, ever-smiling young women gliding through its planes' aisles in figure-hugging batik sarongs are still called stewardesses.
More to the point, the airline does not refer to these hard-working women as women, at least not for public consumption.
These, dear passengers, are Singapore Girls.


Megan R. Healey, John C. Hagerty
Megan Ruane Healey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Healey of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to John Coleman Hagerty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry C. Hagerty Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph G. Healey, an uncle of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Mrs.
Hagerty, 24 years old, is a special-events coordinator at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges.
Her father, a former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance, is a partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
Her mother, Dr.
Margaret Healey, is a psychologist in Morristown, N.J.


Mel Finkelstein, 60; Took Photographs for Several Papers
Mel Finkelstein, The New York Post's photography editor and an award-winning photographer at three other newspapers, died on Friday at South Nassau Community Hospital in Oceanside, L.I.
He was 60 years old and lived in Baldwin, L.I.
He died of bone-marrow cancer, his family said.


Coup by Ex-Communists Is Reported in Tajikistan
Armed bands from south Tajikistan led by a former Communist swept into the republic's capital, Dushanbe, this morning, seized key Government buildings and announced that they were restoring a hard-line government, according to Russian and Tajik reports.
But heavy fighting broke out later in the city center, and pro-Government forces were reported massing for a counterattack.


Envoys Talk of a Serb-Croat Entente
After more than a year of savage warfare in the former Yugoslavia, diplomats and United Nations officials say they now see growing signs of an accord between Serbs and Croats, the two strongest ethnic groups in the region.
Senior Serbian and Croatian officials have begun quietly negotiating to improve relations, these envoys say, and the talks have already produced concrete results, including prisoner exchanges, opening of the Belgrade-to-Zagreb highway and withdrawal of Serbian troops from a peninsula on Croatian territory.


Very Private Candidate In a Very Public Race
Brook Johnson, with his jacket off and his gold horse cuff links gleaming, looked back over his shoulder in the car he uses for campaigning and did a cackling imitation of an old woman.
"Johnson wouldn't know -- he's a millionaire," Mr.
Johnson crowed in a tone of scorn, mimicking the character in a radio commercial for Senator Christopher J. Dodd.
That one ad, more than Mr.
Dodd's more conventional attacks on Mr.
Johnson's business career or the attacks on Mr.
Johnson's motives in running for the Senate, hit home, he said.


Coming Unglued
SERBS AND CROATS
The Struggle in Yugoslavia.
By Alex N. Dragnich.
Maps. 202 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Catherine Guerin, John Dougherty
Catherine Ann Guerin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Guerin of Plandome Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Joseph Dougherty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Dougherty of Owego, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gerard Gordon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Dougherty, 28 years old, is a technical analyst in the worldwide equity division of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment banking company, in New York.
She graduated from Stonehill College.
Her father, the former star guard for the New York Knickerbockers basketball team, is a managing director of Bear Stearns &amp; Company, the investment banking company, in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; For TV, Perot Spends Heavily on Wart Removal
The top-of-the-line makeover at the Neiman Marcus beauty salon in Dallas does not come cheap -- $200 for the full treatment, including haircut, facial, manicure and massage.
But that is loose change compared with the nearly $1.1 million that Ross Perot has spent in the last week to make over his political image.
While remaining out of sight since Monday night's final debate, Mr.
Perot has focused his television advertising campaign not on the economic issues he maintains are so vital but on a careful portrayal of his character and life story.


Pastor's Yale Mission; Redefining God's Role in Academia
On a bright Sunday in October, a familiar scene unfolded on the New Haven Green.
Worshipers gathered in the three historic churches along Temple Street.
Homeless men met on the park benches behind.
As the men picked through their bags, a congregation rose to sing the "Gloria Patri":
"As it was in the beginning, it now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Amen."


Lilco Program Encourages Companies to Innovate
LILCO workers will soon be trained by computers.
Riggers who hoist or lift equipment will no longer be instructed in a classroom.
Instead, a computer designed by Argonaut Consultants of Northport will soon be available for job training.
When an assignment calls for lifting a turbine shell in a power plant and the rigger has questions, the push of several buttons on the computer will teach him what he needs to know.


. . . Chez Lanvin, Too
A reopening of the Lanvin shops, Oct. 18.


Reading the Candidates' Family Portraits
IN THE MIX OF ACTIONS, IDEAS AND pageantry that makes up a Presidential race, two parallel campaigns vie for voters' attention.
One is the explicit campaign of issues, while the other, equally important, deals with images and symbols.
This year, candidates' families have played a central role in this other campaign of symbols.
Using a complex mix of media, including official portraits, staged photo opportunities and elaborate video biographies, candidates have presented themselves and their families, in an effort to convince voters of their character, and their ordinariness.
The official start of the campaign of images, like that of issues, comes at the conventions.
It is here, in a now traditional moment at such gatherings, that the theme of family is first made explicit.
The candidates stand on the podium in a blaze of television lights, flanked by their wives, children, grandchildren, parents, even brothers and sisters.
Lined up like the cast of an opera taking a curtain call, they offer themselves as an admirable example of the American family, given vivid and dramatic form.


Why the Candidates Resist Saying 'Prime the Pump'
EVER since President Franklin D. Roosevelt launched the Works Progress Administration and other New Deal ventures to help the one in four Americans out of work during the Great Depression, policymakers have looked to fiscal stimulus as a life raft to rescue the nation from recession.
Though the success of the New Deal is debated -- it took World War II to end the Depression -- the vast job creation program, based on the precepts of John Maynard Keynes, the British economist, put almost four million Americans to work building the Hoover Dam, LaGuardia Airport and other public projects.
Some economists say it laid the basis for more equitable distribution of wealth when recovery occurred.
This year, even though the economy remains stalled, all three Presidential candidates are looking askance at fiscal stimulus, the use of deficit spending to create jobs and consequent growth.


Youthful Book Lovers Meet Regularly to Share Critiques
LIKE other literary critics, they are extremely well read.
And like other lovers of books, they relish discussing the latest novels they have enjoyed with a group of their peers.
But what sets these literary critics apart is their age: most are about 10.
Wearing high tops and baseball caps or headbands and ankle bracelets, these fourth, fifth and sixth graders meet every other week at the Chappaqua Library to share in their common passion: a love of books.


Out of the West, Rose Rustlers
THE Texas rose rustler had come to Brooklyn, and the old roses around here gave him itchy fingers.
"Old Blush," G. Michael Shoup said with certainty, staring at a nondescript little bush in front of an old brick town house on Prospect Park West.
It didn't even have a bloom.


No Headline


Leaving Commercial Fruitcake Behind
PEOPLE either love or hate fruitcakes.
I think the reason so many people dislike them is that they have been subjected to the commercial variety -- heavy, dried-out cakes made with supermarket candied fruits that are dyed alarming colors and often have a strange, soapy taste.
Calvin Trillin's most often quoted joke is that there is only one fruitcake and it is sent on from year to year.
Russell Baker felt the same way; he once wrote that his dislike of fruitcake dated from a Christmas dinner when at the age of 15 he dropped a small piece of fruitcake and shattered every bone in his right foot.


Children's Museum Born of Teamwork
SO FAR, volunteers working to establish the Children's Museum of Southeastern Connecticut have dealt with, among other things, fund raising, trench digging, poison ivy, painting, the delivery of hundreds of pounds of fossils and, yes, the delivery of a baby.
With the museum scheduled to open next Sunday, they are still working.
"We're getting in there, getting dirty, and making it happen," said Andrew Pappas, vice president of the museum's board of trustees.


Polly Eastman, Eugene L. Scott
Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Eastman of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary van Liew Eastman, the senior advertising director at Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York, to Eugene Lytton Scott, the founder and publisher of Tennis Week magazine in New York.
The bridegroom is the son of Dorothy Scott of New York and the late Samuel L. Scott.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Eastman, who is 33 years old and is known as Polly, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is an advertising and marketing consultant in New York.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the race for State Assembly included an erroneous reference to the Republican candidate in the 86th District.
He is Kelly Jones.


Leaving Commercial Fruitcake Behind
PEOPLE either love or hate fruitcakes.
I think the reason so many people dislike them is that they have been subjected to the commercial variety -- heavy, dried-out cakes made with supermarket candied fruits that are dyed alarming colors and often have a strange, soapy taste.
Calvin Trillin's most often quoted joke is that there is only one fruitcake and it is sent on from year to year.
Russell Baker felt the same way; he once wrote that his dislike of fruitcake dated from a Christmas dinner when at the age of 15 he dropped a small piece of fruitcake and shattered every bone in his right foot.


French Fare in a Little White Farmhouse
A LITTLE white clapboard farmhouse with front porch, roosting quietly on a tree-sheltered hilltop: What better place to open a good, caring restaurant?
That seems to have been the guiding principle that led at least three restaurateurs to the shaded hills along Route 202 north of New Milford.
The third and latest to occupy the modest but appealing site is Le Marmiton with an attractive sign reading "Cuisine Francaise."
Up the steps, along the homey front porch, into the two tiny dining rooms, the configuration looks much the same as during its previous tenancy as Carol Peck's.
There have been changes in decor, however.


Marjorie Becker and Peter Burack
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Becker of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marjorie Anne Becker to Peter David Burack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Burack of Harrison, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Becker, 26 years old, is an associate in municipal investment banking at Paine Webber in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father is the managing partner in the New York law firm of Snow Becker Krauss, where her mother, Deborah Becker, is the vice president of management systems.


After the Challenge, A Handsome Payback
America's Cup campaigns have never been considered money-making endeavors.
But the challengers in the 1992 regatta recently recouped some of their costs -- a half-million dollars each -- in an unprecedented payback by the organizers.
The Challenger of Record Committee, which represented the eight cup challengers, finished doling out the money last month after the challengers furnished invoices on legitimate expenses, said Ernie Taylor, the committee's executive director, in a telephone interview from Australia.


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
BRONX CHAMPS: Brian Underwood (21 carries for 118 yards, 1 touchdown) became LEHMAN 's career leading rusher with 2,268 yards en route to a 14-0 upset over KENNEDY (5-1).
The Frenchies (4-2) clinched the A Division Bronx title with the victory, coupled with CLINTON 's 26-20 defeat of WASHINGTON .


Correction
A picture caption on Sept. 27 with an article about churches' role in fostering modern dance misidentified the dancer who played Mary in a 1971 production of "Christmas Rappings" at the Judson Memorial Church.
She was Lee Crespi.


Furor Over a Decision Not to Indict in a Rape Case
When an Austin woman found herself facing a knife-wielding intruder demanding sex with her one night last month, she tried talking him into wearing a condom to protect against disease.
"Don't worry," he told her, according to statements from both of them.
"I don't have AIDS." She replied, "How do you know I don't?"


Lights to Return Along Rochester's Highways
The Monroe County executive thinks that $1.46 million is a small price to pay to lift people's spirits, even in tight-money times, especially if he can light up major roads as part of the bargain.
And so, the county bought the lights along its expressways and plans to turn them on next week, after more than nine months of darkness.


Grimy No More
To the Editor:
It's funny what one gets inured to over time  [ "Getting the Grime Off the Face of the City," Oct. 11 ] .
After all these years, now seeing the Dakota with its grimy facade removed is like seeing Abraham Lincoln with his beard cut off.
ERIK KOLBELL Manhattan


Sports of The Times; Looking Beyond the Neon in Deion
ISN'T it odd how seemingly timeless attributes of athletic heroism can suddenly become bitter points of dispute when the would-be hero wears gold chains?
Take, for example, the ideal of the multisport athlete.


The Smell Of Money
IT was bound to happen.
Someone thinks he is about to create the Honest Car Salesman in a bottle.
A year ago, one of Detroit's Big Three auto makers hired Dr.
Alan R. Hirsch, a quirky smell researcher in Chicago, to devise a rather exceptional scent.
The hope was that when the odor was sprayed on a car salesman, he would -- yes -- smell honest.


Revival of 'Slow Dance On the Killing Ground'
CUT through a welter of words in "Slow Dance on the Killing Ground," and a simple, even powerful, message emerges.
Hope springs, however fleetingly, out of human disparity and social chaos.
It must be a message that the Crossroads Theater Company swears by, for this is the third time in 13 years that William Hanley's play, a failure on Broadway in 1964 and off Broadway in 1970, is being revived here.
While the playwright's setup strains credulity, his payoff is emotionally charged.
After dark in a threatening Brooklyn neighborhood, two men who couldn't be more polarized make contact.
It's that simple.


Profile/George Steinbrenner; He's Back. And He's Still the Boss.
George Michael Steinbrenner 3d learned early on that there are no free lunches, even for the scion of a shipbuilding empire.
His father refused to give him an allowance, and presented him instead with a flock of chickens and a few turkeys so he could start his own egg and poultry company.
Thus it was at the age of 9 he found himself chopping the heads off birds in the exurbs of Cleveland.
"That chicken would run around with no head," he said as if visualizing the whole grisly scene.
"Suddenly he'd flop down and you had to pick the feathers."


Life Prison Term in 6 Drug-Case Murders
Thomas Pitera, a 37-year-old martial-arts expert known as Tommy Karate, was sentenced to life in prison on Friday for committing six murders as a drug-dealing member of the Bonanno crime family.
Alluding to evidence that he brutally killed his victims and dismembered their bodies, Judge Reena Raggi sentenced him, saying, "Mr. Pitera, nobody deserves to die as these people died."


'Other People's Money' Revived in Westport
THE Fairfield County Stage Company is not opening with a long shot.
"Other People's Money," a play sold by its title alone, hardly represents the non-mainstream credo of the group that started out as the Boston Post Road Stage Company in Fairfield eight years ago.
But it's easy to understand why Burry Fredrik, the new artistic director and one of the company's mainstays, intends to take no chances with this season's opener.
The theater has been surviving on tenterhooks after moving to a larger, high-profile playhouse in 1990.
Since then, some productions turned out to be misjudgments, leading the theater management to presume that audiences in Westport are more responsive to the established than the off-beat.


New Emphasis on the Disabled at Work '
PATRICIA DeMARTE is reliable, hard working and bright, says her boss, Marian Randazzo, the general manager at Proftech Corporation, a wholesale office products and office furniture concern in Tarrytown, where Ms.
DeMarte is a data-entry clerk.
"Patty is the kind of person every employer wants," Ms.
Randazzo said.
"Since she has been here, she has taken on added responsibilities in her department." Ms.
DeMarte, 27 years old, is deaf.
Proftech is the first place she has worked.


USAir Pulling Out of Mercer
ON a wet Friday afternoon at Mercer County Airport in September, passengers clutching rain-soaked tickets and bags hurried past a poster beckoning them to sunnier climes: "Fly USAir to Tampa -- only $349 for four days!" There was no hint that within a few days the airport's jet service, operated by USAir nonstop to its main hub at Pittsburgh three times daily, would be just a memory.
And last week, the Mercer County Executive's Office was notified that USAir plans to discontinue its daily propeller-plane flights to Baltimore and Washington National Airports, the only remaining scheduled service, by the end of the year.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Sally Mann will continue to be chastised for cashing in on her photogenic children while treating their nudity and suffering with an uncaring flippancy.
With her new collection of photographs, however, she has displayed quite the opposite.
"Immediate Family" does not trivialize the lives of her children but, instead, shows that their lives include bloody noses, bug bites and nude runs across grassy fields.
Mann will not scar her children through her photography.
What she does show is that childhood, with all its pain and pleasure, should not be concealed.
JACOB BOSTON
Brockport, N.Y.


565 Broadway
To the Editor:
We at the New York Landmarks Preservation Commission were concerned to see a serious error in the Streetscapes column last Sunday about 565 Broadway.


Sports of The Times; Looking Beyond the Neon in Deion
ISN'T it odd how seemingly timeless attributes of athletic heroism can suddenly become bitter points of dispute when the would-be hero wears gold chains?
Take, for example, the ideal of the multisport athlete.


A New Plan For Autonomy of Hospitals
New York City's 11 municipal hospitals will gain more fiscal and administrative autonomy under a plan by the city hospital agency intended to increase efficiency and improve patient care for the city's poor.
Dr.
Billy E. Jones, president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the hospitals, said the plan was an outgrowth of the decision by the city earlier this year to allow the corporation to control its own budget and keep surpluses, rather than returning them to the city.
Beginning in December, Dr.
Jones said, some of the independence granted to his agency will be passed along to the individual hospitals.


Ideas and Emotions Clearly Expressed in Objects
MANY of the 47 craft artists whose works are on display at the New Jersey State Museum here express ideas and emotions as clearly as painters or poets.
Their pots, quilts and furniture are far more than handsome and well made.
Inscribed words and symbols speak about the environment, overpopulation or the devastation of AIDS.
Colors set moods; textures refer to nature or industrial products.


Yonkers Plant About to Begin Its Recycling Job
"THIS is
not
garbage," County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said as he proudly surveyed the two-story mound of plastic milk jugs, yogurt containers and cola cans that constitute the county's newest recycling venture.
The mound feeds the Murf, the Material Recovery Facility as the enormous $20.8 million plant will formally be christened at its dedication on Wednesday.
County officials agreed that the opening of the Murf, named for the pronunciation of the initials M.R.F., marks the beginning of comprehensive, countywide recycling in Westchester.


Downtown Mainstays Are Lost in the Shuffle
FOR many years, Society for Savings was a mainstay of downtown Hartford, but it will become "Bank of Boston-Connecticut operation." G. Fox, another Hartford tradition, is being closed, and its branch stores in the suburbs will become Filene's.
Connecticut Bank and Trust has become Fleet Bank, and Connecticut General has become two anonymous initials in the insurance giant Cigna.
And there are indications that the trend toward closings and regional mergers and consolidations in business could continue.
Analysts have been busy speculating on the implications of the Primerica Corporation purchasing a large share of the Travelers Corporation, the Hartford insurance giant.


Patricia Trent, Marc Saidenberg
Patricia Carol Trent, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Trent of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there last evening to Marc Robert Saidenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Saidenberg of New York.
Miriam Curnin, a marriage officer of the town of Mamaroneck, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the Larchmont Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Saidenberg is a preschool teacher at the Early Years school in San Francisco.
She graduated from Washington University and received an M.B.A. from George Washington University.
Her father is a vice president in the international division of Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her mother, Florence Trent, is the vice president of Innovations in Wallcoverings Inc., a designer and maker of wall coverings in New York.


Tax Cuts and Spending Hikes? No Way!; The Big Spenders
To the Editor:
For generations, the Republican Party has attacked Congress as big spenders and budget breakers.
These attacks became more intense during the Administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush because the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives for 12 years and the Senate for 6.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE WIDOW'S BROOM.
Written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg.
Houghton Mifflin. $17.95. (All ages) With a nod to "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" and a dip of the pointed hat to "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz," here's the elegantly illustrated story of Minna Shaw's independent broom.
It's not wicked, as the neighbors think, or even very scary, but grand fun.


Mutual Funds; Risk, Alas, Was Its Own Reward
The stock market crash of 1987, which passed its fifth anniversary on Monday, ushered in an era of lower stock market returns compared with bonds.
In those five years, the riskiest investments produced the smallest returns.
Among stock funds, for example, growth funds returned 7.7 percent, compared with 8.2 percent for equity-income funds, their lower-risk cousins.


Reflections Of a Colorist
HARVEY APPELBAUM talks about reflections as if he had just discovered them.
But he was inspired years ago by the work of the photo essayist Ernst Haas, who took classic color shots of reflections, ranging from a wet manhole cover reflecting the neon lights of Times Square to a highly polished limousine with zebra stripes mirroring Manhattan skyscrapers.
For more than 20 years, Mr.
Appelbaum, an independent art director, has been photographing reflections in his spare time -- bright impressionistic autumn scenes reflected on a lake, city lights bouncing off the wet black pavement of a street, shimmering kaleidoscopic colors on a Fifth Avenue department-store window and wild flowers turned impressionistic in a flowing stream.
His sense of striking color is reflected even in his clothing, for he dresses in robust, often startling colors.


Always Room for More Bulbs, Bbut Where?
LUCKY indeed are those who remembered to take pictures of their garden last spring.
Rather than one magnificent shot, ideally the pictures should be taken at several intervals to record when assorted bulbs bloom.
These pictures provide excellent records of what is planted where and are practical guides for planting bulbs now.
It is most difficult to recall in October what the garden looked like last March, April and May.
Of course, many of the spring-flowering bulbs that were planted several years ago, like daffodils, eranthis, muscari and scillas, have multiplied to provide fine spring displays.
Many seed themselves and in a few years the display can be wonderful.


Safety Net for the Hungry Is Collapsing
FROM one end of the state to the other, in church basements and bingo halls, in soup kitchens and shelters for the homeless, thousands of volunteers have woven a vast grass-roots safety net to feed hundreds of thousands of hungry men, women and children.
But now, the leaders of this unprecedented movement say, the rapid growth in the ranks of the hungry is outstripping their ability to meet the demand.
These are some of the developments they cite:


Miniskirt Fit for a Man on Stage
Bill T. Jones, the choreographer, donned a designer dance costume on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater for his new work, "Last Night on Earth."
Created by Rifat Ozbek, the fashion designer, the outfit consisted of a white-silk georgette miniskirt worn over an embroidered velvet codpiece.


A la Carte; The Crowning Glory of Feta Cheese
NICK BOBORIS is the feta king of Long Island.
Although few Islanders know his name, many have eaten his cheese at local restaurants or purchased it at nearby stores.
Mr.
Boboris's domestic production plants churn out more than 5.5 million pounds of feta a year.
An additional 500,000 pounds of Greece's best-known cheese comes to this country from Mr.
Boboris's European operation near Preveza, Greece.


Fireworks, Above and Below the Water Line
It was time for sundowners at the River Cafe.
The incoming tide ran hard, lapping against the footings of the Brooklyn Bridge.
In the warm air of the Indian summer evening, I waited on the dock, looking for the running lights of Steve Sautner's stripped-down Mako.
At 8:10, Sautner arrived accompanied by Dery Bennett, executive director of the American Littoral Society (a coastal conservation organization headquartered at Sandy Hook, N.J.).
Sautner's plan was to fish for stripers right up against the shore of Governor's Island, where the lights of the ships and docks attracted bait-fish.


Reds Keep Looking
The Cincinnati Reds have interviewed their sixth candidate for the manager's job, MARC BOMBARD, a former minor league manager for the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Bombard, 42 years old, was a pitcher, coach and a manager in the Reds' minor league organization from 1971 to 1988.
The former New York Mets manager DAVEY JOHNSON was the fifth candidate.
He was interviewed Friday.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Aug. 92
Jul. 92
Aug. 91
New York
2,673
2,879
2,831
New Jersey
1,140
1,646
1,894
Connecticut
690
834
632
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.21
8.22
9.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.23
5.24
6.73
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.07
8.04
8.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.09
5.09
6.59
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.08
8.10
8.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.95
4.92
6.62
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.33
8.37
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.74
5.81
7.20
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.26
3.09
5.33
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.58
7.58
8.93
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


WHO TRUSTS WHOM?
While dissecting Barbra Streisand's use of language in her comments about the tennis star Andre Agassi, William Safire reveals a lack of familiarity with the game of tennis (On Language: "Who Trusts Whom?" Oct. 4).


Iran Is Reported to Aid Turkish Kurds in Iraq
For several nights this week, Iraqi Kurdish guerrillas fighting to drive separatist Turkish Kurds from their bases in northeastern Iraq watched as the twinkling lights of helicopters approached from the direction of nearby Iran.
Each night, two helicopters touched down briefly just beyond the Iraqi guerrillas' front line, in a valley harboring one of the Turkish separatists' main bases, then flew back toward Iran, guerrilla leaders said.


U.S. Revises Kenya Warning
The Department of State is advising travelers that security in the Masai Mara game reserve in Kenya has improved because of new security measures put into effect by the Kenyan Government.
Last March the department recommended avoiding the reserve, a popular safari destination, because of attacks on tourists.
In an advisory issued this month, it said safaris are best undertaken with a minimum of two vehicles.
It also said travelers who did not travel with reputable safari companies or guides or drivers were at risk, adding solo camping is risky.


Everything Was Perfect, but Then Southern Cal Had to Come Along
It might have simply been too much history to overcome.
Washington State, unbeaten in its first six games and ranked among the country's top teams this week, had not beaten Southern Cal on the road in 35 years, and it could not end that streak today.
The Cougars led early but ended with a 31-21 loss to the Trojans at the Los Angeles Coliseum and fell to 6-1.
Southern Cal (4-1-1) held a 24-7 lead early in the third period before Washington State came back with two touchdowns, the second a 34-yard pass to Deron Pointer with 3 minutes 19 seconds left.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
I know a lot of white people who agree with Sherman Alexie that the adoption of tribal rituals by whites is certainly humorous and, perhaps, even disrespectful.
I don't agree.
My first encounter with tribal ritual was at a Native American festival on a reservation near my home.
It was open to the public, so I wandered in and was invited to join the dance around the fire, in the sacred circle.
As I danced around the bright orange flames, the drumming resonated within me, the air shimmered and I began to experience a oneness with everything around me -- like deep meditation.
That was the beginning of a long journey.


The Whole Earth On a Platter
Eighteenth-century maps were incomplete without a few robust human figures lounging about the edges.
This old Italian design, called Terrarum Orbis, is stenciled onto white bone china by Rob Turner of Celestial Studios, in London.
Nymphs cavort with dolphins; Neptune brandishes his pitchfork; horned beasts grace a pastoral landscape.
Each transfer is individually applied, so scenes vary from piece to piece.
Plates are hand-colored in pastel pinks, blues, yellows and greens.


There Won't Be an Off Season for Money and Other Matters
The end of the World Series signals the beginning of baseball's second season.
This year's second, or off-field, season promises to be more eventful than the playing part of the season.
That part, for the most part, was devoid of scintillating division races.
The developments of the next few months may not all be classified as scintillating either, but they are expected to be significant for future events both on and off the field.


Lynn P. Cowell And Allen Ives
Lynn Pierce Cowell, the daughter of Phyllis S. Cowell of Rocky Mount, N.C., and John F. Cowell 3d of New York, was married yesterday to George Allen Ives 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ives Jr. of Durham, N.C.
The Rev.
Joshua T. Mac Kenzie performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Pine Island Club, on Pine Island, N.C.
Mrs.
Ives, 25 years old, is an infant-program coordinator for the day-care center at Glaxo Inc., a pharmaceutical manufacturer, in Zebulon, N.C.
She and her husband graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father heads worldwide marketing communications at CS First Boston, the investment banking company, in New York.


Signs of Life at Sears, Roebuck
Floors laid with carpet or tile instead of linoleum?
Women's dresses displayed in their own section instead of across the aisle from laundry detergents and kitchen gadgets?
Brand-name appliances and attractively priced knockoffs of trendy dresses and blouses sold at Saks and Neiman Marcus?
Just what is going on at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company?


Howe Sees Black Eye
Hall of Fame wing GORDIE HOWE says the National Hockey League is hurting its image by appealing a court decision that ordered the league to return more than $25 million in surplus pension funds to a group of retired players.
Howe said Friday that he had hoped the N.H.L. and its pension society would have accepted an Ontario court order and start building better relations with players.


The Presidential Windbreaker
WHAT: A good, Republican (at least for the last 12 years) cloth windbreaker, in water-repellent Air Force blue-gray with the Presidential seal sewn on one breast and, since the identity-conflicted 1980's, a name embroidered on the other.
Like this: "President Bush." A curiously American bit of clothing.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev had a windbreaker, in proletarian brown.
Margaret Thatcher would have looked silly in one.
Francois Mitterrand once put on a windbreaker (without the seal) while walking with President Bush in Maine, but he looked pretty uncomfortable.
Supplied by the Air Force, this ultimate symbol of Washington status is available to only the most select clientele: Presidents.
It is generally worn on Air Force One, the President's aircraft, where the chief executive slips it over his dress shirt and telegenic tie for that relaxed-but-still-in-command look.


Sexual Harassment: Questions and Politics
A year after the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings, the same questions are being asked.
What did he say to her?
Why did she wait so long to speak up?
Who's lying?
Is it all just politics?


NO BURDEN TO BEAR
Marcie Hershman's Hers column "No Burden to Bear" (Oct. 4) was particularly poignant because, when I read it, I was on my way to visit my mother's grave before the Yom Kippur holiday.
I never knew my own grandmother, but the story reminded me once again of how I miss my mother.
As I sat down to work the Sunday crossword on Monday morning, I was compelled to turn to Hershman's story again, reread it and cry once more.
FLORENCE SCHNEIDER
Bronx


Alisa Wendy Falk, Stuart Popowitz
Dr.
Alisa Wendy Falk, the daughter of Drs.
Willy and Violette Falk of Providence, R.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Stuart Marc Popowitz, a son of Dr.
Leonard Popowitz of West Boxford, Mass., and Linda Ross of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Chiam Shapiro performed the ceremony at the Touro Synagogue in Newport, R.I.


2 Run on Records in Silk Stocking District
City Councilwoman Carolyn B. Maloney was grumbling about her Congressional campaign's lack of money the other day when the 86th Street crosstown bus rolled up, bearing an enormous poster of her opponent, Representative Bill Green.
She stood there for a moment against the backdrop of Mr.
Green's picture and noted, rather wistfully, that she can ill afford the $750 needed to buy such an advertisement.
And then, as the bus rolled away, Ms.
Maloney picked up her bag of leaflets ($8 for 100) and walked on to her next meet-and-greet stop, a street fair on Broadway.


The Senators Are Still In Baseball


Deirdre Kane, Robert Kravitz
Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Kane of Packanack Lake, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deirdre Kane to Robert Kravitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon C. Kravitz of Baltimore.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kane is a recruitment coordinator in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, where her fiance is an associate.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the superintendent of the Hamburg (N.J.) Public School District.
Her mother, Maureen D. Kane, retired as a reading specialist at the Wayne Valley High School in Wayne, N.J.


Corrections
An article on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about Gustav Mahler and the New York Philharmonic, includes an outdated reference to the conductor for the orchestra's concerts this Thursday through the following Tuesday.
Zdenek Macal will replace Klaus Tennstedt, who is ill.


Playing With Fire
It is early afternoon and the word on 116th Street in Harlem is that Denzel Washington is in a nearby trailer preparing to shoot a scene for Spike Lee's film "Malcolm X."
Neighborhood residents peer out their windows and mill about on the street hoping to catch a glimpse of Washington, who has been hailed by critics as one of America's most versatile and talented young actors -- as well as one of the sexiest.


Staying Alive
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM
By Maryse Conde.
Translated by Richard Philcox. 225 pp.
Charlottesville: Caraf Books/University Press of Virginia. $19.95.
TREE OF LIFE
By Maryse Conde.
Translated by Victoria Reiter. 371 pp.
New York: One World/Ballantine Books. $18.


Jennifer Harmon, James Gaffney
Jennifer Yvonne Harmon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Harmon Jr. of West Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to James Patrick Gaffney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Gaffney of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Gaffney, 28 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
She is to start work next month as an events coordinator and fund-raiser for the Foundation for Life, a nonprofit fund-raising organization for bone marrow transplants in New York.
Her father is a limited partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment banking concern, in New York.


Corrections
A correction in this space last Sunday, reporting the dismissal of wiretapping charges against Steve Corbett, a columnist who wrote about a homicide investigation in Pennsylvania, referred incorrectly in some copies to the author of "Murder at 75 Birch," a book about the case.
The author is Richard T. Pienciak.


INSURERS PREPARE TO SEEK RATE RISES AFTER DISASTERS
Insurance for homes and automobiles is expected to rise in cost 10 percent or more in some states, and perhaps become harder to obtain, after the staggeringly high losses to insurers from Hurricane Andrew and other recent disasters.
The losses this year, estimated at more than $10 billion, come after a number of difficult years for the property-casualty industry.
And they come while lower interest rates are reducing the return on insurance companies' investments.
As a result, analysts and industry executives say, many companies will experience cash shortages in the next 12 months and will be under pressure to raise rates.
An Excuse to Gouge?
Nonetheless, consumer advocates say many insurance companies are far healthier than they would have the public believe and are trying to use the catastrophes as an excuse to gouge the public.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Eighth Avenue will be closed between Bleecker Street and 14th Street, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Eighth Avenue street fair.


Plotting Careful Courses In Harassment Dispute
After three days of headlines and a blitz of television and radio reports, the politically explosive controversy over accusations of sexual harassment against the Deputy Mayor-designate, Randy Daniels, retreated from fever pitch yesterday into a series of high-stakes, behind-the-scenes strategy meetings.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who last week named Mr.
Daniels as his Deputy Mayor for Public and Community Affairs, effective Nov. 2, declined in several public appearances yesterday to comment on the dispute and appeared to be distancing himself from his appointee and the controversy, which could hurt him politically whatever the outcome.
Dinkins's Choices
But City Hall aides indicated that the Mayor and his advisers were privately discussing ways to cope with his problem: whether to stand by Mr.
Daniels, an old friend who could play a critical role in his future, and incur the wrath of feminists and others who say he is not responding forcefully enough, or to abandon Mr.
Daniels and incur the enmity of many black political allies and other supporters of the appointee.


2 Run on Records in Silk Stocking District
City Councilwoman Carolyn B. Maloney was grumbling about her Congressional campaign's lack of money the other day when the 86th Street crosstown bus rolled up, bearing an enormous poster of her opponent, Representative Bill Green.
She stood there for a moment against the backdrop of Mr.
Green's picture and noted, rather wistfully, that she can ill afford the $750 needed to buy such an advertisement.
And then, as the bus rolled away, Ms.
Maloney picked up her bag of leaflets ($8 for 100) and walked on to her next meet-and-greet stop, a street fair on Broadway.


The Lowey-DioGuardi Rematch
LIKE a quarreling couple reworking old disputes at a dinner party, Joseph J. DioGuardi and Nita M. Lowey are moving from political debate to political debate these days, puzzling and annoying their audiences while trying to inform and sway them.
Both candidates are seeking re-election.
Mr.
DioGuardi, a Republican-Conservative, won Westchester's 20th Congressional District seat in 1984 in his first run for public office.
He held on to the seat in 1986, but then lost it two years later to Mrs.
Lowey, a Democrat, in her first election bid.
She was the only woman in the United States that year to beat an incumbent Congressman.


POSTINGS: Echoes by Design; St. John's Law Addition
When Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley, Myerson &amp; Casey, once the nation's fourth-largest law firm, went into bankruptcy nearly five years ago, it seemed unlikely that Leon Finley would again see his name emblazoned on a prominent front door.
But it turns out that the 85-year-old lawyer's name will be on the door not just to an office, but to a whole building.
St.
John's School of Law, Mr.
Finley's alma mater, has broken ground for a building on its Hillcrest, Queens, campus that, when completed in December 1993, will have classrooms, a cafeteria and a good part of the law school library.
The school refused to divulge either the building's cost or the size of Mr.
Finley's donation that warranted naming it for him.


Filming With Eddie Murphy, at Age 12
KEEPING up with the acting family of Al and Sherrill Jones and their four sons is not easy.
"They are a dream family," Lillian Green Caran said.
Ms.
Caran, at the age of 76, is a former star of stage and screen whose career began at 2 and who founded the Masque Theater Workshop in Smithtown, where she has worked with each youngster.


Barbara Bauer, J. J. Strojnowski
Barbara Ann Bauer, the owner of Bauer Marketing and Communications in Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Col.
Joseph John Strojnowski, who retired recently as the deputy superintendent for field operations of the New York State Police in Albany.
The Rev.
Giles Spoonhour performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; CONTEST TIGHTENS AS PEROT RESURGES AND CLINTON SLIPS
The 1992 Presidential campaign is entering its home stretch with Ross Perot newly energized and Gov.
Bill Clinton still in the lead but facing a tightening contest with President Bush, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The new poll, conducted Tuesday through Friday, suggests that Mr.
Perot received a considerable boost from his performance in the Presidential debates and his weeks of heavy advertising.
It indicates that Mr.
Clinton's support has dropped since early October and that Republican attacks on his trustworthiness may be taking a toll.
Mr.
Bush's support, however, was not growing, according to the poll.


World Markets; Out of China, a Boost for Hong Kong
ORDINARY Chinese must be wondering what could have happened in their country to have sent the Hong Kong stock market bouncing to new heights this week.
For while their markets, in the cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen, were creeping downward, the Hong Kong market rose to a new record, mostly on the news from China.
The prime shaker in the Hong Kong exchange is not a central bank.
It is a coterie of elderly men, most in their 80's, who rule China and who with a cough or a stumble can send the markets reeling.
They essentially determine the pace of China's economic growth -- the direction is invariably up -- and therefore the action in Hong Kong.


Less Than Full Equivalency
FOR decades, the General Educational Development test, or G.E.D., has been regarded as a respectable alternative to a four-year high school diploma, one that a growing proportion of high school dropouts have taken as a way to resume their education or enter training programs.
Now evidence is emerging, part academic, part empirical, that the people who have G.E.D. certificates remain well behind regular high school graduates in earning power as well as in other, more subtle qualities .


Campuses Buck Clinton On Welfare
THEY canceled classes.
They sang "Blowin' in the Wind." They carried placards that read, "Willie Horton was an abused/neglected child."
Teach-ins were back last week at the School of Social Work at Columbia University and about 200 other graduate programs around the country.
The events, which at Columbia included lectures and a march around campus, were meant to protest cuts in welfare benefits, as well as what the organizers called the demonization of people on welfare .


Their Deutschland
THE JEWS OF GERMANY
A Historical Portrait.
By Ruth Gay.
Illustrated. 297 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35


In Case You Forgot, Penguins Play Like Champions
The Penguins gave plenty of evidence tonight why they are the only undefeated team in the National Hockey League.
They posted a 4-3 triumph over the Devils despite an inspiring performance by the home team.
With 49 goals, the most in the league in their first nine games (7-0-2), and with Mario Lemieux in playoff form, the Penguins have been dominating opponents in every facet of the game, the way they did en route to the Stanley Cup last season.


A Symphony Of Stature
To the Editor:
Mr.
Schwarz referred to Henry Lewis's experience at the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Mr.
Schwarz quoted Mr.
Lewis as saying he was resented once he began to take on the role of an authoritarian conductor, because such a role was unacceptable for a black man.


Tech Notes; A Watch That Refuses to Die
For people who get a kick out of maintaining their tools and gadgets, quartz watches are a bore.
Day after day, they keep dismayingly precise time, and would be affronted at the mere thought of being wound.
About all you can do is change the battery every few years.
Now Seiko is out to abolish even that trace of upkeep.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Hopkinton, R.I.; Work to Start On Golf Resort
WITH hopes of turning this rural town of 6,900 residents into a golf resort that will attract thousands of tourists, a development partnership plans to break ground next month on a $7.5 million, 18-hole golf course.
Brae Bern Limited Partnership also plans to build a 200-room hotel, a conference center and 165 units of housing around the golf course, according to Hal Henry, Brae Bern's general partner.
The project is backed by the State of Rhode Island, which is providing the developers with loan guarantees.


Janet Putnam and Douglas Van Riper
Janet Lynn Putnam, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Putnam of Fallbrook, Calif., was married yesterday to Douglas Raymond Van Riper, the son of Mrs.
George Haase of Manhasset, L.I., and the late Douglas M. Van Riper.
The Rev.
Darrell Floyd, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Los Verdes Country Club in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
Mrs.
Van Riper, 31 years old, is an accountant with Mattel Toys in Los Angeles.
She graduated from San Diego State University.
Her father is a pharmacist in Fallbrook.


Lisa Tillman, David Frankfurter
Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Tillman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Michelle Tillman to Dr.
David Frankfurter, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
George M. Frankfurter of Baton Rouge, La.
A March wedding is planned.


Daniels-Wood: More Opinions Than Facts
Wanda Leland, who stopped in mid-Manhattan to get her fingernails done after work on Friday, gingerly expressed a common concern.
"As a black person, I'm a little annoyed," she said.
"All the harassment cases that seem to come forward involve black persons."
And Kevin Moore, working out at a Brooklyn gym, put a finer point on it.
"I thought that the Thomas-Hill matter would be the last time that this would happen," he said.
"Martin Luther King must be rolling around in his grave."


Green Look, Greenbacks
ENVIRONMENTALLY sound products with high prices are best sold within improbable decor that blends New Age lethargy with Frank Gehry-ish idiosyncrasy.
At least that's what Felissimo, a housewares and clothing store, will try to prove when it opens on Tuesday in a Neo-Classical 1902 town house at 10 West 56th Street.
The store is the first retail outlet of a 30-year-old Japanese mail-order company that says it strives to "inspire a more harmonious whole." The store poses two burning questions of our time: Have we already grown so tired of the green look that we need to give it bizarre new spins, and how extravagant and commercialized can greenness get?


NO BURDEN TO BEAR
I nestled my grandmother's head in my arms, as she died in a Los Angeles hospital in 1964.
As the eldest grandchild, I was the one to plan the funeral.
After choosing a burial plot and the music, and writing the eulogy, I was left with the task of selecting the pallbearers.
We didn't have a large family: there were two sons and a few distant relatives.
I selected five people and told the funeral director that I would be the sixth.
He informed me that it would not be proper for a woman to carry a coffin in an Orthodox funeral.
As I sat with the rabbi before the funeral, I told him what the funeral director had said.
Knowing how I felt about my grandmother, he said, "Although you are not permitted to carry the coffin, you can carry her all the days of your life in your heart."


Central Link in Release of Hanoi M.I.A. Photos: A U.S. Researcher
At the center of a major breakthrough in American efforts to resolve cases of servicemen missing since the Vietnam War is an American researcher who served as a conduit for Hanoi and was paid by the Pentagon as a consultant.
Those who know the researcher, Theodore Schweitzer, say they are not surprised that a man they describe as an adventurer should be identified this week as the principal link in the transfer to Washington of a trove of Vietnamese photographs and documents on American servicemen.


Commercial Property: Workletters; In a Tenant's Market, Flexibility Clinches the Deal
THIS summer, Prudential Securities signed on for 2.1 million square feet in One New York Plaza, the building at One Water Street owned by Chase Manhattan.
Not only is Prudential customizing the space, but it is financing the work as well.
The investment firm negotiated a rent that is about $6 a square foot lower than it would have been had the landlord paid for the work.
Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz also made an "as is" deal with CBS Inc. for the seven floors it is renting at Black Rock, CBS's headquarters building at 51 West 52d Street, at Avenue of the Americas.


The Executive Computer; Big-Business Power in Affordable Small-Business Servers
As computer networks proliferate in medium-to-smaller businesses, the demand for specialized computers called servers is expected to grow.
Not coincidentally, both the Compaq Computer Corporation and the Dell Computer Corporation introduced server models this month that offer high performance at a far lower price than was previously available.
Who needs such power and performance?
Quite a few businesses, as it turns out.
Servers are powerful computers designed for use on local area networks, or LAN's, which allow companies to connect groups of computers.
Equipped with fast processors, lots of system memory and large amounts of high-speed data storage, the servers' job is to be a central repository of computer files to be shared by groups of workers, and also to coordinate user requests for printers, modems and other shared peripherals.


Miss Shulman, Stephen Rosen
Elizabeth Anne Shulman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Shulman of Dayton, Ohio, was married there last evening to Stephen Bradley Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Rosen of Lexington, Mass.
Rabbi P. Irving Bloom performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.


Coach of the Hornets Cautions Mourning
Charlotte Hornets Coach ALLAN BRISTOW says that unless the team's No. 1 draft pick, ALONZO MOURNING, intends to reduce his demands, he can prepare to miss the National Basketball Association season.
"I'd rather lose Alonzo Mourning than pay him everything that they want," Bristow said.


On 'Roseanne,' The Recession Is a Laugh Riot
With gloomy news about the economy filling the nightly news, the talk shows and the campaign documentaries, it is a pleasure to announce that the Conners are having a good recession.
Yes, Dan's motorcycle shop conked out to begin the season, which sent Mark, his young helper, and daughter Becky eloping to Minneapolis, where a job awaits.
Roseanne can't get work of her own; there are squabbles over money, problems with mortgage payments and worries about the electricity bill. (The telephone still operates, or how would a sitcom get along?) But the main thing is that the wisecracks keep coming and ratings stay high.
Making jokes out of dire circumstances is a treasured American characteristic, a way to cope and no doubt a sign of mental health.
Probably that is how Roseanne's nearest and dearest, punchy from punchlines, manage to stay on this side of neurosis.
"I knew we shouldn't have gone into business for ourselves," Roseanne says to Dan by way of commiseration.
"There's no one to steal from."


Two Operas Make Hash Of History
The Metropolitan Opera's other shoe has finally dropped.
For a quarter century not a single new work was presented at the Met; then two were scheduled in succeeding seasons.
Last year came John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles." Now Philip Glass's "Voyage" has arrived.
For the foreseeable future, that's it: the Met will restrict itself to curatorial activities.
But before this brief era of innovation passes, it is worth looking at these ventures into novelty.
Oddly, for all their differences, these problematic works actually form a matching set; a new genre is evident, even though the species of Met premieres is doomed for the moment.
At first glance, of course, the differences between the works seem profound.
One is a gussied-up Minimalist opera, the other a neo-Romantic romp that verges on high camp.
Mr.
Glass's style depends on repetitions of rhythmic cells and Mr.
Corigliano's on skewed quotations of Rossini and Mozart.
Mr.
Glass's story is inspired by Doris Lessing and science fiction, Mr.
Corigliano's by Beaumarchais's Figaro character.
"The Voyage" gives three almost distinct examples of voyages: an alien spaceship crashes on Earth during the last ice age; Columbus journeys to the New World, and Earthlings of the future depart to find life in space.
"Ghosts" shows Beaumarchais amusing the aristocracy in the afterlife; he tries to alter history by entering his own plays and saving Marie Antoinette from the guillotine.


Benefits
Promoting Independence
TODAY -- Independence Residences, which tries to provide homes for young adults who are blind and have other disabilities, will soon open its first home, in Richmond Hill, Queens.
To help offset the cost, a fund-raising dinner and jazz party will be held in the Balcony Cafe at the Crown Plaza Holiday Inn in Manhattan, starting at 5 P.M.
Tickets, $55, at the door.
Information: (718) 805-6796.


At the End


Japanese Emperor Views China's History


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Attacks News Media, And Crowds Cheer Him On
President Bush regaled crowds in two states today with his standard attacks on Bill Clinton's credibility and tax proposals, but the day's best red-meat lines had nothing to do with the Arkansas governor.
What roused the crowds -- what rouses many Bush crowds lately -- were Presidential jabs at the press.
"Annoy the media," Mr.
Bush cried with evident delight at a Montgomery, Ala., rally this morning that drew 10,000.
He had spotted a banner sporting that slogan with the tag line "Re-elect Bush," prompting him to add, "They wouldn't know good news if it hit them in the face."


Melissa Dulman and Scott Wagner
Melissa Dulman, a daughter of Howard and Dorothy Dulman of Katonah, N.Y., was married last evening to Scott Harlan Wagner, the son of Arthur and Lucille Wagner of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky officiated at the Doral Arrowwood Hotel in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wagner, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father retired as president of Vaneck Associates, a former investment bank in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Meanwhile, In New York
Benefits for the disabled, an American museum and the Royal Academy.


Borders's Bat Is Doing the Talking
If Yogi Berra had a conversation with Toronto catcher Pat Borders before Game 6 of the World Series tonight, it might have gone like this:
Berra: "You're swinging the bat pretty good."


Fancying Pants
American designers are going all out for pants in their spring collections.
Norma Kamali has elegant, high-waisted versions tailored as tight as a matador's.
Donna Karan for DKNY is giving a 70's-style hippie-chick twist to jeans.
Calvin Klein shows dungarees worn backward and slung low on the hips, inspired by street fashion and rappers like Marky Mark and Kriss Kross.
Next season's pants, arriving in stores in January, range from fetching to funky.


Lauren Timoney and Jeffrey Upton
Edward Timoney of Dania, Fla., and Rosemary C. Timoney of Tamarac, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Patricia Timoney, to Jeffrey James Upton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Upton of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Timoney, 25 years old, graduated from Smith College and is a third-year law student at Boston University.
Her father is a pilot with Delta Airlines.
Her mother is the chairman of the English department at Taravella High School in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Fordham Can't Stop Lafayette Passer
Lafayette 44, Fordham 21
Quarterback Tom Kirchhoff of Lafayette, which began defense of its Patriot League title yesterday afternoon, threw three touchdown passes as the Leopards routed the Fordham Rams, 44-21, at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx.
Two of Kirchhoff's scoring passes were to Jamal Jordan for 95 and 80 yards, while the third, good for 10 yards, was to Erik Marsh.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WHAT'S IN IT FOR ME? By Joseph Stedino with Dary Matera. HarperCollins, $22.


Dead Sea Tours
To the Travel Editor: Last December you listed several travel agents who book tours to the Dead Sea in Israel, one of which was Jericho Spa Tours of New York.


Brooks Is Waived
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers waived veteran running back JAMES BROOKS and activated defensive back ROGERICK GREEN yesterday.
Green, the Buccaneers' fifth-round draft pick this year from Kansas State, was on injured reserve after suffering a hyperextended elbow in the preseason.
Brooks, in his 12th N.F.L. season, rushed for only six yards on five carries in two games with the Buccaneers this year. (AP)


Mutual Funds; Winning Formula: Value Plus Profit
With stock prices stalled, most stock funds have barely broken even this year, and funds that own small companies have slipped 2.6 percent.
But some funds have bucked this trend, like the Chicago-based Skyline Special Equities Fund, which rose a healthy 16.5 percent through Sept. 30, according to Morningstar Inc., a mutual fund research group.
Skyline, just over five years old, is a real sleeper.
For the 12 months ended Sept. 30, the fund returned 24.9 percent, more than triple the small-company average; and it has gained 14 percent a year, on average, for the last five years, roughly six percentage points more than the average small-company fund.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
As I read and appreciated the insights Sherman Alexie gently presented in his article "White Men Can't Drum" (Oct. 4), I was struck by one disturbing aspect of the exploration of tribal ritual by some American males: It is superficial and made for selfish redemption, rather than for knowledge and understanding of another way of life.
How odd that these men would attempt to draw spiritual currency from a culture forced into bankruptcy by their own forebears.
RICHARD A. FIORE
Hackettstown, N.J.


Rates Cut For Winter Golf
Before storing clubs for the winter, golfers might consider discount programs at resorts in the Southern Atlantic states.
Although there can be uncertainties in weather, temperatures are generally fall-like (by standards of the Northeast) with possible morning precipitation.
In Charleston, S.C., for example, average daily temperatures get up to 66 degrees in November, 59 in December and February and 58 in January.
Several properties in Myrtle Beach, S.C., have multinight packages for under $100.
The Poindexter Resort, (800) 248-0003, for example, has a seven-night, six-day program from Dec. 1 to Jan. 31 for $99 a person, double occupancy, that includes accommodations and greens fees at 17 golf courses.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
The description of Mann's teen-age son's motoring about her opening, boasting of the price of his shoes, must be someone else's idea of charming.
But let's give the child a break.
This seems trivial when contrasted with the reality that he lives surrounded by nude photos of himself and his siblings in their most private and vulnerable moments.


Frederick Eaton, 71, Publisher in 3 States
Frederick G. Eaton, a retired publisher of newspapers in three states and a leader in the creation of performing arts centers in Saratoga Springs and Binghamton, N.Y., died on Friday after dining with friends in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 71 years old and lived in nearby Brewster.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


THE MOST HAPPY COLLEGE PRESIDENT
That Leon Botstein is a Renaissance model for educators has been evident since his arrival at Bard.
The legerdemain that he has performed in Annandale-on-Hudson is unmatched by any of his academic peers.
However, Bard was not merely "a place to get stoned" in the late 1960's.
Where, but at Bard, in one four-year period, could you have studied poetry with Anthony Hecht and Robert Kelly, literature with Mary Lee Settle and Robert Coover and philosophy with Heinrich Bluecher; watched Blythe Danner in Genet's "Maids" and Chevy Chase in "The Groove Tube"; entertained Bob Dylan in your dormitory room; met Timothy Leary; had drinks at Gore Vidal's house?


Football the Way It Ought Not to Be
To the Sports Editor:
Before we get too excited about a return to the days when football players played both ways, let's look at one of the darker consequences: ("Football the Way It Oughta Be," by George Vecsey, The Times, Oct. 2).
I played football for an Ivy league college in 1956 and '57 during the years when limited substitution rules were in effect.
I was not among the 11 best players on the team, but I'm sure I was among the best 22 since I was second-string.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Mann's images of her children are a form of exploitation for one simple reason: her children have not given a truly
informed
consent.
Mann herself states: "They have no idea what's out there in the world. I know what to be afraid of. They don't." The children, not unsurprisingly, giving in to their mother's wishes to pose them naked, are not aware of how others (adults) might view the photos, and how American society feels toward nudity, in general.
In this sense, Mann is using her children solely for her own benefit, and not respecting them by recognizing their naivete.
DAVID R. NEIBLUM, M.D.
Cliffside Park, N.J.


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight time starts and ends.
The date this fall is today.


The Trials and Joys of Historic Houses
BEHIND a loose panel of Sheetrock in the dining room of Beth and Lawrence Friedhoff's home in River Vale is an impasto of mud, straw and horsehair, sectioned by hand-hewn beams.
The couple found it there three and a half years ago when they bought the Dutch Colonial sandstone house built about 1742 by Cornelius C. Haring.
The Friedhoffs are among the hundreds of New Jerseyans who have chosen to live in historic houses.
They reap substantial financial and personal benefits, they say, but make their share of sacrifices as well -- especially if, like the Friedhoffs, they decide to take on the work of repair and rehabilitation themselves.
Where others simply live in houses, these people live with their houses.


Roberta Rossi, Jonathan Baum
Roberta Geraldine Rossi, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ennio C. Rossi of Winnetka, Ill., was married there yesterday to Jonathan Morton Baum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton J. Baum of Baltimore.
The Rev.
Robert Ferrigan officiated at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr., a Presbyterian minister, assisted.
Mrs.
Baum, 30, graduated from Beloit College.
Her father is a professor of hematology at Northwestern University in Chicago and is the vice president for medical affairs at Life Source Donor Centers, a group of blood banks in Glenview, Ill.


D'Amato: TV Spots Center on Death Penalty, Opponent
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato unveiled a new 30-second ad about his support for the death penalty.
The ad appeals directly to viewers' emotions.
Mr.
D'Amato also continued his negative ad campaign, releasing a 10-second television spot that accused Mr.
Abrams of planning to raise Medicare premiums.
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT


On the Other Hand, Who Needs Perfect?
Walter Gieseking was a pianist of principle.
Principle both freed and confined him.
His method of study -- taken from his only teacher, Karl Leimer -- began with the ear, not the fingers.
"The fingers are the servitors of the brain," Leimer wrote.
"They perform the action the brain commands. If, therefore, by means of a well-trained ear, it is clear to the brain how to execute correctly, the fingers will do their work correctly."
The ear commands; the fingers obey.
The directness is compelling, though for most pianists, who have learned their trade through hours of physical repetition, the idea is a bit surreal.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column of the Travel section on Oct. 11 about absentee voting misstated the information telephone number for New York City voters.
It is (212) 868-3692; applications must be requested by this Tuesday.


Sounds of Lieder, Cabaret and Folk
WEEKENDS are normally crowded with a variety of musical events, but for a change the midweek schedule is also busy.
The Hudson Valley Music Club opens its 68th season tomorrow by presenting the Eroica Trio.
The ensemble -- made up of the violinist Adela Pena, the cellist Sara Sant'Ambrogio and the pianist Erika Nickrenz -- has chosen music by Beethoven, Dvorak and Schumann.
The recital will be given at 2 P.M. at the club's Chamber Music Hall at 54 Clinton Avenue in Dobbs Ferry.
For more information about this program -- or the ones to follow, by such groups as the Mendelssohn String Quartet and the Chelsea Chamber Ensemble -- the number to call is 693-1489.


A Correction
In a diagram that accompanied Game 22 in Monday's editions, a white pawn should have been on f4 and a white bishop should have been on f2.


Hail Deng!; Chinese Leader Placed on Pedestal: Is His Aim to Perpetuate His Ideas?
If there was anything that Deng Xiaoping used to stand for, it was personal modesty and an abiding opposition to a personality cult.
"Leaders are humans," he once declared, "not gods!"


The Smells of Something Important
A GARLIC TESTAMENT
Seasons on a Small New Mexico Farm.
By Stanley Crawford. 241 pp.
New York: Edward Burlingame Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


Laurie E. Colwin, 48, a Novelist And Writer of Short Stories, Dies
Laurie E. Colwin, a novelist and writer of short stories on modern urban romance and life, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 48 years old.
She died of a heart attack, her family said.


Fast Fists Help Byrd Get Back
Defensive end Dennis Byrd is trying to punch his way back into the Jets' lineup, literally.
In an effort to strength the muscles inside his dislocated right shoulder, Byrd has donned gloves and has been shadow-boxing.
And Byrd said that he expected to be back in the lineup for the Miami game next Sunday, which is about two weeks ahead of schedule.


A Beethoven Marathon in Hartford
FOR a dozen years, Chamber Music Plus has been bringing innovative programs to various Connecticut communities, but for its 13th season opener, the ensemble has expanded its musical horizons to encompass two concertos, a symphony and a choral cantata.
The concert, "Blockbuster Beethoven," begins at 3 P.M. today at Wallace Stevens Theater in Hartford.
The founder-directors of Chamber Music Plus -- the cellist Harry Clark and the pianist Sanda Schuldmann -- will be joined for the occasion by the violinist Renee Jolles, the Wesleyan Orchestra, the University Concert Choir under Melvin Strauss and, as host, Connecticut Public Radio's John Berky.
The marathon program includes the "Eroica" Symphony, the Fourth Piano Concerto, the Triple Concerto and the rarely heard "Calm Seas and Prosperous Journey." Tickets will be available at the door, or call 232-0085.


A Guide for Those Whose Yard Is a Jungle
THE grandeur of dying leaves, the brilliance of the October sky -- the desolation of the summer gardens.
As fall blazes and fades, seasoned property owners know what they must do to have healthy flowers and shrubs again next year.
Others, however -- like new homeowners and two-career couples without time for yardwork -- may now be viewing their personal landscapes with anxiety or guilt.
They value their properties but do not know how to get their trees and plants safely through the winter.


The Case Vs. Golf in Olympics
On the whole, there is probably less to the concept of golf's becoming part of the 1996 Summer Olympics than meets the eye.
Naturally, those caught up in the push to see the sport included in the world's greatest athletic forum for the first time since 1904 would say just the opposite.


Money Is Music To Their Ears
To turn or not to turn professional, that notorious figure skater's dilemma, may be turning into a moot point.
"It's starting not to matter," said Nancy Kerrigan, the 1992 Olympic bronze medalist.


Linda K. Dallas, Peter David Rich
Linda Karen Dallas, an associate at the law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray in Washington, was married yesterday in New York to Peter David Rich, a Republican counsel to the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce in Washington.
The Rev.
Carleton J. Sweetser performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel on the campus of Columbia University.
Mrs.
Rich, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from George Washington University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Dallas of Englewood, N.J.
Her father is an internist and a cardiologist in New York.
Her mother, Dorothy B. Dallas, is a painter in Englewood.


What Capote Said About Kerouac
In "At Northport Watering Hole, Kerouac Was Just Another Drinker"  [ Sept. 13 ] , Patrick Fenton neglected to mention Truman Capote's flip dismissal of Kerouac's work as follows, "That's not writing, that's typing." While this evaluation was not without merit, I must agree with Mike McGrady, quoted by Fenton as having declared Kerouac "important." Certainly, "On the Road" was a faithful depiction of youthful despair over the order of things as they saw it.
McGrady's praise is not to be taken lightly, coming as it does from a serious journalist ("A Dove in Vietnam") and mastermind of the boffo sex spoof "Naked Came the Stranger." I would add that Capote was a bit of a poseur himself, his enormous gifts notwithstanding.
His professed invention a new genre, the fictional biography (or whatever exactly he called it) with "In Cold Blood" was really a veiled excuse for not having to be accurate.
EWIN RITCHIE Elmont


Liberal Giants Inspire Three Centrist Justices
By the end of careers in the law spanning six decades, Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall had inspired generations of lawyers with their view of the law as an instrument of social and political change.
Among their many spiritual heirs, it would seem extremely farfetched to count three current Justices who were placed on the Supreme Court by Presidents eager to see major portions of the Brennan and Marshall legacy dismantled.
But the three, Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter, have each offered remarkable testimony recently to the impact of these liberal giants, both now retired, on their own lives as Justices and on their vision of the Court.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about President Bush gave an incomplete account of Spiro T. Agnew's role in Mr.
Bush's 1970 senatorial campaign in Texas.
Mr.
Agnew, then Vice President, campaigned briefly for Mr.
Bush.
The author, William Safire, worked for President Richard M. Nixon then.
As the article notes, Bryce N. Harlow, a Nixon aide, said Mr.
Bush had rejected Mr.
Agnew's offer to help.
But shortly afterward, the Bush campaign did accept Mr.
Agnew's aid for a limited number of appearances.


Update; 7 Years Later, Justice Is Done In Slaying, Prosecutors Say
Seven years after a New York State parole officer was shot to death on a Queens street, Federal prosecutors said last week that all those responsible had finally been brought to justice.
The prosecutors announced that four former members of the Queens drug ring headed by Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols pleaded guilty last week to Federal charges involving the slaying of the officer, Brian Rooney.


Two on Base, One Out In Toronto
FOR ALL THE GOOD PRESS THIS city has received, it hasn't been much of a place for architecture. (It wasn't much of a place for baseball, either, once upon a time.) Toronto's glory was in its ability to make urbanity seem benign and welcoming, to make the very idea of downtown appealing -- a more important achievement, in some ways, than the creation of a bunch of prima donna buildings.
But as Toronto's baseball fortunes have changed, so, too, has its approach to building.
This city now has three new buildings that stand on their own as works of architecture, buildings that would have a claim on our attention no matter where they had been put.
One of these projects, the galleria at the recently finished BCE Place office complex in the downtown business district, is among the best public spaces conceived in the 1980's, and it is full of lessons for other cities.
Another, Terminal 3 at the Lester B. Pearson International Airport, is the finest piece of airport architecture since the United Airlines terminal in Chicago.
And the third, the downtown headquarters of the Canadian Broadcasting Company, is a garish monument to deconstructivism that proves that Toronto, for all its virtues, is not above the desperate search for trendiness that afflicted so much commercial architecture in the last decade.


Melissa Collier, Foye Staniford
Mrs.
John B. Hokanson of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Richard T. Collier of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melissa Turnbull Collier, to Foye McKean Staniford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Foye F. Staniford Jr. of Lawrence, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Collier graduated from the College of Wooster, as did her fiance.
She is a sales associate at Tiffany &amp; Company in Palm Beach, Fla.
Her father is a principal in New York in the VanderKloot Company, a real-estate marketing and consulting concern.
She is the stepdaughter of Mr.
Hokanson of West Palm Beach and of Roberta E. Collier of New York.


More on the Gas Tax, Con and Pro
To the Editor:
In assessing the burden of the gas tax on domestic consumers, Mr.
Oppenheimer overlooks one possibility: that a portion of the burden will be borne by foreign suppliers of petroleum.
Since the higher taxes will give Americans an incentive to drive less and switch to more fuel-efficient cars, gasoline consumption should decrease.
This will, in turn, lead to a decrease in petroleum imports and, thus, to a decrease in the world market price of oil.
WILLIAM P. O'DEA Oneonta, N.Y., Oct. 8


Kathleen Cunningham, Farley Bolwell
Kathleen Beth Cunningham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Cunningham of Huntington Bay, L.I., was married yesterday to Farley William Bolwell, the son of Edwin Bolwell of Toronto and Pauline Bolwell of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas Fusco, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Patrick in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Bolwell, 27 years old, is the senior director of marketing and merchandising in the retail division of Nine West Group Inc., a women's footwear company in Stamford.
She graduated from Villanova University.


Profiles of the Crew Aboard the Shuttle
James D. Wetherbee --
Mission Commander
Commander Wetherbee, a 39-year-old Navy pilot, is flying his second shuttle mission in less than three years.
He was the pilot of the Columbia when it orbited the Earth for 11 days (a record until Columbia's 13-day flight in July), and has logged more than 3,500 hours of flight time in civilian and space agency aircraft since being designated a naval aviator in 1976.


A Spinnaker Pole Through Heart
To the Sports Editor:
I was stunned after reading "Will Conner Jump America's Cup Ship and Set Sail for Italy?"(The Times, Oct. 18).
Having followed the America's Cup since I began to sail as a youngster, I had developed a nationalistic, even patriotic, feeling for this event.


The Problem With Productivity
To the Editor:
"The Need for More Public Investment" (Forum, Oct. 11) is both perceptive and well argued as far as it goes.
However, the fundamental problem in the American economic structure today cannot be corrected in the near term solely by the use of dislocation management and public investment in basic infrastructure abetted by supportive monetary and fiscal policy.


Adding Insult to Improvement
No orchestra in the world, not even the Vienna Philharmonic, is more complexly associated with Gustav Mahler -- man and musician -- than the New York Philharmonic.
Such Philharmonic conductors as Willem Mengelberg, Bruno Walter, Dimitri Mitropoulos, Leonard Bernstein and Pierre Boulez were stirring and influential advocates of Mahler's cause -- and the same can be said of Klaus Tennstedt, who performs Mahler's Sixth Symphony with the Philharmonic, beginning on Thursday.
A second component of Mahler's New York legacy is less recalled, and also less understood.
His own stint as the Philharmonic's conductor, from 1909 to 1911, illuminates the New World's uneasy relationship to its Old World cultural parents.
The misunderstandings began with Mahler himself, and with his wife, Alma.
She depicted her husband's brief New York career, which began at the Metropolitan Opera in 1907, as a martyrdom among philistines.
Mahler himself wrote to Bruno Walter in 1909: "My orchestra here is a real American orchestra, untalented and phlegmatic. It's uphill work. To start from scratch as a conductor is decidedly unpalatable to me." But the same letter continues: "Music-making still gives me terrific fun."


Power Struggle in Japan's Ruling Party
Japan's governing party has been riven by one of the most vicious power struggles to erupt here in years, with the furious maneuvering to succeed the head of the Liberal Democratic Party's largest faction leading to a split that threatens to paralyze political decision-making and force a Cabinet reshuffling.
Many commentators have said they were appalled at the spectacle of this nonstop infighting over a successor to Shin Kanemaru, known for years as a political kingmaker.
It does not involve a single issue of policy, but it has dominated the press for several days and nights, pushing aside discussion of Mr.
Kanemaru's connections to an organized crime boss and the oft-repeated call for political reform.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; The Faces Behind the Face That Clinton's Smile Masks
On television, Bill Clinton radiates earnestness, empathy and polite deference, coming across as an odd hybrid of television evangelist and think-tank analyst.
But in person, it is possible to see more: his commanding attitude and his supple political shape-shifting, his fascination with and yearning for the adulation he is getting, and his surliness and finger-wagging upbraidings when something does not go exactly as he likes.
After a rousing, celebrity-powered rally in the once-conservative stronghold of Orange County, Calif., on Thursday night, Mr.
Clinton lost his temper with a Secret Service agent when a couple of autograph seekers evaded a rope line in the parking lot of the amphitheater and got to Mr.
Clinton.


Public &amp; Private; Can the Cheerleader
David Dinkins is a careful, deliberative sort of man, which is why it may take him longer than it should to dismiss his Deputy Mayor for Public and Community Affairs.
But dismiss him he must.
A little over a week ago Randy Daniels was appointed to this new post, which pays $112,000 a year.
Soon stories began to appear that he had sexually harassed a woman on his staff when he was press secretary to City Council President Andrew Stein.
The woman, Barbara Wood, now a television reporter, declined to repeat the sexual suggestions she alleges Mr.
Daniels made, except to say that they were "crude and low" and that she believed that her job situation was "put out or get out."


Patricia Textor, Raymond O'Rourke Jr.
Patricia Ann Textor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Textor of Oceanside, L.I., was married yesterday to Raymond John O'Rourke Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Rourke of Nanuet, N.Y.
The Rev.
Sean O'Sullivan officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York.
Mrs.
O'Rourke, 29 years old, is a vice president in Brooklyn for the Chase Manhattan Bank.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father retired from Chase Manhattan, where he was an assistant treasurer and a branch manager in Manhattan.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
There was nothing "disturbing" about Sally Mann's photography in your magazine, but I cringe to think of the pictures that are causing the controversy -- shots of naked boys and girls, suggestive suicide tableaux and titles like "Damaged Child" and "The Wet Bed."


He Inhales So Others Can Breathe Freely
RICHARD A. DUFFEE is a founder and an owner of Odor Science and Engineering in Bloomfield, an international consulting company that sniffs out trouble.
He has spent 36 years tracking down the source of odors and helping companies and municipalities snuff them out.
In the field he works with plastic bags to collect air samples and a portable "scentometer," which is a device about the size of a portable cassette player -- except with nosephones instead of earphones -- to filter air and determine how much odor is present.
In his laboratory he has machines that dilute air for measurement purposes and complex chemical analyzers that track specific compounds.


Technology; Yes, CD Sound Is 'Perfect.' And Yes, It's Getting Even Better.
"Perfect sound, forever" that was Sony's 1982 promise for compact disks.
It was a pretty short forever.
The digital recording of CD's still strikes many audiophiles, recording engineers and musicians as cold and artificial next to the best analog recording.
Now a tiny company here has found a way to breathe new life, and realism, into digital sound.


Theresa Graham, Thomas Oakley
Monica Rohrer of Berkeley, Calif., and Albert Graham of Redding, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Theresa Marie Graham to Thomas Elliott Oakley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Oakley of Washington.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Graham, 27 years old, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a program assistant in Roslyn, Va., for Automation Research Systems, a consulting company.
Her father is the program director for Geriatric Services of Shasta County in Redding.
Her mother is a real-estate broker in Berkeley for Mason McDuffie, a real-estate company.


The Chat of the Chattering Classes
DOCTOR CRIMINALE
By Malcolm Bradbury. 344 pp. New York: Viking. $22.


Safe at Home: A Formula for a Team That's in Need
If they knew that recent history could produce a few runs or strike out a few batters, the Atlanta Braves could have approached tonight's sixth game of the World Series with the attitude that by being down by three games to two and playing at home, they had the Toronto Blue Jays right where they wanted them.
In the last decade, that was the pattern that existed in each of the five years that the Series went beyond five games.
The team trailing three games to two won the sixth and seventh games at home.


Far From A Blood Bath
To the Editor:
I was saddened by Caryn James's essay on this year's New York Film Festival  [ "Wading Through Blood to the Festival's Heart," Oct. 11 ] , in which she characterized the entire event as a blood bath for people with "a strong stomach."


World Series; Blue Jays Take the Big Prize Home to Canada


Timothy E. Noll, Brokerage Executive, 35
Timothy E. Noll, an investment and finance executive, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 35 years old and lived in Manhattan and Ridgefield, Conn.
He died of intestinal cancer, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  TESTING SALVADOR'S RESOLVE


Streetscapes: 153 East 63d Street; The 'Mushroom Factor' in a $150,000 Restoration
IT'S a classic example of the "mushroom factor," a term coined in 1986 by Clem Labine in an article for Old-House Journal on the unpredictabilty of renovation work.
Simply to repair a few cracks on the front facade of the house at 153 East 63d Street -- overall a small percentage of the surface -- the entire stucco front must be removed and replaced.
At the turn of the century the rich section of the Upper East Side ran from Fifth Avenue to just short of Park Avenue.
The blocks farther east had been built up in the 1870's and 80's with middle-class flats or, as on East 63d Street between Lexington and Third Avenues, with modest brownstones.
But Park Avenue soon saw redevelopment with mansions and luxury apartment houses and the elite neighborhood pushed over to Lexington and even Third Avenue.


Thirties Redux: The Return of Trade Wars
As the world has stumbled into what President Bush calls a global recession, the economic optimists have been comforted by one fact.
The leading industrial nations, they said, had learned from the 1930's, when the Smoot-Hawley tariff sparked trade wars and "beggar thy neighbor" policies deepened and prolonged the Depression.
Perhaps the optimists spoke too soon.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Video Novices
Bill Brenner's Grand Canyon looks like a ditch.
"I told him he was panning too fast,"' said Jerry Goldberg of North Woodmere.
"I got excited," Mr. Brenner, of Levittown, said. "It was such a panoramic view."


A Chair Is for Sitting But a Desk Says Something
The most talked about object in SoHo isn't a painting or a sculpture.
It's the lavish Louis XVI writing desk that Mary Boone installed in the reception area of her West Broadway gallery last month.
What's striking is the incongruity of such an antique at the entrance to a contemporary art gallery -- and that Ms.
Boone's assistant is visibly uncomfortable sitting behind it.


Making a Difference; Easing the Cultural Tension At the Neighborhood Store
DEADLY confrontations at stores owned by Asian-Americans in minority neighborhoods have become a sad fact of life from New York to Los Angeles.
In Houston, Glenda Joe thinks it doesn't have to be.
After a young black man was killed there by a Vietnamese storekeeper in a dispute over a stolen beer and then, two weeks later, an Asian merchant was shot to death in a robbery, Ms.
Joe knew she had to try to do something.
A business owner and community activist, Ms.
Joe, 40 years old, wrote an 11-page handbook for Asian-American merchants.


'Sister George' In Revival
AS a 1966 British export to Broadway, "The Killing of Sister George" was said to be audacious.
It was.
After all these years, it is nervy for the group Wordplay II to be taking on a nasty little play that, in its own good time, redeems itself with the playwright's compassionate afterthought.
Say that the local production at the Schoolhouse in Croton Falls, N.Y., is revealing the wrong reasons for doing Frank Marcus's play and some of the right ones.
Sister George, the moped-driving, hymn-singing district nurse of "Applehurst," the name of an English soap opera, is being bumped off after six years, a victim of a 4 percent dip in ratings.
Away from the wireless, she is the dominator and lover of Alice, otherwise known as a "flatmate" in a sado-masochistic relationship that has Alice, a consenting "Childie" (as she is called) of 34, doing unspeakable acts of obeisance.


Why Truman's Campaign Train Lingered in Oklahoma City
To the Editor:
This year's Presidential campaign has again invoked Harry S. Truman and his 1948 campaign train, a subject the former President once discussed in my hearing.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Aberdeen 147,000
159 Fordham Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; built-in barbecue, patio, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,064.
Clifton 172,000
129 Edgewood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old newly remodeled colonial; deck, full basement; $2,756.
Livingston 222,000
9 Arthur Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old bilevel; 2-car garage, deck, h/w floors, c/a; taxes $4,702.
Maplewood 353,000
17 South Crescent Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; rec room, 2-car garage, living-room fireplace; taxes $6,772.
Millburn 240,000
56 Mountainview Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; fireplace, 1-car garage, porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,668.
West Orange 305,000
15 Barbara Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; c/a, den w/fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,680.
OTHER AREAS Clinton, Conn. 172,500
144 Liberty Street. 4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 110-year-old renovated Cape Cod; sliders to patio, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,608.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 203,000
26 Ridge Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $5,084.
Oakdale, L.I. 135,000
5 Jeffery Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; den, dining area, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,500.


Guerrilla's Bones Get a Confederate Soldier's Funeral
With military honors and the smoke of powder and musket balls, a smattering of remains of the Civil War's most notorious bushwhacker were given a Confederate warrior's burial today.
After a macabre dispersal, a grim odyssey and long years of exile in the land of his enemies, five bones and a vial of hair of William Clarke Quantrill found a final resting place in a sprawling Confederate cemetery here among the green hills he haunted 130 years ago.


Travel Weary Rangers Awake Just in (Over)Time
In the course of just 17 hours, the Rangers landed in Ottawa, pulled out an overtime victory against an expansion team, and caught a charter flight back to the Newark airport.
The National Hockey League schedule and the new franchise from Ottawa were not kind to the Rangers, who finally did what they had to do when Phil Bourque poked a loose puck past goaltender Peter Sidorkiewicz with 11.6 seconds left in overtime for a 3-2 victory.


Conversations: Emir Kusturica; A Bosnian Movie Maker Laments The Death of the Yugoslav Nation
HE is a displaced person: a Bosnian who cannot return to Bosnia, a Slav of Muslim origin who never practiced Islam, a Yugoslav patriot whose Yugoslav culture has been demolished.
Emir Kusturica, the director from Sarajevo whose films have won major international awards, is living the title of his last movie, "Time of the Gypsies." As he alternates residences between a room in Morningside Heights in Manhattan and an apartment in Paris, he wonders whether anything remains of his family memorabilia in his place of birth, the shattered capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


POSTINGS: FannieNeighbors; Down Payment as Low as 3%
A new nationwide neighborhood-based mortgage plan intended to increase home owners in low-income and minority areas was put into effect this month by the Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae.
The plan, called FannieNeighbors, provides qualified applicants with market-rate mortgages with down payments as low as 3 percent if they live in a neighborhood that is either 50 percent minority or has a median income that is 80 percent or lower of the median in the surrounding metropolitan area.


Little-Remarked Item on Ballot Would Put Constitutional Cap on Spending
With surprisingly little fanfare, Connecticut residents will vote next month on a idea that has been taking hold across the nation: constitutional restrictions on government spending.
The measure, a Constitutional amendment known as Question 2, is supported by most Connecticut political and business leaders, who say that it will insure greater fiscal responsibility and that it is a necessary accompaniment to the passage last year of the state income tax.


Planting Seeds of Reasonable Doubt?
With the trial of a black teen-ager charged with the stabbing death of a Hasidic scholar drawing to a close, what appeared to be an open-and-shut case now has some doubt surrounding it as a result of the efforts of an aggressive, at times intimidating defense lawyer.
On Monday, the case will go to the jury and the critical question for the group of 5 men and 7 women, of which 6 are black, 4 Hispanic and 2 white, is whether reasonable doubt has been cast on the charges facing Lemrick Nelson Jr.


Officer Injured Chasing Suspect
A plainclothes police detective chasing one of three robbery suspects on foot along the Grand Central Parkway in Queens was critically injured yesterday when an undercover police car also involved in the chase struck him, the police said.
The detective, Juan Herrera, 45 years old, suffered a fractured skull and a broken leg when the undercover police car, a yellow medallion taxi on special patrol, struck him on the service road of the parkway where it intersects with the Long Island Expressway in Corona, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, said.


Women's Groups Protest Over New Jersey Sexual Assault Case


With a Quiet Empathy, Sade Creates Small Gems
Refined understatement is so rare in mainstream pop music that it is easily mistaken for blandness.
That's one reason why Sade, the English pop-soul singer and songwriter, is often dismissed as a cool, remote symbol of jet-set ennui.
The 33-year-old singer exudes a calm self-containment that contrasts sharply with the supposedly more authentic gospel- and rock-driven exuberance of soul singers like Aretha Franklin and Tina Turner.
But while Sade possesses a soul singer's rhythmic intuitiveness, she has always favored reflection over aggression and pastel shades over bold musical colors.
And her smoky, vibratoless voice, with its echoes of Astrud Gilberto, Julie London and the young Nina Simone, evokes the high-gloss nightclub ambiance of a pre-soul music era.


Margaret Weber, Darryl Hoffman
Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph de Winter of Plandome, L.I., have announced the engagement of Mrs. de Winter's daughter Margaret Weber to Dr.
Darryl Hoffman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Hoffman of Durban, South Africa.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weber is a coordinator of special projects at the Developmental Disabilities Institute in Huntington, L.I.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her late father, Norman J. Wiener, was a New York lawyer.
Her mother, Janet de Winter, is a special education teacher at Hewlitt (L.I.) High School.


Business Diary/October 18-23
COMPANIES It May Be a Matter of the Right C.E.O., Wrong Decade


Susan Brom, Jonathan Olick
Susan Brom, an associate at the New York law firm of Bodian &amp; Eames, was married last evening to Jonathan Adam Olick, an associate at the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon.
Rabbi Roy Rosenberg officiated at the University Club in New York; the Rev.
Winston B. Charles, an Episcopal minister, assisted.


Just Call Elway the Escape Artist
Occasionally, word gets out from the Rocky Mountains: John Elway is doing it again, with three last-quarter comeback victories already this season.
Much of the country tends to focus on the Broncos only during the National Football League playoffs, when the quarterback's exploits are rediscovered, analyzed, marveled at -- and forgotten for another year, as the Broncos never quite make it all the way to the Super Bowl title.


D'Amato: TV Spots Center on Death Penalty, Opponent
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato unveiled a new 30-second ad about his support for the death penalty.
The ad appeals directly to viewers' emotions.
Mr.
D'Amato also continued his negative ad campaign, releasing a 10-second television spot that accused Mr.
Abrams of planning to raise Medicare premiums.
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT


Fischer and Spassky Draw in Cautious, Peaceable Play
Boris Spassky's strategy in Game 24 yesterday in Belgrade may have been to rest and get rid of his cold.
He certainly didn't attempt anything ambitious with the initiative of the white pieces.
Fischer had no opportunity to press for advantage, and a careful draw was agreed upon after 39 moves.
The score stands unchanged at Fischer 8, Spassky 4, in this exhibition series where draws don't count.
Fischer still needs two more victories to claim the winner's $3.35 million prize.
The loser collects $1.65 million.


Manic, Inspired Carpentry
There are almost always artists who do unexpected things with buildings.
In the 1960's, Christo wrapped them in tarpaulin; in the 70's, the late Gordon Matta-Clark sawed great holes in several that were, admittedly, slated for demolition.
Now in the 90's the mantle seems to have passed to Tadashi Kawamata, a 39-year-old Japanese artist who specializes in surrounding, covering and sometimes filling buildings or their remains with dense, chaotic yet carefully constructed scaffoldings of scrap lumber.
Over the past decade Kawamata's orchestrations in wood have temporarily transformed buildings in Tokyo, Venice, The Hague, Toronto, and Sao Paulo, Brazil.
For the 1987 Documenta exhibition in Kassel, Germany, he filled the remains of an 18th-century church with a cyclonelike spiral.
Invited back to last summer's Documenta, he created something completely different: a decrepit, strangely elegant shantytown of shacks that was poised on the banks of a woodland creek like a flock of migrating geese.
His environments, almost always made of jettisoned materials, exist for only a few weeks or months, mimicking and accelerating the relentless cycle of construction, use, abandonment and destruction endemic to urban life.


Camden Braces for Mischief Night Fires
Authorities have ordered a dusk-to-dawn curfew and assigned nearly the entire police force to duty on Friday, Oct. 30, hoping to avoid a repeat of last year when the traditional pre-Halloween hijinks of "Mischief Night" escalated into an arson spree.
But some residents and community leaders, wary of the plan's effectiveness, say the effort would be better spent on rehabilitating housing and providing more opportunities in Camden's neighborhoods -- not stricter security measures.


The Whines of War
HONORED AND BETRAYED
Irangate, Covert Affairs, and the Secret War in Laos.
By Richard Secord with Jay Wurts.
Illustrated. 405 pp.
New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons. $24.95.


Helen G. Collier, Richard K. Mauch
Helen Gaffney Collier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Collier Jr. of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Richard Kevin Mauch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Mauch of Rockville Centre, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Tetlow officiated at St.
Leo's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Mauch is an associate at Farer Siegal Fersko, a law firm in Westfield, N.J.
She graduated from Boston College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Collier, Cohen, Crystal &amp; Bock.


Alison T. Gray, Peter S. Fiske
Alison Travis Gray, a daughter of Melissa T. Harrison of Princeton, N.J., and Gilson B. Gray 3d of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Sewell Fiske, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Fiske of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Phillip A. C. Clarke, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Princeton University Chapel.
Ms.
Gray, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of Princeton, she is the assistant director of development at the Seton Medical Center in Daly City, Calif.


Nonworking Bulb Can Indicate a Defective Circuit
WHEN an ordinary ceiling light with an incandescent bulb flickers or will not light, tightening or replacing the bulb often solves the problem.
But when it does not, there are easy tests for determining what is wrong, as well as easy remedies.
To avoid shock when handling a bulb in a fixture, turn off the switch before touching the bulb.


Brussels
In Brussels, visitors and residents alike are drawn to the Grand'Place, one of Europe's splendid squares.
Dominated by the Gothic town hall with its slender belfry and surrounded by Baroque guild houses adorned with gilded statuary, it is a stately backdrop for a multitude of events, including rock concerts, folklore fairs and all kinds of processions.
The sidewalk cafes overflow with people well into the fall, and now the hunting season is bringing its harvest to the many restaurants in the area: venison, hare, pheasant, partridge and wild boar from the Ardennes.
The old Brussels patois, which mixes Flemish and French and bits of Spanish, is rarely heard anymore.
But the linguistic quarrel between Belgians speaking Flemish (known as Flemings), and Belgians speaking French (known as Walloons), again in full swing elsewhere in Belgium, is less apparent in bilingual Brussels.
Here Flemish is increasingly heard in shops, restaurants and offices.
Events
Two major exhibitions have just opened.
One is "Tresors du Noveau Monde," which surveys 4,000 years of pre-Columbian cultures.
Four hundred objects have been borrowed from museums and private collectors in 25 countries, shedding light on 70 cultures from Alaska to Argentina.
The exhibition, at the Musees Royaux d'Art et de l'Histoire, 10 Parc du Cinquantenaire, continues until Dec. 27.
It is open Tuesday through Sunday from 10 to 5 (Wednesday to 10; closed Monday).
Admission is $8.60.


Lily-Livered Neo-Wilsonian! The New Political Tag Game
AS the saying goes, you can't tell the players without a scorecard, but what if the game changes and the scorecard stays the same?
That is the situation this political season, when the labels "conservative" and "liberal" no longer seem to fit the players, but no one has quite come up with new ones.
"These labels now disinform rather than inform," said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a veteran of many political wars.
"We are headed for a new political language to describe a new political terrain -- one in which we are not the economic colossus of the world, which we have been for a century, and one in which we are not locked in a struggle with totalitarianism, which we have been for half a century."


Kauai Tourists Pick Other Isles
Tourists who had planned to visit the Hawaiian island of Kauai, which was devastated by Hurricane Iniki in September, are apparently going elsewhere in the state rather than canceling their trips altogether, according to tourist officials.
About 85 percent of Kauai's 7,600 hotel rooms were badly damaged by the hurricane, and many resorts will not reopen until next year.
Pleasant Hawaiian Holidays, which sends more than 200,000 visitors to the islands each year, said virtually all of its clients who had been booked for Kauai had shifted to Oahu, Maui and the other islands.
The company, in Westlake Village, Calif., has waived the customary cancellation and change-of-schedule fees.


You Got to Accentuate the Negative
DONOVAN'S WIFE
By Tom Wicker. 336 pp. New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.


A Saturday to Make New York Better
Michael Alcamo broke his Saturday tradition of sleeping until noon and then lingering over a two-hour brunch to help plant 20,000 daffodils, grape hyacinths and tulips at Bryant Park yesterday.
Mr.
Alcamo, a 27-year-old New York University law student, was one of 3,000 people who volunteered throughout the city yesterday to celebrate the fifth anniversary of New York Cares, a nonprofit volunteer agency.
The effort, which is similar to a charity walk-a-thon, brought out people to plant gardens, rebuild low-income housing, paint fire hydrants, spruce up schools and deliver food packages to the elderly throughout the city.


Always Room for More Bulbs, but Where?
LUCKY indeed are those who remembered to take pictures of their garden last spring.
Rather than one magnificent shot, ideally the pictures should be taken at several intervals to record when assorted bulbs bloom.
These pictures provide excellent records of what is planted where and are practical guides for planting bulbs now.
It is most difficult to recall in October what the garden looked like last March, April and May.
Of course, many of the spring-flowering bulbs that were planted several years ago, like daffodils, eranthis, muscari and scillas, have multiplied to provide fine spring displays.
Many seed themselves and in a few years the display can be wonderful.


George Bush's Failure -- Bill Clinton's Promise
Paradoxically, this has turned out to be the most popular and least popular Presidential campaign in years.
It's the most popular in the sense that a great many citizens are paying close attention.
The debates, and political television generally, have been drawing big audiences, and voter registration is up almost everywhere.
It's the least popular campaign because the voters don't much care for the candidates.
Even at this late stage in the campaign, only 4 out of 10 of each candidate's supporters strongly favor their man.
Thus in 1992 the usual question -- Which candidate is best? --has changed to, Which candidate is disliked least?


Sports of The Times; This Year, Otis Nixon Has Control
A YEAR ago, he could not even watch his old teammates on television, if that was the group decision of his new companions.
Otis Nixon had lost control of such decisions.
The first step was to admit he had lost control.
"Where I was, you don't even have control over the clothes you wear," Nixon has said.
"But you accept it. You're a sick person. They're going to make you well."


China Ousts Student Leader Active in Democracy Movement
A prominent Chinese student leader who was detained early last month after he returned from exile in the United States was deported today by the public security authorities, who said he had "confessed" to engaging in anti-Government activities.
The police drove the student leader, Shen Tong, to Beijing airport, allowed him to meet his mother and other family members, and then put him on a plane bound for the United States.
The authorities apparently decided that expelling him -- even though he is a Chinese citizen -- would result in less international protest than putting him on trial.
He arrived in San Francisco today on the flight from Beijing.


Homebody


Passion


Logan M. Kulwin, Scott P. O'Connor
Logan Melynda Kulwin, the daughter of Dr.
Richard Kulwin of Somers, N.Y., and Grace H. Kulwin of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Scott Patrick O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James O'Connor of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul DeHoff, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
O'Connor is an assistant to the chief financial officer of Brunschwig &amp; Fils, the decorative fabrics house, in North White Plains, N.Y.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College, as did her husband.


Polls Are Showing a Shifting Race
Polls taken last week show increased support for Ross Perot and a tightening of the race between Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush.
When the polls are averaged Mr.
Clinton leads with 41 percent followed by Mr.
Bush at 33 percent and Mr.
Perot at 18 percent.


NOTES
Mary Tyler Moore has raised eyebrows in unassuming Millbrook, N.Y., where she and her husband, Robert Levine, own a 30-acre estate.
The actress is having an elaborate, 12-foot-high gate built at the entrance to her property.
Ms.
Moore, through a spokeswoman, said the gate was not obtrusive.
"It's absolutely gorgeous," she said.
"It's an old English oak gate, made in London, accented with iron. The rest of the property is simply surrounded by a horse fence. If anyone raises the question, my little joke is, it will all come together once we've added the moat."


QE2
To the Editor: I was a passenger along with my husband and son on the QE2 sailing that ended on a rocky ledge off the Massachusetts coast Aug. 7.
A great deal has since been written about the accident, its cause, Cunard's efforts to get the passengers home and the quantities of food and drink the line provided.
Interesting, but far more important was Cunard's administration of the evacuation at sea.
If anyone deserved preferential treatment, it should have been the children and the elderly.
Cunard did not think so.
To our amazement they assembled and disembarked the passengers in the highest-priced cabins first.
Not only were they selected to leave first, they were granted an inordinate amount of time in which to do so on that sunny afternoon.
And when they reached the waiting train they left immediately for New York.


A Daughter Starts to Follow In Her Father's Big Footsteps
NAME: Nona Gaye.
IDENTITY: 18-year-old daughter of Marvin Gaye.


Schlichter Quits
Quarterback ART SCHLICHTER won't return for another season with the Rockers, Cincinnati's Arena Football League team.
It was a mutual decision, Schlichter said.
He will concentrate on working with a local radio sports talk show and dealing with his gambling problem.
Schlichter was arrested on charges of passing a bad check during the season and admitted he had a relapse of his gambling problem. (AP)


Raptors' Flight
To the Editor: Your article on Hawk Mountain in Pennsylvania brought memories of the 60's when we left all duties and engagements in the second week of September to take the two-hour drive and climb the mountain to the rocks.
The exact day depended on weather, for rain held the birds up, but with clearing and a wind we would see some 2,000.
Broad-wings were the most common, but both kinds of eagles flew, even below us on the thousand-foot ridge, so that we were looking down on eagles in flight.


Love Your Jacket!
There is a cookie-cutter look dominating the autumn fashion scene in Paris.
It's a black Chanel jacket with an off-center gold zipper and four nonfunctioning gold buttons.
Seven women wearing the jacket, most of whom were strangers to each other, were seated in the same small section of the audience at last Monday's Chanel opening.
At least 18 others there were in the same jacket, and all but two were in black.
What is the special appeal of the jacket, which retails for $2,480?
Especially in a time of economic strain, this jacket's advantage is that it works with both day and evening wear.
At 11 A.M., women were wearing the jacket with both above-the-knee and mid-calf skirts.
Others were wearing it with trousers and leggings.
At a cocktail party, it was seen with a chiffon skirt, and over satin-finished tights.
The zipper allows the wearer to have a lower neckline for the dinner table without sacrificing the jacket's smooth-body shape, and the comfort of a higher neckline for cool autumn days.


No Headline
So I applaud the new generation.
So it takes them three, four years, 10 years to come forward.
It's a hard life.
But God bless them, when they do, they have nerve.
The men are afraid of being set up?
Let them be afraid.
We've kept our mouths shut for centuries. -- ROSE SEGAL, a 61-year-old bookkeeper, speaking about sexual harassment.  [ 36:1. ]


THE MOST HAPPY COLLEGE PRESIDENT
When Leon Botstein arrived at Bard in 1975, the students gave him an impromptu Shakespearean-festival-of-a-parade, featuring out-of-tune instruments, Botstein banners made from sheets and dogs dressed in scarves ("The Most Happy College President," by Anthony DePalma, Oct. 4).
We students strolled behind this scholarly, bow-tied, tweed-jacketed man, who was only a couple of years older than many of us.
We followed him into our crumbling gymnasium, where he spoke to us of his plans for our economically depressed school and of his hopes for its curriculum, and we started to like this guy.
He would amble into our local hangout on weekends.
He was not good at small talk, but he loved to listen and to ask us about our interests and what we wanted Bard to be.
In spite of a rigorous schedule, he would leave his office door open on specified afternoons for informal talk -- academic or otherwise.


Corrections
An article on page 20 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the movies' portrayals of New York characterizes "Dirty Harry" incorrectly.
It was set in San Francisco.


Blacks Say G.O.P. Ballot Challenges Are Tactic to Harass Minority Voters
A two-year Federal investigation that will culminate in a trial on the eve of Election Day is likely to have greater impact on voter turnout in this small Mississippi River delta town than the Presidential debates or any last-minute blitzes of campaign advertising.
The case involves accusations that several black candidates and their campaign workers forged signatures and falsified absentee ballots in the 1990 elections.
But black politicians find both the timing and the charges suspicious, and they maintain that local Republican officials pushed for the investigation and subsequent indictments hoping to discourage blacks from participating in politics.


Women Bail Out Men's Soccer Team
SEVERAL weeks ago, with the season well under way and his men's varsity soccer team decimated by injuries, the coach at Central Connecticut State University in New Britain, Shaun Green, felt that desperate measures were called for.
"From about 24 players, we were down to 12 with about half the schedule to play," Mr.
Green said in an interview.
"I didn't know what to expect, but I put up signs around campus asking for prospective players to get in touch with me."


Mary Elizabeth Navin, Alan Wilmit
Mary Elizabeth Navin, an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine, was married last evening to Alan Scott Wilmit, an associate at the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton.
Cantor David Rosenzweig performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Navin, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Wells College and received a law degree from Albany Law School.


A Director Crosses the Line Into a Reality of . . . More Lines
Anthony Drazan has come home again.
On a bright October afternoon, the director and writer of "Zebrahead" is taking a tour of his old neighborhood in Cedarhurst, L. I., just a few miles over the border from Queens.
He is going back to visit some of the scenes that inspired the film, giving a tour of the divergent black and white neighborhoods.
"Zebrahead," which opened in Manhattan on Friday, is the story of a white Jewish teen-ager named Zack whose best friend is black and who winds up dating Nikki, a black girl, in high school.
The film played for two nights at this year's New York Film Festival.
There, it received some mixed reviews, and a great deal of attention: for Mr.
Drazan's enormous good fortune with this, his first movie, and for its exploration of racial issues.Because Mr.
Drazan, a white man, has made a film about black-and-white relationships.


Betsy Blumenthal, Jonathan Root
Betsy Blumenthal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Blumenthal of West Hartford, Conn., was married last evening to Dr.
Jonathan Root, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen W. Root of Tampa, Fla.
Rabbi Harold Silver performed the ceremony at the Tumblebrook Country Club in Bloomfield, Conn.
Ms.
Blumenthal, who is 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate managing director of Kroll Associates, a private-investigations firm in New York.
She graduated from the American University.


Jackson's Renewal
To the Sports Editor:
One vital fact was left untouched by Tom Friend ("Jackson Files Knicks Under Distant Memory," The Times, Oct. 11).
Before last year, because of the stumble-bumbling of that Three Stooges act (Stu Jackson, Al Bianchi and John MacLeod), they all but destroyed any trade value that Mark Jackson might have had.
Coach Pat Riley allowed Jackson's point-guard qualities as well as his confidence to soar back so that in only one year's time he became part of the N.B.A.'s biggest off-season trade.
MICHAEL LUCZAK Floral Park, L.I.


Spending Taxpayers' Hard-Earned Money
These Republican "borrow and spend" policies are in great measure the cause of this country's present economic stagnation.


Tasty Currency And Other Tales
NINETEENTH-CENTURY European explorers in Ethiopia discovered a mixture of currencies that was one of the oddest ever.
Austrian talers circulated at the same time as bars of salt, which traded for pieces of cloth and iron needles.
Iron needles traded for gold rings, which were exchanged for pear-shaped glass bottles or large amber beads.
Bars of salt, called amoles, were the most widely used money in Ethiopia.
Salt was mined by the Amole tribe from the shores of Lake Karum in the rugged northeastern part of the country.
The salt was fashioned into 10-inch-long bricks, wrapped in a protective covering of reeds and sent out to the rest of the country.
Along the way, tax assessors took a little, animals licked a little and rain dissolved a little of the bars.
By the time the amole reached the far ends of Ethiopia, perfectly formed bars were 10 or 12 times more valuable than when they left the lakebed.


Starks Is Making Case For a Starting Position
With Rolando Blackman (back spasms) out of action, John Starks has started every Knick preseason game.
Starks hopes his starting role continues, even when Blackman returns.
"There's just something about starting the game; it feels good," Starks said before the Knicks (5-1) lost to the San Antonio Spurs (3-2) by 119-113 tonight at the HemisFair Arena despite his 23 points.
"I started when John MacLeod was here, so I have a little experience at it.


Looking Forward To Looking Back
Xavier McDaniel has a fantasy about his first on-court meeting with Patrick Ewing this season.
He has already told Ewing, warned him, as such.
After all, even if they play for different teams now -- McDaniel for Celtics, Ewing for the Knicks -- they are still friends.
They will meet in the lane, perhaps with McDaniel driving.
They will clash, they will bump, and it will be Ewing who tumbles to the court.
McDaniel won't hurt him.
He would never want to do that.
He might leave a little bruise, though.
And afterward, when McDaniel stands over his friend and former teammate, he will do little more than chuckle at the pleasure of it all.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE PUMPKIN SAIL
The Hudson River sloop Clearwater has begun what has become its yearly passage from Rensselaer to Greenwich Village carrying a cargo of pumpkins to 15 communities along the waterway.


Recession Dictates Renovation
ADDITIONS to Manhattan's skyline may have all but stopped, evidence of the severe recession ravaging the world of commercial real estate these days.
But scores of office buildings are being repaired, renovated and reconfigured as landlords, faced with an increasingly competitive market, strive to make their properties as attractive as possible.
The capital improvements -- which, in many cases, are designed to keep old tenants as much as lure new ones -- are esthetic (installing new floors, facades, walls and windows), efficient (improving access for the disabled and replacing old elevators, bathrooms, electrical and telecommunications systems) and environmentally conscious (installing new heating, air-conditioning and security systems and removing asbestos).


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAVING COLD SASSY The Unfinished Sequel to "Cold Sassy Tree." By Olive Ann Burns.
Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.


Tax Cuts and Spending Hikes? No Way!
To the Editor:
How wrong can you get?
"First, Fight the Slump" (editorial, Oct. 9) calls for "a menu of quick-hitting tax cuts and spending hikes" as the best remedy for today's sagging economy.


Correction
An article last Sunday about a hypothetical 50-cent-a-gallon increase in the gasoline tax misstated the difference between the revenue that it might raise and the spending projected for electric car research by a Federal-private entity, the Advanced Battery Consortium.
The consortium's research-cost figure, $100 million a year, is only one five-hundredths as much as the $50 billion in potential gas-tax income.


Dartmouth Streak Is Stopped by Cornell
Dartmouth's march through the Ivy League 15 games without a defeat over three seasons -- came to a halt here today in the rain at the Schoellkopf Crescent.
Cornell's defense stopped Jay Fiedler, the Green's dangerous quarterback, in the fourth quarter while Scott Oliaro, the Big Red's tailback, ripped apart the wounded Dartmouth defense.
The result was a 26-16 victory for Cornell that shuffled the league standing and left Princeton on top.
The Tigers have a 3-0 record while Cornell, Dartmouth, Penn and Yale are tied at 2-1.


Laurel Beckett, Hoke Slaughter
Laurel J. Beckett, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Beckett of Ardsley, N.Y., was married yesterday to J. E. Hoke Slaughter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Slaughter Jr. of Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
James F. Kuntz officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Beckett Slaughter, 31 years old, is an assistant vice president at Sotheby's, the auction house, in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, as did her husband.
Her father is an investment broker with A. G. Edwards, a securities brokerage, in White Plains.


What Poetry?
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman's praise of the film version of David Mamet's "Glengarry Glen Ross"  [ "In Mamet's Words, You Are How You Speak," Oct. 4 ]  focuses on language, what Mr.
Goodman calls "the poetry of the good con."


Foreign Affairs; Russia's Rumblings
Are the Russians contriving their own new and bizarre brand of gothic democracy -- or could they be heading toward Yugoslav-style chaos and nationalistic authoritarianism?
To experts, the answer is both.
With Americans and West Europeans looking inward, Russia has taken strange and ominous turns, and its foreign policy and domestic future may be hanging in the balance.


Jennifer Gillen, Robert Rasmussen
Dr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Gillen of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Chase Gillen, to Robert Henry Rasmussen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Rasmussen of Little Silver, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Gillen, 29 years old, is a cost-accounting manager for Communications Diversified, a promotional marketing concern in New York.
Her father is a plastic surgeon in New York.


Leaving Commercial Fruitcake Behind
PEOPLE either love or hate fruitcakes.
I think the reason so many people dislike them is that they have been subjected to the commercial variety -- heavy, dried-out cakes made with supermarket candied fruits that are dyed alarming colors and often have a strange, soapy taste.
Calvin Trillin's most often quoted joke is that there is only one fruitcake and it is sent on from year to year.
Russell Baker felt the same way; he once wrote that his dislike of fruitcake dated from a Christmas dinner when at the age of 15 he dropped a small piece of fruitcake and shattered every bone in his right foot.


THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
Mann's images of children, manipulated to appear sexualized and physically abused, may say more about repressed memories of her own childhood than of her present relationship with her children.
Mann says her father, a man with "a keen sense of the perverse," photographed her in the nude as a young girl.
Perhaps the psychologist who attends Mann's children would do better to attend to their mother's repressed childhood traumas and ask why a woman who sexualizes photographs of her children would utter the self-denying pronouncement, "I think childhood sexuality is an oxymoron."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; The Faces Behind the Face That Clinton's Smile Masks
On television, Bill Clinton radiates earnestness, empathy and polite deference, coming across as an odd hybrid of television evangelist and think-tank analyst.
But in person, it is possible to see more: his commanding attitude and his supple political shape-shifting, his fascination with and yearning for the adulation he is getting, and his surliness and finger-wagging upbraidings when something does not go exactly as he likes.
After a rousing, celebrity-powered rally in the once-conservative stronghold of Orange County, Calif., on Thursday night, Mr.
Clinton lost his temper with a Secret Service agent when a couple of autograph seekers evaded a rope line in the parking lot of the amphitheater and got to Mr.
Clinton.


Arts Festival In Hong Kong
The tenor Jose Carreras, the Paris Opera Ballet, the Royal Shakespeare Company from Britain and the Moscow Central State Puppet Theater will be performing at the Hong Kong Arts Festival from Jan. 30 to Feb. 21.
The festival opens with a production of "Der Rosenkavalier" by Richard Strauss, with the sopranos Josephine Barstow and Diana Montague and the bass-baritone Richard Van Allan.
The Hong Kong Philharmonic, the Oslo Philharmonic and the Hong Kong Chinese Orchestra will be taking part in the festival, along with Russia's Borodin String Quartet, New York's Ensemble for Early Music and other groups.
Jazz and film will also be represented at the event, which will be celebrating its 21st year.
It is to be held at a number of venues, including the Hong Kong Cultural Center, opened in 1990.
Information: Hong Kong Tourist Association, (212) 869-5008.


Laura J. Nadel, Lawrence Eisen
Laura Jane Nadel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Nadel of New York, was married last evening to Lawrence David Eisen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham H. Eisen of Houston.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Nadel Eisen, 24 years old, is the children's-events coordinator for the District of Columbia Jewish Community Center in Washington.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a master's degree in public policy and women's studies from George Washington University.
Her father is the publisher of Metal Finishing magazine, a trade publication, in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Ilene Nadel, is the president of Creative Philanthropic Resources Ltd., a fund-raising consulting company in New York.


A Bond Begins to Fray In South Africa's Politics
BOB GELDOF, the rock singer and philanthropic promoter, got at least two shocks when he interviewed Nelson Mandela for a program broadcast last week on British television.
One was the revelation that the South African liberation leader's favorite musical group is the ultra-white Swedish pop quartet Abba.
The other, more disturbing, was Mr.
Mandela's apparent sympathy for what he called the Irish Republican Army's "struggle for self-assertion" in Northern Ireland.
Mr.
Geldof, who is Irish, was dismayed.
"I cannot accept your analysis of what is going on," he objected.
Mr.
Geldof is just the latest admiring foreigner to discover something that has long troubled South Africa's white liberals: that the African National Congress's understanding of democracy does not always conform to their own.
In its ideals, its loyalties and its tactics, many liberals argue, the congress remains too much a populist rebellion when it should be developing the democratic skills of a government in waiting.


More on the Gas Tax, Con and Pro
To the Editor:
"Raise the Gas Tax to Cut the Deficit" suggests just one more way to further destroy the United States economy.


Update; Rescued Dolphin Is Sent To the Miami Seaquarium
A month after a stranded 8-month-old striped dolphin was rescued on the Delaware shore and taken to New Jersey, it has found more permanent shelter in the Miami Seaquarium.
The young dolphin, called Maine, was airlifted to Miami a week ago from the the Marine Mammal Stranding Center in Brigantine, N.J., headed by Bob Schoelkopf and his wife, Sheila Dean.
Maine -- so named because Mr.
Schoelkopf and Ms.
Dean canceled a trip to Maine, their first vacation in 12 years, to find it a home -- is now convalescing in an 80,000-gallon quarantine tank at the Seaquarium.


Emerald City Bound


Always Room for More Bulbs, but Where?
LUCKY indeed are those who remembered to take pictures of their garden last spring.
Rather than one magnificent shot, ideally the pictures should be taken at several intervals to record when assorted bulbs bloom.
These pictures provide excellent records of what is planted where and are practical guides for planting bulbs now.
It is most difficult to recall in October what the garden looked like last March, April and May.
Of course, many of the spring-flowering bulbs that were planted several years ago, like daffodils, eranthis, muscari and scillas, have multiplied to provide fine spring displays.
Many seed themselves and in a few years the display can be wonderful.


Hogue Gives Islanders A Reason for Winning
The Islanders had plenty of good excuses to lose tonight.
Three regulars were out with injuries.
Their goaltending wasn't particularly sharp.
They had won the night before on the road while the Hartford Whalers, tonight's opponent, were rested and waiting for them.
Their home crowd was small and somewhat critical at times.


Games at Highest Level (Measured in Altitude)
SOME day humans will no doubt play bridge in space, but it does not seem to have happened yet.
Col.
Gerald P. Carr of Huntsville, Ark., learned bridge in 1955 while in Marine Corps flight training.
But when he was commander of Skylab 3 in 1973-74 he missed his chance to be the first space player.
A deck of cards was on board, but "we were too busy to use them," he said.


Prerequisite for College: Banking 101
A finance quiz: If the American economy is adversely affected by its hugh debt and one prescription to improve the economy is to create a better, college-educated work force, how do people pay for a college education?
Increasingly, the answer is debt.


Henry Kissinger's Harvard Years
To the Editor:
Walter Isaacson, an assistant managing editor of Time magazine, has written an 893-page biography of Henry Kissinger.


Museums Focus On the Ecology
A museum with the goal of taking natural history out of glass cases and allowing visitors to interact with displays has opened in ATLANTA.
The 160,000-square-foot Fernbank Museum of Natural History is part of an environmental education complex that includes a 65-acre forest, gardens, parks and the Fernbank Science Center.
The new museum contains "A Walk Through Time in Georgia," which takes visitors to the state's mountains, valleys, plains and beaches.
In the exhibit are remains of dinosaurs and other animals that once roamed the area and a dragonfly with a three-foot wingspan.


Point of View


Paper Says Ex-Priest Admitted Sex Abuse to Pope
James R. Porter, a former Roman Catholic priest accused of sexually abusing more than 100 children, admitted in a 1973 letter to Pope Paul VI that he had molested youths in five states, The Boston Globe reported today.
"I know in the past I used to hide behind a Roman collar, thinking that it would be a shield for me," Mr.
Porter wrote to the Pope in a four-page affidavit seeking to obtain his release from the priesthood in 1973, according to The Globe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Strategy; Clinton Is Loath to Act As if He's Already Won
The election is just days away, and history would suggest that this is the right time for Gov.
Bill Clinton, who is leading in public opinion polls, to start talking loftily about mandates and governing.
But Mr.
Clinton is not ready to deliver that speech just yet.
The Arkansas Governor, and Democrats generally, are wary.
They have no recent history of victory on a national scale.
They worry about Republican attacks and are convinced that taking anything for granted during the campaign's final days would be a poor idea.


Men's Style; A Wing and a Prayer
Infrequent travelers don't know any better.
They think checking luggage is the convenience it was meant to be.
But frequent travelers know otherwise.
That's why they stand at the airline check-in counter begging to drag on board the suitcase they could barely dead lift out of their cab.
Defeated, they nervously wave goodbye to the conveyored bag as if it were a child heading off to sleep-away camp.
After deplaning, they wait at baggage claim anticipating tragedy.
Considering the current turmoil in the airline industry, the mystery of airline food, the four-hour "routine-check" delays and the odds in favor of catching "My Cousin Vinny" in flight for the fourth time this month, why not try some anxiety reduction in at least one department:
1.
If you love the feel, smell and look of good luggage, buy a great piece of carry-on.
That way, you never have to let it out of your sight.


Sound Bites: Testing, Testing
"Back in my little, old town . . . the way we elect fellows to office is we figure out which fellow can best be spared from useful labor." An example of Harry Truman's Missouri pragmatism?
Bill Clinton's homespun humor?
Actually, it's Andy Griffith as a political adviser in the 1957 movie "A Face in the Crowd."


Pentagon Objected to Bush's Message to Iraq
Days before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, senior Pentagon officials sought to block a message from President Bush to Saddam Hussein they feared was so weakly worded that it would send a signal that the United States was not determined to stand up to Iraqi aggression.
The previously undisclosed dispute in late July 1990 within the Bush Administration about how to deal with the Iraqi leader occurred as Mr.
Hussein's troops massed on the Kuwaiti border.


In France, a Spanish Smorgasbord
Vieux Lyons, the old quarter of France's second city, was alive with the sound of guitars and castanets last month.
On a glorious day with the sun shining down on a brilliantly staged event, a Spanish-style feria with featured folk dancers attracted 150,000 of Lyons's Sunday strollers.
There was hardly a better way to advertise a dance festival than this outdoor fete organized by the Lyons Dance Biennial.
Like so many other events in 1992 that were initially inspired by the Columbus quincentennial, the fifth biennial was devoted to a Spanish theme.
Nonetheless, the originality of this increasingly important dance festival, held every two years since 1984, was proved again.


Plant Some Bulbs and Set the Birds' Tables
Plant some paperwhite narcissus bulbs in water and pebbles, to bloom when the skies get gray.
Finish planting early spring bulbs and get those tulips in the ground; they need to grow some roots before the ground freezes.
Save some bulbs to plant in pots: sink the pots into the ground and mulch them, or store them in the garage or basement (any place that is dark and remains about 40 degrees).
Bring them into the house this winter to force into bloom.


Sports of The Times; This Year, Otis Nixon Has Control
A YEAR ago, he could not even watch his old teammates on television, if that was the group decision of his new companions.
Otis Nixon had lost control of such decisions.
The first step was to admit he had lost control.
"Where I was, you don't even have control over the clothes you wear," Nixon has said.
"But you accept it. You're a sick person. They're going to make you well."


Cricket Bach, Thomas F. Cush
Kirstin Marin Bach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Bach of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Francis Cush, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Cush of Smithtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas G. Morrow officiated at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Cush, who is 30 years old and is known as Cricket, is the retail advertising manager for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington.
Her parents own the Melba Inn in New Canaan.
Her mother, Lucy-Ann Bach, is also a portrait artist there.


World Markets; Out of China, a Boost for Hong Kong
ORDINARY Chinese must be wondering what could have happened in their country to have sent the Hong Kong stock market bouncing to new heights this week.
For while their markets, in the cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen, were creeping downward, the Hong Kong market rose to a new record, mostly on the news from China.
The prime shaker in the Hong Kong exchange is not a central bank.
It is a coterie of elderly men, most in their 80's, who rule China and who with a cough or a stumble can send the markets reeling.
They essentially determine the pace of China's economic growth -- the direction is invariably up -- and therefore the action in Hong Kong.


More on the Gas Tax, Con and Pro
To the Editor:
"Raise the Gas Tax to Cut the Deficit" (Forum, Oct. 4) doesn't make any sense.
Your writer, Ernest J. Oppenheimer, seems to believe that if we throw more money into the Federal pot, suddenly the Government will use the money efficiently, wisely and well.
Any taxpayer with the ability to read a newspaper -- any newspaper -- realizes there is no basic good financial sense in government.
That's why we have a huge deficit and we're going broke!


Nancy J. Tuttle, Joshua M. Siegel
Nancy Jean Tuttle, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at the City University of New York, and Joshua Mitchell Siegel, a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York, have announced May wedding plans.


Power of Russian Parliament's Leader Is Becoming Vexing Issue for Yeltsin
It is instructive of the vagaries of Russian politics that the man who has proved probably most vexing to President Boris N. Yeltsin -- Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the Speaker of Parliament -- is not Russian, has no constituency, and was not long ago an ardent Yeltsinite.
A native of Chechenya in southern Russia and a virtual unknown before he was elected to the Russian legislature in 1990, the former academic was at Mr.
Yeltsin's side during the failed coup in August 1991, and he ran for Speaker as the President's man, barely squeaking past the Communist candidate.


The End of the Line, for Many Items, Is Really in Jamaica
SOMEWHERE out there is Debbie, a bride to be.
Minus two shower gifts.
She left them on a Long Island Rail Road train bound for Babylon last month.
Lovely plate and a glass bowl set.
Lovely wishes on the cards, too.
You really should visit the railroad Lost and Found, Debbie.
Maybe the wedding dress would fit.
The tag says it is a size 8, all silk, nicely beaded and white, of course.
It was never worn and so far has not been claimed.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
This article made me mad.
It's a "modern" Native American exhibiting his reverse racism by stereotyping wildmen-weekend "types." My mind boggles when I try to think of any article on women or African-Americans or Native Americans that's even remotely this hostile.
CHARLEY MURPHY
Minneapolis


Susan Schulte, Kurt Schneider
Susan Jean Schulte, a daughter of Patricia W. Schulte and Stephen J. Schulte, both of New York, was married yesterday to Kurt Matthew Schneider, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Schneider Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Duncan R. McQueen, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Meeting House in New Marlborough, Mass.


What's in a Name if the Name Is Godard?
Listening to Jean-Luc Godard is much like watching his films -- jump-cuts, non sequiturs, ample philosophizing, occasional intimacies, the odd obsession and no obvious narrative.
Questions prompt responses, but not necessarily answers.
Words flow freely, but their meaning is often obscure.
And, as with many of his films, the end can be at the beginning, and the middle may be at the end.
Yet, eventually, a conversation with the 61-year-old director does show something of the complex and solitary figure who for the past 30 years has carried the burden of one of the most famous names in modern cinema.
Not that he shows much interest in discussing the content or even the message of his 65-plus movies, documentaries and videos.
It's just that he likes talking.
At times, he could be thinking aloud.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 203,000
26 Ridge Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $5,084.
New Castle, N.Y. 520,000
11 Annandale Drive 4-bedroom, 3-bath, 55-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, library, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $10,816.
White Plains, N.Y. 250,000
65 Shirley Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split-level; eat-in kitchen, screened porch, separate entry, family room, workshop, laundry room; taxes $6,799.
Bristol, Conn. 143,500
349 Marcia Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; newly-painted interior, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $2,549.
Clinton, Conn. 172,500
144 Liberty Street. 4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 110-year-old renovated Cape Cod; sliders to patio, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,608.
Madison, Conn. 250,000
12 Hammonassett Meadows Road  5- bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; slate foyer, screened porch, 2-car attached garage, 1.7 acres; taxes $3,226.
OTHER AREAS Clifton, N.J. 172,000
129 Edgewood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old newly remodeled colonial; deck, full basement; $2,756.
Livingston, N.J. 222,000
9 Arthur Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old bilevel; 2-car garage, deck, h/w floors, c/a; taxes $4,702.
Oakdale, L.I. 135,000
5 Jeffery Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; den, dining area, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,500.


'A Prize Not Worth Having'
To the Editor:
In his article "Black Maestros on the Podium, but No Pedestal"  [ Oct. 11 ]  K. Robert Schwarz writes: "Conversations with black conductors yielded a warning as urgent as it was unanimous: American orchestras will have to focus on the absence of minorities on the podium, on the stage . . . ." As one of the conductors consulted by Mr.
Schwarz, I must dissent.
Not only embarrassingly self-serving, the above quoted view is artistically indefensible.


Q and A
Barges in France
Q.
We are interested in taking a barge trip on the canals of France next summer.
How can we get information on such trips? -- Raymonde Lachance, Fairport, N.Y.


New &amp; Noteworthy
PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK, by Melissa Fay Greene. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) Progress in civil rights was slow to come to McIntosh County, Georgia, until an unarmed black man was shot there by a white police officer in 1972.
This book details the legal struggles that followed and the political rise and fall of Thurnell Alston, the black community's leader.
"I will keep it on the shelf next to James Agee, another irreverent natural writer who tried, through his appetite for life and language, to drive inconsequence from the world," Theodore Rosengarten said here last year.
JUMP: And Other Stories, by Nadine Gordimer. (Penguin, $10.) Nadine Gordimer, who last year won the Nobel Prize in Literature, is an expert at finding the political within the personal, the personal within the political.
Like her previous work, most of the 16 stories in this collection examine apartheid's social legacy in her native South Africa at the same time that they explore the individual lives caught in its web.
"Ms. Gordimer takes upon herself this burden of getting it straight and telling it straight, which far too many of her compatriots have refused," our reviewer, John Edgar Wideman, said last year.
"Her eloquence breaks through the silence, parses it, shames it."


Lucile G. Ford, Nicholas G. Tullo
Lucile G. Ford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas I. Ford of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Nicholas G. Tullo, the son of Geraldine LaRocca of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Vance Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Tullo, 29 years old, is a coloratura soprano in New York.
Her father is the president of PDS Communications, a producer of industrial and training videos in Rye.
Her mother, Renee G. Ford, is the editor of Materials &amp; Processing Report, a monthly publication on advanced technology, in New York.


Drug Use Rises
During the candidates' debate on Oct. 15, President Bush cited a drop in drug use among high school students as progress in the war against drugs.
Four days later, a new survey indicated that the President had been touting old data.
A survey of 212,802 junior high and high school students in 34 states found that drug use was up in all categories for grades 6 through 8, and rose in seven of 10 categories in grades 9 through 12.


INSIDE
Was It Rape or Not?
A storm has been touched off in Austin, Tex., by a grand jury's refusal to indict a knife-wielding intruder who accepted a condom from a woman before sex with her.
Page 30.
Rough and Unexpected
In New York, Robert Abrams expected an easy campaign to unseat Senator Alfonse D'Amato.
But it hasn't turned out that way.
Page 41.
Heavy Fighting in Tajikistan
Armed bands swept into the capital of Tajikistan, a former Soviet republic, and said they were restoring a hard-line government.
Page 19.


Will Parcells Recognize These Giants?
Interesting, isn't it, that Bill Parcells happens to be making his return to Giants Stadium this weekend?
Parcells, who will be in the booth for NBC's coverage, couldn't have picked a potentially more lackluster game.
The Seahawks are 1-6, have lost five straight and haven't scored a touchdown in their last three games.
The inconsistent Giants are coming off an embarrassing loss to the Rams in what has been an entirely embarrassing month.
This does not make for your classic football confrontation.
Of course, the Giants have given Parcells plenty to talk about with all their off-field antics last week -- a week of turmoil that culminated in a shouting match between Coach Ray Handley and offensive lineman Eric Moore, who said Thursday that he would not return to the team next season, even though he has a year remaining on his contract.


Children's Books
CIRCUS
Written and illustrated by Lois Ehlert. Unpaged. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
PETER SPIER'S CIRCUS!
Written and illustrated by Peter Spier.
Unpaged.
New York: Doubleday Books for Young Readers.
THE CIRCUS
Written and illustrated by Heidi Goennel. Unpaged. New York: Tambourine Books.


Tax Cuts and Spending Hikes? No Way!; The Secret Budget
To the Editor:
"The Truth About the Deficit" (Op-Ed, Oct. 4) offers only a partial truth.
Charles J. Zwick and Peter A. Lewis omit the fastest-growing segment of the Federal budget: so-called off-budget expenditures.
By 1984, off-budget expenditures were adding more than $100 million to the annual budget deficit, according to the National Center for Policy Analysis.
Since then a proliferation of off-budget loan guarantees for farmers, students, homebuyers, shipbuilders, the flood insured, cable television companies and other industrial and small-business loans have further increased off-budget expenditures.


The Candidates on the Issues
ECONOMY AND TAXES
Robert Abrams, Democrat: Favors phased reduction in military spending to $145 billion in the year 2000, or roughly half the military spending forecast by the Bush Administration for that year.
Would use part of the estimated $900 billion to $1 trillion savings for deficit reduction and part for investment in infrastructure, housing and schools.
Favors tax credits of up to 20 percent for businesses and industries that invest in plant modernization or defense-industry conversion, and of up to 30 percent for research and development.
Opposes any increase in personal taxes.


Playing Variations On Shostakovich
The Zhdanov decree of 1948 denounced Shostakovich, Prokofiev and indeed almost any Soviet composer of merit as decadent formalists, ushering in yet another dark period of Stalinist repression in the arts.
Shostakovich was forced into a divided role as a composer, turning out simple or flashy public pieces and retreating inward, like some monk in a time of barbarity, for his deeper utterances.
Given his fame and his willingness to produce patriotic effusions and film scores, he was still allowed to venture beyond Soviet borders for carefully regulated public appearances.
In 1950 he visited Leipzig to help celebrate the 200th anniversary of Bach's death and, incidentally, to shore up artistic ties between the Soviet Union and the newly formed All-German Republic, which eventually became the German Democratic Republic, or East Germany.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
DAVID F. MOORE is one of the best secret-sharers in New Jersey or one of the worst, depending on your view of keeping secrets.
In the 23 years he has been with the New Jersey Conservation Foundation, he has come to know this state very well.
And like the ardent Boy Scout that he in so many ways resembles, he can't help but share what he knows.
That's why he led a group of environmentalists on a tour this month of secret natural places that he has ferreted out over the years.
He takes only a small group, so the secret places are not trampled into nothingness, and he doesn't like to give many hints about where he goes.
But he sounds assuring when he says there are extraordinary patches of hemlock forest and brooding woods right in the heart of the most crowded state in the nation.


On Sunday; Tough Crowd, Tough Race, Tough Laughs
The three dozen supporters at the Westchester Coalition for Legal Abortion should have been a piece of cake for Attorney General Robert Abrams.
His abortion-rights stand is a strong political card.
Yet even here it was not straightforward.
"Why aren't you saying more on abortion?" asked a contributor.
"Why are we getting clouded up?"
"I didn't think I'd have to repeat my record for this group," said Mr.
Abrams, flushing.
"Every stop I make, I mention I'm pro-choice, it's one of the three cornerstones of my campaign."


Always Room for More Bulbs, but Where?
LUCKY indeed are those who remembered to take pictures of their garden last spring.
Rather than one magnificent shot, ideally the pictures should be taken at several intervals to record when assorted bulbs bloom.
These pictures provide excellent records of what is planted where and are practical guides for planting bulbs now.
It is most difficult to recall in October what the garden looked like last March, April and May.
Of course, many of the spring-flowering bulbs that were planted several years ago, like daffodils, eranthis, muscari and scillas, have multiplied to provide fine spring displays.
Many seed themselves and in a few years the display can be wonderful.


Liberal Giants Inspire Three Centrist Justices
By the end of careers in the law spanning six decades, Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall had inspired generations of lawyers with their view of the law as an instrument of social and political change.
Among their many spiritual heirs, it would seem extremely farfetched to count three current Justices who were placed on the Supreme Court by Presidents eager to see major portions of the Brennan and Marshall legacy dismantled.
But the three, Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter, have each offered remarkable testimony recently to the impact of these liberal giants, both now retired, on their own lives as Justices and on their vision of the Court.


U.S. Lead in Software Faces a Rising Threat
ON a tour of Russia last summer John Morrison, a software designer for the Star Wars anti-missile defense system, was startled to find dozens of small companies using the most advanced American software tools to write programs that rival America's best efforts from electronic spreadsheets to video games.
"The surprising thing," he said, "was that Russians are doing more with our best technology than we are. You have world-class programmers who were willing to work for $200 a month."
Low labor costs in foreign countries and dramatic changes in computer technology have led Mr.
Morrison and some other software experts to believe that the United States' dominant position in this crucial high-technology sector may soon be challenged.
Until now this country's lead in software has appeared unassailable, and the outlook for computer programmers has been one of the few bright spots on the American economic scene.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics' projections through 2005 anticipated a need for 613,000 programmers and systems analysts, one of the country's five largest growth categories.
Today, however, Russia, India, Brazil and Singapore, among other countries, are making the development of an indigenous software industry a top priority.
These countries and others are eagerly offering their brightest technical workers to United States companies, frequently to do the most boring and repetitive programming tasks for low wages.
American companies may well find it compelling to export such jobs.


What's Doing on Avenue of the Americas?


Nonworking Bulb Can Indicate a Defective Circuit
WHEN an ordinary ceiling light with an incandescent bulb flickers or will not light, tightening or replacing the bulb often solves the problem.
But when it does not, there are easy tests for determining what is wrong, as well as easy remedies.
To avoid shock when handling a bulb in a fixture, turn off the switch before touching the bulb.


Wall Street; Those Foggy Crystal Balls
Brokerage firms pay $1 million and more a year to some of their superstar analysts.
For that kind of money, they should be dazzling clients with blockbuster stock picks.
Yet only 22 of 39 star analysts polled a year ago managed to pick stocks that outperformed the Dow Jones industrial average.
That means nearly 45 percent of the best and brightest couldn't keep up with the unimpressive 6.03 percent advance of the Dow.


Sound Bytes; He Who Fielded Compaq's 'SWAT Team'
While her husband was a prisoner of war in World War II, Eckhard Pfeiffer's mother fled advancing Russian troops with her children and a handcart.
For Mr.
Pfeiffer, now chief executive of the Compaq Computer Corporation, the lesson was that bold risk-taking, tempered by careful planning was the way to go.
And he did, through careers in Europe with Texas Instruments and later the fledgling Compaq.
Called back to the United States to "rescue" Compaq in 1991, he has overseen two drastic price cuts that have transformed the company and touched off the current price war in the industry.
Question: They say you were given $20,000 and told to start up Compaq in Europe.


Marky Hall, Joseph Lee Carter
Marcia Reed Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry I. Hall of Morristown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Joseph Lee Carter, a son of Emily Carter of Darien, Conn., and the late Aubrey J. Carter.
The Rev.
David P. Hegg, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Church.
Ms.
Hall, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, is known as Marky.
She is a vice president of Moran &amp; Associates Inc., a securities brokerage and investment banking company in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Q and A
M.C.I.
Rent Increases  Question: Last year our landlord tried to convert our rental building into a co-op, but failed.
Before the attempt at conversion, there were many violations against the building because of its neglected condition.
Repairs were made because he was trying to sell the apartments.
Now he is trying to get rent increases for such things as work on the roof and brick pointing.


Bush Role as Envoy in Iran Deal Reported
An article in The New Yorker reports that George Bush played a previously undisclosed role as secret emissary in 1986, traveling to the Middle East to revive the then foundering arms-for-hostages initiative with Iran by urging Iraq to carry out air strikes deep inside Iran.
The article, in the magazine's Nov. 2 issue, says the plan was conceived during the Iran-Iraq war as a pressure tactic intended to force Iran to turn to the United States for sophisticated anti-aircraft weapons to repel the Iraqi attacks.


Getting Clinical
LIFE, DEATH, AND IN BETWEEN
Tales of Clinical Neurology.
By Harold L. Klawans. 270 pp.
New York: Paragon House. $21.95.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in the Arts and Leisure section today refers incorrectly to the role played by Broderick Crawford in the movie "All the King's Men." The character is based on a Huey Long-like governor, not on Long's later years as a senator.


France Is Set To Put Curbs On Smokers
One of the trademarks of the French bistro, the sometimes heady, sometimes overpowering aroma of cigarette smoke, is about to be curbed.
Restaurants, hotels and theaters will also be affected by an antismoking regulation to be put into effect by France's Ministry of Health on Nov. 1.
The regulation restricts smoking in all enclosed public places.
Smoking will be permitted only in specific areas, which will be signposted and ventilated.
Fines for smoking in a nonsmoking area will range from about $42 to $270.
The police will enforce the law, although officers will not be sent out specifically to check on compliance with the law.
On the Metro and in trains, ticket inspectors will do the job.
Smoking is already prohibited on Metro trains; from Nov. 1 it will prohibited in the stations, too.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Illinois; Bush's Chances Appear Less Than Slim in Illinois
Illinois usually stays up late on Presidential election nights.
The count was close in this bellwether state in 1948, when it went for Harry S. Truman in the wee hours, and in 1960, when it gave John F. Kennedy the barest of majorities.
It was close in three of the last four Presidential races.
But not this year.
Not unless a sudden shift from Gov.
Bill Clinton toward Ross Perot, reported late this week by senior officials of both major parties, becomes a stampede.


Nonworking Bulb Can Indicate a Defective Circuit
WHEN an ordinary ceiling light with an incandescent bulb flickers or will not light, tightening or replacing the bulb often solves the problem.
But when it does not, there are easy tests for determining what is wrong, as well as easy remedies.
To avoid shock when handling a bulb in a fixture, turn off the switch before touching the bulb.


OCT, 18-24: 'It Could Happen Again'; Report on Los Angeles Riots Blames Police and City
When rioting erupted in Los Angeles in April, Daryl F. Gates, who was then the police chief, was unable to find a way to restore order.
Last week it came to him.
"Clearly that night we should have gone down there and shot a few people," he said, surprising reporters who had asked him about a just-released study on the riots.
"In retrospect, that's exactly what we should have done. We should have blown a few heads off."


Virginia Choung, Todd Dutkin
Sangwon Virginia Choung, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nak-Young Choung of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Raymond Todd Dutkin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Dutkin of Easton, Pa.
The Rev.
Stanley Aronson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Burning Tree Country Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Dutkin, who is 26 years old and is known as Virginia, graduated cum laude from Colgate University.
She was until recently a second vice president and a branch manager at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father is a vice president in the international division of Random House in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Sampras-Pioline Final in France Pete Sampras, the defending champion, reached the final of the Lyons Open in France yesterday with a 6-0, 6-2 victory over MaliVai Washington.
In the other semifinal, Cedric Pioline of France defeated Richey Reneberg of the United States, 6-2, 6-7 (1-7), 7-5, in a match that lasted nearly three hours. (AP) Chang Gains Over Injured Prpic: Top-seeded Michael Chang of the United States beat the injured Goran Prpic of Croatia, 7-6 (7-3), 4-6, 6-3, yesterday and advanced to the final of an exhibition tournament in Hong Kong.
Chang, ranked fourth in the world, will meet Ivan Lendl, seeded No. 2 and the defending champion, in the final today.
Lendl beat Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, in the other semifinal.
Prpic suffered a recurrence of a knee injury that almost forced him to quit. (AP) Novotna Upsets Fernandez: Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia upset second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-3, 6-4, in the semifinals of the Brighton Indoors tournament in England yesterday and will play top-seeded Steffi Graf for the title.
Graf reached the final for the sixth time in seven years when she overpowered a fellow German, Anke Huber, 7-5, 6-2. (AP) GOLF Price Seeks His Second Triumph Nick Price, the P.G.A. champion, emerged from a tightly bunched pack to a one-stroke lead at the Texas Open yesterday in San Antonio and put himself in position to achieve a long-sought goal.
"Ever since I won the P.G.A., my goal for the year has been to win another tournament," Price said after his three-under 68 in the third round gave him a 197 total and a one-stroke lead over Steve Elkington and Roger Maltbie. (AP) Dent Leads Senior Classic: Jim Dent had nine birdies for a 63 and a one-shot lead over Gary Player (65) and Rocky Thompson (67) after two rounds of the Senior Classic in Los Angeles.
Dent had a 36-hole total of 131, 11 under par. (AP) McNulty Leads by 2: Mark McNulty of Zimbabwe shot his second 66 of the tournament and opened a two-stroke lead after three rounds of the Madrid Open yesterday. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY Men's Team Title Goes to Providence Mark Carrol's gold-medal effort of 23 minutes 35 seconds for five miles at Franklin Park in Boston yesterday carried the Providence Friars to the team title with 31 points in the Big East Conference championships.
Carole Vajac of Villanova, fourth last year, won the women's 3.1 mile race in 16:46 as the Lady Wildcats won a fourth straight team crown with 28 points.
West Virginia Runner Repeats as Champion: Bob Donker of West Virginia became only the third runner in the Atlantic 10 Conference to repeat as the men's champion as he covered the five-mile course at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx in 25:05.82.
St.
Joseph's (Pa.) won the team championship with 29 points, while the defending champion Mountaineers were next with 48.
Alicia Guiliano of Rutgers set a meet record of 17:43.20 in the women's 3.1-mile race.
Massachusetts (38 points) retained the team crown.
Fairleigh Dickinson Is First Again: Vinko Markovina won the men's 5.1 mile title in 26:09 to lead Fairleigh Dickinson to a third straight team championship with 28 points in the Northeast Conference Meet at Clove Lake Park, Staten Island.
Wagner, the host, won its first women's title with 45 points behind Amy Felci's fifth-place finish in 19:37.
Nadine Jamerson of Mount St.
Mary's (Md.) was the individual winner in 18:54 for 3.1 miles.


Jackson May Sit
The Miami Dolphins announced yesterday that tight end KEITH JACKSON, who had three touchdown receptions in his first three games with the Dolphins, could miss today's game against Indianapolis because of a pulled groin muscle.
Jackson suffered the injury in practice Friday. (AP)


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the engagement of Anne-Marie Lund referred incorrectly to Christopher Carver Kagy.
He is Ms.
Lund's fiance.


Irish Build Victory From the Ground Up
At the end of an afternoon of contrasting football doctrines, Brigham Young's precise, creative passing tradition could not match Notre Dame's size and strength.
Not in Notre Dame's convincing second half, when the Irish overpowered the Cougars to turn a potentially dangerous game into a 42-16 victory.
In a meeting of the nation's two leading offenses, Notre Dame (5-1-1) rushed for 291 of its 455 yards.
The Irish were outgained, 220 yards to 132, in the first half.
But in the third and fourth quarters, the Irish gained 323 yards -- 233 on the ground -- to Brigham Young's 132.
Notre Dame controlled the ball for 20 minutes 21 seconds in the second half and took control of what had been a 5-point game with three rushing touchdowns within a span of 7:42.


IN SHORT: FICTION
JUMPING SHIP And Other Stories. By Kelvin Christopher James. Villard, $20.


No Headline


OCT, 18-24: English Unemployment; His Future Shaky, Major Reverses Himself On Mines and Miners
John Major has accomplished in 10 days something no other Conservative Prime Minister has been able to do: unite most of Britain behind the National Union of Mineworkers.
By floating an ill-considered proposal that would have closed 31 of 50 coal mines, and putting three-quarters of Britain's 41,000 miners out of work, Mr.
Major set off a storm of public protest, including a rebellion within his own party.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 10  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 490,000
430 West 23d Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, washer/dryer; maintenance $550, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)  TriBeCa 450,000
17 Hubert Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 5-story, brick house in a brownstone; dining room, elevator, 3,000-sq.-ft. private roof deck, 25- by 25-ft. building and lot; taxes $6,700 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper West Side 300,000
203 West 81st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,270-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining room, renovated kitchen and bath, 10-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; common charge $705, taxes $3,300 (Brokers: Vendenberg Inc.-Solarz Realty)  Upper West Side 395,000
345 West 88th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,520-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, dining room, Hudson River view; maintenance $968, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: West Side Properties)  Upper West Side 220,000
299 Riverside Drive (102d St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $821, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clarke)  BRONX  Van Courtlandt Village 152,000
3324 Giles Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, stone and wood-frame house; dining room, finished attic, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Wakefield 175,000
4358 Bruner Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 154,000
443 12th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; dining area, common roof deck, 2 exposures, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $579, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Prospect Park South 237,500
180 Stratford Road  6-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Center Hall Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage, 55- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,221 (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher-Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay 175,000
2074 East 23d Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco and vinyl-sided house; dining room, oak cabinets in kitchen, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  College Point 304,000
11-10 129th Street  3-family, detached, brick and aluminum-sided house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 235,000
67-56 Ingram Street  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, English Tudor; dining room, den, fireplace, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Randall Manor 162,500
7 Westbury Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick, Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 99- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Brokers: Foreman/Rand Properties-Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Rosebank 105,000
20 Cliff Street  (Sea Cliff Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,058-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, large living room, 2 terraces, Manhattan skyline view, pool; maintenance $614, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)


Greed, Lust and Ambition Rule in Hollywood D.C.
Hollywood: a town driven by greed, lust and ambition, where fat-cat moguls indulge sexual fetishes and an elect few (or their agents) rule with an iron hand.
Washington: A town driven by greed, lust and ambition, where white-haired senators indulge sexual fetishes and an
elected
few (or their handlers) rule with an iron hand.


Crime
"The man had his troubles," Robert Campbell tells us about Ray Sharkey, a rogue cop who bleeds for his sins in BONEYARDS (Pocket Books, $21).
"He had his sorrows." What with a wife dying of cancer in an expensive hospital, a retarded daughter in long-term care at another institution and his own private prostitute to support, it's no wonder that Sharkey, a 26-year veteran with the Chicago police force, goes on the take.
Now, in 1977, with the Democratic Party machine in splinters after the death of Mayor Richard J. Daley and with all the crooked pols looking for "a rotten cop to hang on a tree" before the election, Sharkey isn't surprised when they pick him as "the sacrificial goat."
Mr.
Campbell's mournful elegy for Ray Sharkey is both an eloquent character study of a good man gone bad and an indictment of the political corruption that makes his ruination seem inevitable.
Sharkey sees the setup coming a mile away when he makes "a Chicago contract" ("Nothing on tape. Nothing on paper. No outside witnesses. . . . A couple of nods. An understanding") with Frankie Blue Shoes in the Kilarney Tavern.
But he kids himself that he can flash the old Irish charm, work the old connections, grab the money, get the girl and keep the faith.


Abroad at Home; Trust
In the summer of 1986 Vice President George Bush made a trip to the Middle East.
On July 29 in Jerusalem he was briefed by Amiram Nir, an Israeli Intelligence official, on the status of the operation to trade arms to Iran for American hostages.
According to an article in this week's issue of The New Yorker, Mr.
Bush had a more urgent covert mission on that trip.
It was to ask King Hussein of Jordan and President Mubarak of Egypt to pass a message to Saddam Hussein of Iraq that he should use his air force to bomb deep inside Iran.
The two countries were in the midst of their long war.


T.W.A. May Drop Review of Account
Trans World Airlines might be calling off the review of its estimated $45 million to $50 million American and European accounts, said advertising executives who insisted on anonymity, because of imminent changes involving advertising and marketing executives at the troubled carrier.
Earlier this month, Craig Pavlus, T.W.A.'s senior vice president for marketing, unexpectedly disclosed the review, which involved Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York, the agency for the American portion, and Groupe FCA in London, which handles the European portion.
Other participants were said to include Bloom FCA, which is owned by Groupe FCA; Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.; Deutsch Inc.; Grey Advertising Inc., and Lois/U.S.A.
All are based in New York.


Wallaces' Legacy of Philanthropy for Education and Culture
DeWitt Wallace and Lila Acheson protected their privacy zealously, discouraged would-be biographers, left no diaries and destroyed their personal correspondence.
When they died, he in 1981 at age 91 and she in 1984 at 94, their wills left no instructions about how their money should be used for philanthropy.
Before their deaths they had created four foundations that, in 1987, were merged into two funds: the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund devoted to education and youth leadership, and the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, focusing on culture and the peforming arts.


Topics of The Times; New York, More Than Show Biz
New Yorkers know there is plenty to cheer about in their city: ethnic and cultural diversity, first-rate theater, world-class museums, restaurants, literati, designers, scholars and other professionals.
But outsiders often overlook these assets, pointing instead to violent crime, filthy streets, political turmoil and the overall hassle factor.
That's why Fortune magazine's fourth annual survey of America's best cities for business is gratifying.
Despite the problems and unrelenting negative publicity, the city came in fifth -- behind Seattle, Houston, San Francisco and Atlanta, but in front of Raleigh, Denver, Boston and about 50 other major cities.


Research Questions Effectiveness Of Most School-Choice Programs
Allowing parents to choose their children's schools may be the hottest idea in American education, but a new flood of research argues that such "choice" programs alone will not help schools and, in some cases, can actually hurt them.
A report to be made public today by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, a leading educational research group, is the latest of several to argue that choice primarily benefits children of better-educated parents, does not necessarily improve student performance, requires additional money and, without certain safeguards, may actually widen the gap between rich and poor school districts.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the effectiveness of the 1986 immigration law misstated a provision in some copies.
Farmers with fewer than 10 employees do not have to comply with Federal health and safety laws.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Handling Perot: A Very Delicate Affair  Parties Ponder a Rival of Surprising Strength
Ross Perot's climb in the polls, which shook the political terrain last week, may be leveling off, strategists in the Clinton campaign say -- and certainly hope.
And some political professionals suggest that his remarkable accusations this weekend of Republican dirty tricks could feed the voters' doubts about a man criticized in the past as seeing conspiracies all around.
But the resurgence of the Perot candidacy has turned the endgame of this campaign into a very delicate affair.
Thus the campaign is ending as it began, with strategists in both major parties trying to chart, quantify, defuse or turn to their advantage the mercurial candidacy of Ross Perot.


For U.S., a New Day's Dawning in East Asia
To the Editor:
"The Cold War's Over and It's Time to Rebuild" (letters, Oct. 6) addresses problems and opportunities in a reduced demand for military hardware, personnel and bases.
The time is also ripe to revamp United States relations with East Asia.
Our leaders seem at a loss how to respond to the pressures of East Asia's peoples and centers of power.
The challenges of communications technology alone stagger the imagination.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 3 about the wide range of family arrangements represented at a fund-raising festival at St.
Philip's parish in San Francisco referred incorrectly to the woman who runs an after-school program at the parish school.
She is Peggy Dunne.


For Spain's Leader, One More Race
As Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez prepared to mark his 10th year in office this month, he meditated at length on a question unusual for a man who is still his country's most popular politician: Was it time for him to step down?
Accustomed to watching Mr.
Gonzalez wrestle with such doubts, Spaniards awaited his decision patiently.
Before leading his Socialist Party to a third successive victory in 1989, he went through a similar ritual before agreeing to run -- but announcing that three terms in office would be enough.


Fernandez Is Sought By Mets
The Mets, with their shortstop situation a considerably uncertain one, have spoken with the Padres about acquiring Tony Fernandez.
Characterizing themselves as one of a handful of clubs pursuing the veteran shortstop, the Mets said their trade talks have been detailed and included the names of players who could be offered in return.


Wallace Journal; A Town Loses Jobs, Then Celebrates
There was a celebration here recently for an occasion that would have caused despair in many other places: the cancellation of plans for a new industrial plant and its promise of hundreds of jobs.
The jobs, about 1,000 of them full time and 800 temporary, would have come with a $700 million wood pulp and rayon plant that the Formosa Plastics Corporation, which is based in Taiwan, planned to build here.


Emily Pachuta, Frank E. Derby
Emily Pachuta, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Pachuta of Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday to Frank Edwin Derby, a son of Susan Derby of Jacksonville, Fla., and the late Rabbi Matthew I. Derby.
Rabbi Steven Arnold officiated at the Ann Whitney House in Brookline, Mass.
Mrs.
Derby, 28 years old, is a film maker in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Price Wins in Texas  Nick Price won the Texas Open in San Antonio yesterday when Steve Elkington missed a 3-foot putt on the second hole in their playoff.
The victory was the second of the year for Price, the P.G.A. champion, who shot a five-under-par 66. (AP) Floyd Is Top Senior: Raymond Floyd rolled in four straight birdies en route to a nine-under-par 62 and a tournament-record victory in the Senior Classic at Los Angeles.
Floyd's three-day total of 195 was 18 under par.
Isao Aoki (65) was three strokes back. (AP) TENNIS


No Headline
"I didn't care to be a hero or anything, because we've had so many guys to get us here, to get us through. But as long as I had one little hit, one little extra base hit to drive in a couple runs, it was important." -- DAVE WINFIELD.  [ C4:4. ]


Books of The Times; Diversity in the Fastest Growing U.S. Minority
Latinos  A Biography of the People  By Earl Shorris  520 pages. W. W. Norton. $25.
Earl Shorris's "Latinos: A Biography of the People" is a large baggy book that strives to give readers a sense of the diversity and complexity of the fastest growing United States minority, which comprises Mexican-Americans, Cuban-Americans, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans and immigrants from Central and South America.


Unfulfilled Promises; 2 Koreans Seek Justice and a Dream
One October night two years ago, Ok Sun Kim called her three children in South Korea with good news.
After eight years of working in other Koreans' grocery stores, she and her husband, Tong Kwang, had saved enough to set up their own corner grocery in Brooklyn.
Soon, she promised the children, they would be able to afford to bring them to America.
That promise was abruptly broken.


A Magazine Niche for the New Age Hemingways
Oh, fickle post-New Age man!
Just when we thought he had finally settled into the Nesting Nineties -- doing his bit around the house and planning fun-filled family vacations -- we learn that he is really plotting to floatplane into the Alaskan wilderness with his buddies and hunt partridge in Spain.
If last year's hot new magazine was Family Fun, this year's is surely Men's Journal.
Filled with Hemingwayesque tales of powder skiing in the Canadian Rockies and burning up the highways on chrome-encrusted Harley-Davidsons, it speaks directly to our newly domesticized hero. ("It's beautiful, it's dangerous, it's irresponsible. Wanna go?")


Sanford Renews Tough Senate Race
Senator Terry Sanford, at 75 the grand old man of North Carolina politics, returned to the campaign trail today after two weeks in the hospital to have a heart valve replaced.
He spoke briefly, saying it "sure is good to be back home" where his political career began, and introduced Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, who told a roaring crowd, "We need Terry Sanford back in the Senate to help bring change."


Ann Aidelson and Andrew Singer
Ann Ester Aidelson, the daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Solomon Aidelson of North Woodmere, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Jeffrey Singer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Singer, also of North Woodmere.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel, where he is the assistant rabbi and the educational director.
Mrs.
Singer, 21 years old, is a student at Yeshiva University.
Her mother, Susan Aidelson, teaches Judaic studies at the Brandeis School in Lawrence, L.I.


Rachel Hallote, Alexander Joffe
Rachel S. Hallote, the daughter of the writer Cynthia Ozick and Bernard Hallote of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Alexander H. Joffe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert D. Joffe of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Philip M. Weinberger performed the ceremony at Congregation Anshe Sholom.
Ms.
Hallote, who is 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in Near Eastern archeology from the University of Chicago, where she is a doctoral candidate in that subject.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in the New York City Finance Department.


A Variety of Careers For Mayor's Appointee
For Randy Daniels, the accusations of sexual harassment by a former colleague are a blemish on a career that has combined journalism, public relations, entrepreneurship and politics.
Occasionally, to the dismay of some colleagues, he has dabbled in several of those fields at once.
Still, more than a dozen friends and colleagues of Mr.
Daniels who were interviewed in the last several days said they found it difficult to reconcile the accusations by Barbara Wood, a television reporter who worked briefly for Mr.
Daniels in the office of City Council President Andrew J. Stein, with the man they know as a devout husband and father and a consummate gentleman.


Dance in Review
Tim Martin and Meg Wolfe
Mulberry Street Theater
Tim Martin and Meg Wolfe painted vivid choreographic portraits on Friday night.
What caught their attention were people brooding over problems of the flesh and spirit.
Ms.
Wolfe cringed and tottered in "Wallflower." She was obviously someone who thought herself rejected by life, and her expressions made her look young one moment and a thousand years old the next.


El Alamein Journal; On a '42 Battlefield, Hearts Ache Still for the Fallen
Otho R. Harding, a lanky 74-year-old farmer from New Zealand, walked slowly with a cane down a row of tombstones.
His wife, Allison, followed several paces behind until he stopped at a simple stone marker.
He bent to lay a red paper poppy at its base.


Sports of The Times; Can Parcells Ignore 'Big-Game Thrill'?
BILL PARCELLS had parked his blue Cadillac at Manny's restaurant not far from Giants Stadium, and Ed Croke of the Giants front office was driving him to work.
The former Giants coach would be the NBC analyst at yesterday's Giants-Seahawks game.
And now, as Croke turned onto Paterson Plank Road, the stadium suddenly loomed high against the gray sky.
"This is really a strange feeling riding in here," the coach of two Super Bowl championship teams said.
"There's a lot of my blood in this place."


Hogue Has Fun Making Major Contributions
This week, Benoit Hogue is observing two significant anniversaries.
A year ago today, he played his first game after joining the Islanders, a career move that helped both his personal fortunes and those of the team.
On Tuesday, he will become 26 years old, the prime of life for many professional hockey players.
So what better way to mark these days than by sending a gift of hockey significance to his parents, Pierre and Ginette Hogue?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot Shows Penchant For Seeing Conspiracy
Ross Perot's charges of Republican dirty tricks follow a long-established pattern of espousing elaborate, unproved conspiracies often directed against himself.
On numerous occasions, most recently in the third Presidential debate, Mr.
Perot has described assassination conspiracies directed against him and his family by enemies as varied as the North Vietnamese, the Black Panthers and Texas drug dealers.
Dallas law-enforcement officials interviewed by reporters have said they do not believe the plots ever existed.


Rally for Coal Miners in London


Miss Schreiber, Michael Brosler
Margaret Mary Schreiber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans W. Schreiber of Ossining, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Allan Brosler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Merwyn G. Brosler of Orinda, Calif.
Judge Ron Greenberg of the Berkeley-Albany Municipal Court in Berkeley, Calif., officiated at the Rockefeller Lodge in San Pablo, Calif.
Mrs.
Brosler, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president at the World Savings and Loan Association in Oakland, Calif.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is president of Dunn-Behre Dolbear Inc., a mining consulting company in New York.
Her mother, Mary L. Schreiber, is a costume designer in Ossining.


Millionaire and Comptroller Square Off
As youngsters picked out Halloween masks at a shopping mall here and prepared their tricks or treats, candidates in Long Island's newly redrawn Third Congressional District sought out voters, conjuring up frightening images of their opponents.
"He's a zealot and an extremist on the abortion issue," said Stephen A. Orlins, a Democrat and self-made millionaire, pulling out all stops in describing his Republican opponent, Peter T. King, who is now Nassau County Comptroller.
"He's out of touch with reality and has used his position to block a woman's right to choose."


Review/Philharmonic; Masur's More Is More
If you wanted to revivify an over-familiar symphonic masterpiece, you might consider streamlining it by skipping a few of the sectional repetitions.
Which may be one reason Kurt Masur is music director of the New York Philharmonic, and you're not.
Mr.
Masur did precisely the opposite on Thursday evening with Beethoven's Seventh Symphony, including even some large repeats that are usually omitted and playing the piece for all it was worth.
But his tempos were brisk, and his players seemed fully involved.
Nowhere did the dead hand of routine intrude, and the warm, polished sound of the low strings was especially admirable.


Daniels Scores One For Faith
It was only a preseason game, but for Lloyd Daniels, it was more evidence that his life is headed in the right direction.
Led by Daniels' 30-point performance Saturday night, the Spurs handed the Knicks (5-1) their first loss, 119-113 at the HemisFair Arena in San Antonio.
After Daniels's legendary high school career in New York, a drug and alcohol addiction threatened both his career and his life.
But the Spurs' coach, Jerry Tarkanian, who recruited Daniels when Tarkanian was coaching at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, decided to give Daniels another chance.


Winfield and Carter: History Doesn't Repeat
Joe Carter kept thinking Bill Buckner 1986.
Dave Winfield refused to think Dave Winfield 1981.
The Atlanta Braves would just as soon not think anything today, thank you, because the Toronto Blue Jays are the World Series champions and they are not.


A Pawnshop to the Rich: Business Is Picking Up
The chic boutiques and high-priced department stores here may be emptier today than they have been in the past, but at least one business is thriving in this stubborn recession: the Beverly Loan Company.
It is perhaps this city's best-known pawnshop, at least to some.
With credit tight and unemployment high, more people are turning to pawnbrokers for short-term loans to tide them over.


For U.S., a New Day's Dawning in East Asia; Living Japanese Legend
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 22 article about the disgrace of Sanzo Nozaka, the 100-year-old Japanese Communist leader, is informative and interesting, but neglects to mention an important aspect of Mr.
Nozaka's long career: his intimate involvement with the Chinese Communists in the 1940's.


Dance in REview
Danspace
St. Mark's Church East Village
The Danspace project's annual Food for Thought series, which opened on Friday night, is an ingenious way of having fun, getting to see new dance and helping to feed the hungry.
Admission to each event includes donations of food.
And Friday's program was fast-paced and imaginatively selected.
Norman Salant got the evening started with "Saxophone Stories," a saxophone solo accompanied by a wash of electronic sounds, which in the spare beauty of its performance seemed a kind of benediction.
Samuel F. Wursten's "Picnic" offered Brenda Daniels a chance to stretch and crook her long limbs and show off her inscrutable gaze to music by Mina.


G.M.'s Board Has Aroused Resentment
Whatever happens when the directors of the General Motors Corporation meet next Monday, it already seems clear that the auto maker's 11 outside directors are broadcasting a message that G.M. is not changing fast enough or radically enough.
But that message has been emerging in a halting, uneven manner, and many G.M. employees say they are unhappy.


'That's My Mommy, Give Me the Camera! I'll Take the Picture!'


Miss Riseman, James Bernstein
Margaret Louise Riseman, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Mervin H. Riseman, was married yesterday to James Herbert Bernstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Bernstein of Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Bernstein graduated from Swarthmore College and received a law degree from Tulane University.
Her father was of counsel to Zimet, Haines &amp; Friedman, a law firm in New York.


Review/Rock; From Sonic Youth, Loud Guitars And Thunderous Obscurities
Sonic Youth is about as hard to place as any band working; it connects itself to all sorts of disparate movements and trends, suggesting themes that are explicit one moment and utterly confusing and hidden the next.
The band performed a sold-out show supporting its new album, "Dirty" (Geffen), at Roseland on Saturday night, and amid all the obscurity, two things became clear: the band members are now bohemian teen idols, and as grandparents of the alternative music scene -- the band was founded in 1981 -- they're extraordinarily influential.
Musically, the band creates a chrome-plated universe of guitar sound.
Sonic Youth -- Thurston Moore and Lee Ranaldo on guitars, Kim Gordon on bass and Steve Shelley on drums -- takes an adulation of the raw power and sound of the guitar and uses it architecturally, filling and emptying spaces with a huge variety of noises and textures.
The band tries to work nonlinearly, avoiding obvious sequences of events, and on Saturday night, the two guitarists, using drumsticks to beat on their guitars, unusually tuned guitars, feedback and other noises, created enormous amorphous swells of sound that, with overtones clanging away, suggested nothing less than the meeting of a natural disaster and a symphony.


D'Amato Sows Worry to Reap Votes
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is out to scare New York.
Stalking senior citizens' homes, veterans' posts and defense industry plants all across the state like a bespectacled King Kong, the Republican incumbent is trying to spread terror, panic or even just a twinge of anxiety about his opponent's economic plans.
"Bob Abrams is going to double your Medicare payments" he tells a cluster of wide-eyed elderly voters at an old-age home in Buffalo.
He warned veterans at an American Legion post in Syracuse that Mr.
Abrams would eliminate all veterans' benefits and shut down their V.A. hospitals.
"It will be the end," he said ominously.
"There would be no more veterans' benefits."


Campaigns That Promote the Vote
Every four years, a few altruistic consumer-product companies and advertising agencies mount campaigns to encourage people to vote.
This year, the intense interest in the elections and the impulse toward cause-related advertising has resulted in a bumper crop of "get out the vote" messages.
Here are some examples of ads either produced pro bono by agencies or sponsored by businesses:
*The Deciding Vote, a nonpartisan group of women in the communications industry in New York, is running a print and television campaign that carries the theme "Make them listen. Vote."
A print ad, created by Jeanne Chinard and Beverly Okada at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, features a mouthless woman alongside the headline "Most politicians still think women should be seen and not heard. In the last election, 39 million women agreed."


The Talk of Hollywood; Director Who Blends Action With a Bit of Art
So "Under Siege," the new action adventure starring Steven Seagal, is not exactly high brow.
The film, about nuclear terrorists aboard a Navy battleship, won't rival "Howards End" for Academy Award nominations.
The art house set, who prefer Ingmar Bergman and Akira Kurosawa, won't even blink at it.
But the movie, along with "The Last of the Mohicans," is the major success of the autumn, and has been No. 1 at the box office for the past three weeks.
Even serious film critics admit that "Under Siege" is perhaps the best popcorn film in years.
And a darkly funny, if violent, one.
Andrew Davis, the 45-year-old director, and a politically involved former cinematographer from Chicago, said with a smile: "The film is more complicated and interesting than people anticipate. It tries to raise some provocative issues about nuclear weapons. Look, if you do an intellectual movie that 20 people on the West Side of Manhattan see, you're not exactly reaching a lot of people."


Serbs Block Opening of Road to Zagreb
Militant Serbian nationalists blocked a symbolic reopening of the highway linking Belgrade with Zagreb today, in a major setback for Prime Minister Milan Panic's hopes of improving relations between Yugoslavia and neighboring Croatia.
The road was to have been formally opened today to civilian traffic for the first time since it was closed by fighting between Serbs and Croats in September of last year.
This would have been the first time civilians had traveled the length of the highway, an event that was presented in both capitals as a symbol of their desire to start normalizing relations again, expressed most recently in a statement Prime Minister Panic and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia signed in Geneva with United Nations mediators last week.


INSIDE
A Roadblock to Peace
The highway that once linked Belgrade with Zagreb, impassable during months of ethnic fighting, was blocked by more violence on the day of its ceremonial reopening.
Page A9.
Economic Grist for Bush?
Figures being published tomorrow may give President Bush his last chance before the election to declare an economic recovery.
Page D1.
Tug of War With the Mafia
A priest in Palermo is pulling hard for alternatives in a one-man crusade to keep children from the lures of organized crime.
Page A3.
Risk and Gain in East Harlem
She is a crucial provider of low-cost housing or a slumlord, depending on one's point of view.
And risky speculation may prove her undoing.
Strictly Business, a new feature, page B2.


Review/Music; The Downtown School Of Aural Lessons
The mutations of what has been called the downtown school of composition or the avant-garde, have now been so plentiful it is difficult to draw a genealogical chart or to get a clear sense of this scene's evolution.
It has, in various ways, combined elements of Minimalism and rock and multi-media; it has also relied on countercultural sentimentality and Eastern meditative ideas, punk spunkiness and recycled attitudes of the beat generation.
On Friday night at the Thread Waxing Space -- a SoHo performance loft at 476 Broadway, near Broome Street, that was once a thread-waxing factory -- there was a glimpse of the latest incarnation of this loose-limbed musical tradition.
Ben Neill, a gifted performer and inventor of the mutantrumpet (a trumpet with added B-flat and piccolo trumpet bells, a trombone slide, six valves and sophisticated electronic controls), offered the American premiere of his music-theater piece "Downwind." Mr.
Neill has recently become the musical curator of the Kitchen, once the center of downtown experimentation.


CHRONICLE
Chronicle
SIMON WATSON, an independent curator, was at a rally for the Women's Action Coalition in June and found himself wishing he could join the growing, outspoken feminist organization.
"Men are not allowed to participate, and I understand that perfectly," he said, "but it occurred to me that it would be nice if there were a way for men to support WAC's activities."
Inspiration hit, but in the form of a fund-raising event that is anathema to feminists: a bake sale.


Ann Dee Silver, Barry G. Seelig
Ann Dee Silver, the daughter of Melba Silver of Boca Raton, Fla., and Edward Silver of New York, was married yesterday to Barry G. Seelig, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Seelig of East Berlin, Conn.
Judge Michael Gersten of the State Circuit Court in Palm Beach, Fla., officiated at the Boca Raton Hotel in Palm Beach.
Ms.
Silver, who is keeping her name, is the vice president of human resources in New York for Chess King, a chain of men's clothing stores.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from the University of Notre Dame.
Her father is a partner in Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, a New York law firm.


For U.S., a New Day's Dawning in East Asia; Korean Initiative
To the Editor:
Re "Nuclear Opening in North Korea" (editorial, Sept. 21):


Corrections
A chart on Friday about a plan to merge and close some state university campuses in Mississippi described it incorrectly in some copies.
It is a proposal; it has not been carried out.
In addition, through the misplacement of an asterisk, the chart described the racial composition of two of the universities incorrectly in some copies.
Mississippi Valley State University is historically black; Mississippi State University is not.


World Economies


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  TUG OF WAR WITH THE MAFIA
A priest in Palermo, Sicily, is pulling hard for alternatives in a one-man crusade to keep children from the lures of organized crime.
A3  SERBS BAR THE ROAD TO ZAGREB
In a setback to the Yugoslav Prime Minister's hopes of improving ties with Croatia, militant Serbs blocked a symbolic reopening of the highway linking Belgrade with Zagreb.
A9





People
*
Brad Taylor was named to the new post of senior vice president and management supervisor at the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta, with primary responsibility for the Days Inns of America account.
He was previously director of national marketing at Pizza Hut Inc., Wichita, Kan. *
Joseph T. Finley was named to the new post of director of marketing and business development at Promisloff Casem, Rockville, Md.
He had been a regional marketing manager at Kentucky Fried Chicken Corp., Washington.


As G.M. Tries to Outrun Past, Critics Ask: Who's in Charge?
The General Motors Corporation, the nation's largest manufacturer, was once renowned for its profitability and vitality.
Now it is paralyzed by a crisis that has engulfed the very top of its management.
In the last week, General Motors employees and stockholders have awakened to headlines predicting that Robert C. Stempel, the affable, methodical chairman and chief executive, is on the verge of being pushed out by G.M. directors.
That has not happened to a ranking G.M. executive since William Crapo Durant, the company's president and one of its founders, was forced out in the 1920's.


Essay; The Perot Fraud
Do you realize that it's as if George Bush's staff had been infiltrated by "Russian spies"?
That's the paranoid message being pumped out endlessly on radio commercials paid for by Ross Perot.
While media analysts are entranced by his self-glorifying television infotainment, few observers of mass manipulation focus on the underside of the Perot campaign -- radio spots, where the passions of outrage groupies are stirred by fears of unseen enemies.


Innocent or Not, Daniels Is Snared by Larger Issue
The events surrounding the confirmation could be closed, left to the disappearing act that frequently follows the summing-up process typical of visual and print media.
The seismic reactions of women and men in the workplace, in organizations and institutions, could be calmed and a return to "business as usual" made effortless. -- Toni Morrison
ANITA F. Hill lost her battle against Clarence Thomas a year ago, but the eerily similar sexual harassment charge that erupted in New York City last week demonstrates that she won a lasting moral victory.


Dance in Review
Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company
Joyce Theater
Sean Curran, a member of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, choreographed a new solo for himself, and it was added as a surprise to the company's performance on Oct. 17.
It proved so successful that it was offered again on Saturday night.
Thanks to its placement on the program, "Speeding and Tantrum," Mr.
Curran's work to recorded music by Michael Nyman, was again a surprise.
The solo followed Mr.
Jones's "Fete," a comic depiction of a revel in which Mr.
Curran portrayed an awkward, blundering person and wore a costume by Liz Prince that included a red skirt and headdress.
As a result, he looked like a dim-witted cousin of Little Red Ridinghood.


Bridge
Anyone last month who studied a headline reading "Fischer Strikes Twice" would have suspected a story about the chess match in Serbia.
If told that it referred to maneuvers with kings and queens in the Mediterranean, they would have been sure of it.
But they would have been wrong.
It was a bridge story about Doris Fischer, a member of the Austrian women's team that won the world title in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in September, and it was written by Mark Horton of Britain in the championship's daily bulletin.
One of the Fischer strikes was on the diagramed deal against Portugal.
The bidding shown is Standard American, starting with an artificial two-club bid.
As the Austrians use a strong-club system, their bidding, not on record, must have begun with one club.


American Express in Ad Shift
The American Express Company has dismissed Chiat/Day/Mojo from creating and producing sales pitches for its charge cards, less than a year after it awarded the New York advertising agency the $60 million account.
The decision, made late Thursday, followed months of intense speculation that Chiat's hold on the prestigious account was loosening because its initial campaign had drawn mixed to negative reviews and was perceived as failing to help reverse the company's sagging share of the charge card market.


Term Limits Would Put Curbs on Power
To the Editor:
A single sentence in "Term Limits Limit Choice" (editorial, Oct. 13) is enough to convince supporters of term limits they are right.
I refer to the following:


Oh, Atlanta, the Fans Sympathize With Thee
Jeff Blauser has a videotape of the 1991 World Series between the Minnesota Twins and his Atlanta Braves.
He has never inserted it into the videotape cassette recorder, and he says he is not sure if he ever will.
As far as the 1992 World Series between the Braves and the Toronto Blue Jays is concerned, Blauser deferred questions about whether he would review it until a later date.
Maybe 20 years from now.


Rangers Will Finally Get a Close Look at Lindros
Neil Smith will report to Madison Square Garden tonight and faithfully watch the future of hockey skate against the Rangers.
This will not be easy for him.
It was almost very different, back on June 20 in Montreal.
The Ranger general manager chased Eric Lindros with players, draft choices and money and thought he had a deal with the Quebec Nordiques.
But an arbitrator ruled for the Philadelphia Flyers, who tonight will make their first visit of the season to New York.


With Voting Today, Canada Pact Is Under Threat
Cameron McLeod and Serge Villeneuve, both of whose forebears have farmed the Quebec-Ontario border region for generations, were transacting a little business Saturday next to the silo on Mr.
Villeneuve's farm, 500 acres of rich, black, undulating land just outside this hamlet of 200 people.
Mr.
McLeod, a farmer in Ontario who was buying corn feed for his Holsteins from Mr.
Villeneuve, spoke little French, and Mr.
Villeneuve, no English.
They completed their $25 transaction with the help of a friend of Mr.
McLeod's, Montreal-born Clifford Pryde, as interpreter.


Miss Sundman, Jay Ellis Sport
Barbara Anne Sundman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Sundman of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Jay Ellis Sport, a son of Mrs.
Lee Sport of Newnan, Ga., and the late Mr.
Sport.
The Rev.
Thomas Gallagher performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of the Holy Angels in Little Falls, N.J.
Mrs.
Sport is an account executive with Computer Sciences Corporation, a management consulting company in Bridgewater, N.J.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father, now retired, was the chief financial officer of Corcap Inc., a venture capital company in Hartford.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MORE QUESTIONS IN DANIELS CASE
On a day of confusing signals in the controversy surrounding Randy Daniels, a Harlem rally in his support was abruptly canceled yesterday, and an adviser said Mr.
Daniels was being pressured by City Hall to step down as a deputy mayor.
At the same time, Mr.
Daniels's lawyer announced that a multimillion-dollar libel suit would be filed this week against the woman who has accused him of sexual harassment.
A1.
THE MAN IN THE EYE OF THE STORM
More than a dozen friends and colleagues of Randy Daniels who were interviewed in the last several days said they found it difficult to reconcile the accusations by Barbara Wood, a television reporter who worked briefly for Mr.
Daniels in the office of City Council President Andrew J. Stein, with the man they know as a devout husband and father and a consummate gentleman.
B3.
ANITA HILL REVISITED
Anita F. Hill lost her battle against Clarence Thomas a year ago, but the eerily similar sexual harassment charges that erupted in New York City last week demonstrate that she won a lasting moral victory.
More Americans are infused with an acute sensitivity that no longer reflexively gives a man the benefit of the doubt.
And that, part of Anita Hill's legacy, has been the heart of Randy Daniels's problem.
Metro Matters, B3.
RAISING MORALE AMONG POLICE
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said he met twice last week -- his first full week on the job -- with the leadership of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association to explore ways to increase morale in the department.
Mr.
Kelly said he had met with Phil Caruso, president of the police union, and members of the executive board, "to identify some of the core morale issues that we can work cooperatively on." B3.
ONE LANDLORD'S STRUGGLES
As a private landlord renting to poor and nearly poor New Yorkers in a troubled neighborhood in Harlem, Harley Brooke-Hitching, is either a crucial provider of low-cost housing or a slumlord, depending on one's point of view.
In either case, her risky real-estate speculation may yet prove her undoing.
Strictly Business, B2.
REGION D'AMATO RAISES ABRAMS SPECTER
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is out to scare New York.
Stalking senior citizens' homes, veterans' posts and defense industry plants all across the state like a bespectacled King Kong, the Republican incumbent is trying to spread terror, panic or even just a twinge of anxiety about the economic plans of his opponent, Bob Abrams.
Mr.
D'Amato has made his opponent's call for universal health insurance and major defense cuts the cornerstone of his campaign.
And Mr.
Abrams, the Attorney General, has been reduced to pleading that the Senator is distorting his views.
B4.
BITTER L.I.
CONGRESSIONAL RACE
As youngsters picked out Halloween masks at a shopping mall here and prepared their tricks or treats, candidates in Long Island's newly redrawn Third Congressional District sought out voters, conjuring up frightening images of their opponents.
The bitter race pits Stephen A. Orlins, a Democrat and self-made millionaire, against Peter T. King, who is now Nassau County Comptroller.
Yesterday both candidates sought out voters, with Mr.
Orlins charging that Mr.
King was "out of touch with reality and has used his position to block a woman's right to choose," and Mr.
King striking back at Mr.
Orlins, saying, "He's got the money so the Democrats are willing to help him buy a seat in Congress." B6.
A QUIET LEGACY OF CHARITY
DeWitt Wallace and Lila Acheson Wallace, who founded Reader's Digest, protected their privacy zealously, discouraged would-be biographers, left no diaries and destroyed their personal correspondence.
When they died, he in 1981 at age 91 and she in 1984 at 94, their wills left no instructions about how their money should be used for philanthropy.
But they had created two funds and seven organizations that will give away $150 million yearly.
Those funds are only a part, albeit the largest part, of the Wallaces' charitable legacy.
B6.
Chronicle B9


Macal Replaces Tennstedt
Zdenek Macal is to replace Klaus Tennstedt as conductor of subscription concerts of the New York Philharmonic beginning on Thursday.
Mr.
Tennstedt is ill.
The program remains the same, Mahler's Sixth Symphony.
Performances are on Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and on Nov. 3 at 7:30 P.M.


A 'Marriage' Made in a Heaven Called the New York City Marathon
Fred and Grete.
In the movie, they would have been played by Tracy and Hepburn, he of craggy cussedness, she of willowy strength.
Even Hollywood would have known not to monkey with the main characters, not to turn this into a romance, because it is not.
They are two of the great people of the bizarre calling known as the marathon.
They started as the Scandinavian neophyte and the New York promoter, and they became friends, good friends.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Despite Perot Surge, Clinton Keeps Sights on Bush
Spending an entire day in this swing state, Gov.
Bill Clinton delivered a focused and concerted attack on President Bush today and called the Presidential race "a battle for the spirit of America."
Mr.
Bush, he suggested, has abandoned average working people, has taken refuge in the White House and has used the power of the Presidency to help his "political cronies" and to nurture "a collection of the same old fears" that have divided the nation.
A Spot Above the Fray
"We only have to put up with this, if you're willing to fight for change, for nine more days," Mr.
Clinton said at a fall harvest festival in Saginaw.
The sharpened attack left little doubt that the Democrats would treat the President as their primary enemy as shifting polls in a handful of crucial states illustrate just how many voters are still making up their minds.


Carrie MacLeod and John Moore
Carrie Elizabeth MacLeod, a daughter of Rowena A. MacLeod of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Douglas C. MacLeod of Huntington Station, L.I., was married yesterday to John Francis Moore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ellis O. Moore of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of Christ the Redeemer in Pelham Manor.
Mrs.
MacLeod-Moore, 28 years old, was until recently a customer service representative in the circulation department of Newsday in Melville, L.I., where her father, who is retired, was the public relations manager.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Purchase.
Her father is now president of Douglas MacLeod &amp; Associates, a public-relations agency in Huntington Station.


Rabin Reiterates That Israel Will Not Yield All of Golan
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told his Cabinet emphatically today that Israel would not fully pull back from the Golan Heights even though it has raised the possibility of withdrawal in its peace negotiations with Syria.
His affirmation of Israel's position came just before a fresh spurt of violence left six Israeli soldiers dead, including five killed in southern Lebanon when Islamic guerrillas blew up their tank.
It was the largest one-day death toll the Israeli Army suffered there in two years.


Giants Avoid a Fall But It Wasn't Pretty
When you are the erratic Giants, when players start to point fingers, when the crowd boos even the drum major at halftime, when the coach is struggling to forge his own team, then who needs elegant victories?
What the Giants needed today was Seattle, and what they got was an inelegant 23-10 decision over the flightless Seahawks that will sustain for a while.


Sharon Flank, Dr. Maksimovic
Sharon Flank, the daughter of Drs.
William H. Flank and Sandra G. Flank of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Vojislav Maksimovic, the son of Drs.
Milorad Maksimovic and Ljubica Maksimovic of London.
Mark Tulis, the Town Supervisor of New Castle, N.Y., officiated at the bride's parents' home.
Ms.
Flank, who is 35 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a computational linguist at the Systems Research and Applications Corporation, a computer services company in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior scientist at Union Carbide in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother is a professor of education at Pace University at White Plains.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week consists of today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills, tomorrow's auction of two-year bills and a sale on Wednesday of new five-year bills.
Late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.93 percent; it was 3.18 percent on a six-month bill.
In when-issued trading, the new two-year note was offered at a price to yield 4.39 percent, and the five-year note was offered to yield 5.91 percent.


As Canada Bonds Go, So May U.S. Market
The reaction in the Canadian bond market to the results of a referendum today on whether to confer special constitutional status on French-speaking Quebec could be a harbinger of what is going to happen in the American bond market a week from now.
A relief rally in Canadian bond prices, brought on as the uncertainty caused by the referendum lifts, could be a preview of a similar rally in the United States after the Presidential election returns are in and uncertainty disappears.
And if there is not a rally, at least the downward pressure on prices of the last several weeks may subside.


Term Limits Would Put Curbs on Power; If We'd Had Them
To the Editor:
If the proposal to limit Congressional terms, which you persuasively denounce in "Term Limits Limit Choice" (editorial, Oct. 13) as "the most mischievous proposal of the year," had been in effect during the course of American history, Congress and the country would have been deprived of some of its greatest voices.


Ready to Pass, Torretta
After getting his name entered as the career leader in completions Saturday, GINO TORRETTA is nearly finished rewriting the record book for Miami quarterbacks.
"I have a lot of talent around me," Torretta said after passing for 249 yards and three touchdowns Saturday in a 43-23 victory over Virginia Tech at Blacksburg, Va.


Machine Tool Orders Up 16% After Industry's Trade Show
Orders for American-made machine tools jumped 16 percent in September from levels a year earlier, the Association for Manufacturing Technology reported yesterday.
The association said the increase reflected heavy ordering last month at an industry trade show that is held every two years.


It's Only October, but Penguins Are Already on Fire
The National Hockey League's 1992-93 season is in only its first month, but the Pittsburgh Penguins are playing as if it's April or May.
Last spring, after Mario Lemieux's left hand was fractured by the stick of the Rangers' Adam Graves in the playoffs, the Penguins seemed to get stronger as they marched to their second consecutive Stanley Cup triumph, beating Chicago in the final.
Lemieux returned to play in three of the four semifinal games with Boston and all four of the games with the Blackhawks.


Sports of The Times; Cito Gaston Is a Baseball Man Who Finally Got His Chance
THIS was five years ago in the foul and cramped visiting clubhouse in Detroit.
Reporters seeking a dollop of truth were having a hard time with the Toronto Blue Jays.
Their leading slugger, George Bell, was being loutishly silent in Spanish and English.
And in the manager's closet, a nervous little chap gave the impression that he was the handyman asked to fix the sink, but upon gunpoint he might have 'fessed up that he was really Jimy Williams, the manager.


Competition In Phones For Europe
Despite recent setbacks, Europe will eventually have a telecommunications market nearly as competitive as that of the United States, perhaps as soon as five years from now, the chief executive of Belgacom, Belgium's telephone company, says.
Last week, as expected, the European Commission adopted a watered-down version of a white paper advocating American-style competition in voice telecommunications, which makes up 95 percent or more of European telephone companies' revenue.


Lohmiller's Kick Is Difference As Redskins Rally for Victory
The Hogs were nearly unrecognizable.
The quarterback could remember the date but not his coach's chosen play.
The Washington Redskins could not even reach the 50-yard line in the second half today until less than 2 minutes 20 seconds remained in a struggle with the Minnesota Vikings.
But the defending Super Bowl champions found a painful but rewarding means of escape.
Chip Lohmiller's 49-yard field goal with 1:09 to play, his fifth successful kick in five attempts, was the difference in a 15-13 victory over the Vikings.


Giants Win a Little Peace of Mind
Lawrence Taylor says -- and does -- outrageous things.
Sometimes, though, he is pensive, like today, after the Giants' victory over a clearly inferior Seattle team.
Did you need to win today? he was asked.


Paper Says Clinton Made Deal to Delay Pact
The Sunday Telegraph of London reported yesterday that Jacques Delors, the president of the European Community, had a secret understanding with Gov.
Bill Clinton to delay a world trade agreement until after the Nov. 3 election so that President Bush could not gain political advantage from the pact.
Mr.
Clinton, campaigning yesterday in Michigan, denied any involvement in the trade talks, saying, "I wouldn't dare fool with this."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Assures the Faithful There Is Still Time to Win
In a rare concession to politics as usual, Ross Perot hit the campaign trail today for the first time since rejoining the Presidential race, telling enthusiastic crowds in two states that there was still time for him to win and that he had withdrawn in July because of a Republican dirty-tricks campaign.
In stark contrast to previous appearances, when Mr.
Perot has emphasized the importance of placing substance over character, he made character the focus of his appeal today.


10 Writers Receive Whiting Awards
Ten writers have been given the 1992 Whiting Writers' Awards.
The annual awards, which were established eight years ago, are made by the Mrs.
Giles Whiting Foundation, which was founded through a bequest by Flora E. Whiting.
The writers will receive $30,000 each for "their writing achievements as well as their promise for producing outstanding future works."
The nominees and winners were selected by an anonymous panel of writers, educators and editors from across the country who were chosen by the foundation.


Excerpts From Speech By Perot
Following are excerpts from a speech by Ross Perot at a campaign rally yesterday in Pittsburgh, as recorded by The New York Times:
I want to spend one minute telling you the reason why I dropped out in July.
It's going to be on "60 Minutes" tonight.
I want you to hear it directly from me.
I received a report of a high-level Republican meeting where they said: "We have thrown everything we can make up on Perot and he just keeps on coming and keeps going up in the polls. Isn't this guy sensitive to anything?"


Deborah Semel and George Bingham
Deborah Elaine Semel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Semel of New York, was married yesterday to George Edward Bingham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. Bingham of Plano, Tex.
Rabbi Judith Lewis performed the ceremony at the Inn at Pound Ridge, in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Mrs.
Bingham, 27 years old, is the vice president of sales and communication in New York for Pierre Frey, a French maker of home-furnishing fabrics.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Nell K. Semel, is a nurse at the Dalton School in New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; The Voters Choose to Read, And Political Books Flourish
FOUR years ago, The New York Times nonfiction paperback best-seller list the week before the Presidential election was a typical grab bag: inspirational messages, a book about a cat, a murder case, and memoirs about a traumatic childhood and a rock and roll groupie.
Two books on the hard-cover list gave only a hint that a campaign was under way: an account of Ronald Reagan's second Presidential term and a prescription for what the American people and Government should do in the face of a predicted depression in 1990.


Gail Silberthau, David Silverman
Gail Miriam Silberthau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Silberthau of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to David Jesse Silverman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Silverman of Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
Rabbi Henry Glazer officiated at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Silverman, 30 years old, is a marketing manager at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father owns Ralph Silberthau Jewelers in New York.


Baby Missing From Bronx Home
A 9-month-old child was reported missing last night in the Bronx, having last been seen in the arms of a 17-year-old friend of the child's mother, the police said.
The baby's mother, Benita Williams, 20 years old, told the police that she had last seen her son, Julio DeJon Williams Sostre, in her apartment when she awoke about 8 A.M. on Saturday.
Then she went back to sleep, she said, and when she awoke again several hours later, she could not find the baby.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Odd Source Of Comfort For Feminist
Male curmudgeonliness would seem to offer scant comfort to Pat Blumenthal, a 36-year-old feminist, working mother and field organizer in the politics of abortion rights, where absorbing accusations of woman's self-villainy is a part of the job.
But, to her delight, a colleague with a VCR saved for her the most unexpected sound bite in long years of her campaign issue, a terse, snappish statement of exasperation at all the moralistic combat over abortion uttered by one of the most patriarchal-looking of sources, James B. Stockdale, Ross Perot's running mate.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 26: MONDAY  Aflac Armstrong World Atlantic Richfield Fingerhut Howell Inco Kennametal Ku Energy Lubrizol Philadelphia Elec United Dominion TUESDAY  H. F. Ahmanson American Brands Ball Bausch &amp; Lomb Bear, Stearns Borden Brunswick Carpenter Techn.
Cilcorp Duke Power Enserch Hercules Ina Invt.
Lafarge McDonald &amp; Co.
Invts.
Norfolk Southern Owens &amp; Minor Polaroid Rollins Rubbermaid Southwestern Pub.
Svc.
Standex Intl.
Tambrands TCF Finl.
Tribune Co.
Ugi USX-US Steel Warner Lambert Wicor WEDNESDAY  Amer Elec Pwr.
Amoco AMP Anheuser-Busch Asarco Bancorp Hawaii Cash Amer.
Invts.
Cigna Eaton E.G.&amp; G. Energen Equifax Exxon Grainger, W. W. Houghton Mifflin Lukens McGraw-Hill McKesson MCN Midwest Res.
Nationsbank Newmont Mng.
Oneida Ltd.
Rhone Poulenc Rorer Russell Shaw Inds.
SPX TRW Union Carbide Westcoast Energy Wisconsin Energy Wm.
Wrigley THURSDAY  Amer Home Prods.
Avemco Baroid CRSS Golden West Finl.
Interstate Pwr.
MGIC Invt.
Corp.
Wis.
Olin Precision Castparts PSI Res.
Quaker St.
Questar Sara Lee FRIDAY  ASA Ltd.
Duke Realty Invts.
GATX Indiana Energy Kysor Indl.
Corp.
Del Mobil Rollins Environ Svc.
Ryder Sys.
SATURDAY  Georgia-Pacific Mead Wackenhut


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; As Polls Shift, Bush Grabs Even Small Chance of Surge
Just when they were starting to resign themselves to a loss, President Bush's aides now sense that this is a moment of uncertainty in the 1992 campaign, with numbers shifting in the polls and Mr.
Bush taking on new energy in his campaigning.
Although Ross Perot seems to be the main beneficiary of the change in public opinion, Bush aides are trying to use even the smallest opportunity to create momentum for their candidate.


FERTILITY CLINICS FACE CRACKDOWN
Federal authorities are cracking down on fertility clinics that overstate their success in helping couples have babies.
The Federal Trade Commission has filed charges against five clinics, saying they misrepresented their success in helping women become pregnant.
The Government won a ban on such misrepresentations, through a court order in one case and through negotiated settlements in the other four.


Mary E. Carvalho, Charles S. Litsky
Mary Elizabeth Carvalho, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer Carvalho of Upland, Calif., was married yesterday to Charles Scott Litsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Litsky of Edgewater, N.J.
Richard Westfall, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Catalina Room at Long Point in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
Mrs.
Litsky, 31 years old, is a first-grade teacher at Ramona Elementary School in Hawthorne, Calif.
She graduated from Loyola Marymount University.
Her father is an architectural designer in Upland.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TUESDAY: 7 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today."


Critic's Notebook; Candidates Run to the Puppy Dogs
The preference of the main Presidential and Vice-Presidential candidates for showing their wares on the network weekday morning shows (beginning this week with Gov. Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore on "CBS This Morning" and Vice President Dan Quayle on ABC's "Good Morning America") rather than on the tougher Sunday morning talkies draws attention to the differing styles of the programs and their inquisitors.
Pondering that matter, I remembered Isaiah Berlin's famous distinction between writers who are hedgehogs and writers who are foxes.
The Oxford don was after rarer game than journalists, not to mention television journalists, but why should this inescapable species escape classification?
Some of the best known representatives seem positively to invite it.


Colts Go Fishing and Land the Dolphins
Colts 31, Dolphins 20
MIAMI, Oct. 25 (AP) -- And then there were none.
Rookie Steve Emtman made a game-saving interception on the final play today and returned it 90 yards for a touchdown as Indianapolis handed Miami its first defeat of the season, 31-20.


One Sweet Swing Makes Bitter Story Obsolete
Redemption.
One word, with so much meaning for so many Toronto Blue Jays.
But most seemed to agree, by words and actions, that no one baseball player sipping from the cup of victory here early this morning deserved the soothing comfort of redemption more than Dave Winfield.
Winfield used one hit -- one "stinking little hit," he said with feigned irony -- to exorcise a decade of demons and heartache.
That hit, an 11th-inning, two-run double off the Atlanta Braves' Charlie Leibrandt into the left-field corner at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium in the wee hours, changed Winfield and his Toronto teammates forever.
It assured that the grinding battle that was Game 6 of the 1992 World Series ended in a 4-3 victory for Toronto and the team's first world championship after previous near-misses.
It was also the first Series title for a Canadian team.


CHRONICLE
SINEAD O'CONNOR, the Irish rock singer who has come under attack for tearing up a picture of Pope JOHN PAUL II, received some support yesterday from a group that staged a demonstration in front of St.
Patrick's Cathedral during which some group members also tore up pictures of the Pope.
"We are here to demonstrate our support for Sinead O'Connor in her efforts to expose the Catholic hierarchy as agents of oppression and to say that there are many, many people who stand with her in this," MARY LOU GREENBERG, one of the demonstrators, told The Associated Press.


A Lament of One Landlord: From Riches to Rags
It is a typical day at Equities Ltd., the 11 tenement buildings in East Harlem that Harley Brooke-Hitching so loftily named when she bought them.
A pregnant woman, homeless until now, sits with the office manager doing paperwork that will enable her to get city subsidies to live in one of Ms.
Brooke-Hitching's 180 apartments.
The woman is thrilled that she won't have to give birth in a shelter.


Rally for Dinkins Aide Halted As He Feels Pressure to Quit
On a day of confusing signals in the controversy surrounding Randy Daniels, a Harlem rally in his support was abruptly canceled yesterday and there were conflicting reports on whether City Hall was pressuring Mr.
Daniels to step down as a deputy mayor.
At the same time, Mr.
Daniels's lawyer announced that a multimillion-dollar libel suit would be filed this week against the woman who has accused him of sexual harassment.


Corrections
An article last Monday about an invasion of a house in Queens by a group of armed men included an incorrect location, supplied by the police.
The house was in Holliswood, not Jamaica Estates.


For Congress From Connecticut
Connecticut needs strong hands in Congress to help it through the double downer of a sluggish economy and shrinking defense budgets.
Five of its six representatives meet that test.
Here are choices in three races:


Corrections
A report last Monday about the wedding of Jill B. Freeman and Charles E. Ward 3d omitted a participating clergyman.
Rabbi Charles Lippman assisted the Rev.
Richard J. Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest.


Police Head Meets Twice With Union
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that he met twice last week -- his first full week on the job -- with the leadership of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Assocation to explore ways of bolstering morale in the department.
Mr.
Kelly, on "News Forum" on WNBC-TV, said that while he did not think morale was as low as it was reported to be, he had met with Phil Caruso, president of the police union, and members of the executive board, "to identify some of the core morale issues that we can work cooperatively on."


Hard Times, Even on Rodeo Drive
In a memorable scene from the movie "Pretty Woman," a prostitute played by Julia Roberts goes into a boutique on Rodeo Drive here only to be turned away by snooty sales clerks who say they have nothing in her size.
For years, snobbery has been a hallmark of this city of wealth and glamour, movie stars and entertainment honchos, where it is possible to spend $20,000 for a watch, $6,000 for a suit with 14-karat gold pinstriping or $15,000 for a handbag of rare leather.


The Mozote Horror, Confirmed
The Reagan Administration angrily blamed the messengers when it disputed news accounts describing the massacre in December 1981 of as many as a thousand Salvadoran civilians in the remote village of El Mozote.
But diggers in the first killing ground have already exhumed scores of human remains, most of them children who had been stabbed and clubbed to death.
The disclosure reflects the courageous determination of President Alfredo Cristiani to exhume the horrors of a decade-long civil war and force his country to ponder its costs.
But Americans, too, have reason to look back with contrition.


Review/Theater: Oleanna; Mamet's New Play Detonates The Fury of Sexual Harassment
A year later, a mere newspaper photograph of Anita F. Hill can revive those feelings of rage, confusion, shame and revulsion that were the country's daily diet during the Senate hearings on Clarence Thomas.
Sexual harassment remains such a hot button that even at the height of a raucous Presidential and senatorial election campaign a new case involving a relatively obscure mayoral appointee threatens to sweep all other news and issues from center stage in New York City.
What are the piddling disputes of Democrats and Republicans, after all, next to the blood feuds between men who supposedly "don't get it" and women who doubt they ever will?
Enter David Mamet, who with impeccable timing has marched right into the crossfire.
"Oleanna," the playwright's new drama at the Orpheum Theater, is an impassioned response to the Thomas hearings.
As if ripped right from the typewriter, it could not be more direct in its technique or more incendiary in its ambitions.
In Act I, Mr.
Mamet locks one man and one woman in an office where, depending on one's point of view, an act of sexual harassment does or does not occur.
In Act II, the antagonists, a middle-aged university professor (William H. Macy) and an undergraduate student (Rebecca Pidgeon), return to the scene of the alleged crime to try to settle their case without benefit of counsel, surrogates or, at times, common sense.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors, once renowned for its profitability and vitality, is paralyzed by a crisis in its top management fed by predictions that Robert C. Stempel, the chairman, is on the verge of being pushed out by G.M. directors tired of the auto maker's gushing red ink.
At a company that for generations had a well-defined system of succession, the situation has left employees confused about who is in command.  [ Page A1. ]  Whatever happens when the board meets next Monday, it seems clear that 11 outside directors are broadcasting a message that G.M. is not changing fast enough.  [ D5. ]
A squabble between the chairman of the nation's largest bank, Citicorp, and the chief executive of a much smaller company highlights the debate over how stock options should be valued.  [ D2. ] The Economy
The gross domestic product figures to be published tomorrow -- one week before Election Day -- may give President Bush a final chance to contend that the economy has finally begun to emerge from its limbo.  [ D1. ]


With Eye on Economy, 12 States to Pick Chiefs
From tiny Rhode Island to the Big Sky country of Montana, the 12 states electing governors next week share not just the unpredictable dynamic of politics in a Presidential year, but budget woes and an electorate uneasy about the economy.
States that had never before given a second thought to initiating income or sales taxes are debating when and how to start them.
At the same time, they are looking to the nightmarish experience of California, where some say high taxes and regulation may have played a part in the state's fiscal collapse.


Lisa Ann Miller, Avrohm Melnick
Lisa Ann Miller, a vice president and associate general counsel at the Massachusetts Financial Services Company, a mutual fund company in Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
Avrohm Newton Melnick, an internist in Boston.
Rabbi Alvin Lieberman performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carleton there.
Mrs.
Melnick graduated from Skidmore College and received law degrees from Boston College and Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sydney L. Miller of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father is the president of the Harry Miller Company, a manufacturer of canvas products in Boston.


Syndicated Shows Sagging? You Bet Your Life.
The new season of syndicated television programs has attracted about the same viewer reactions as the new network prime-time season: yawns and an urge to change the channel.
Audiences for syndicated shows are down almost across the board, with the drop especially noticeable among the younger viewers most sought by advertisers.
As for the new crop of game shows, talk shows and sitcom reruns in syndication, viewers are showing no more interest in them than they are in the new comedies, dramas and reality shows on the networks in prime time.


Baker, Telling Iraqis of Loan Aid, Asked Help on Palestinian Talks
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d sent a message to Iraq in November 1989 telling the Iraqis that the United States had just approved new grain credits and seeking Baghdad's influence in persuading Palestinians to take part in peace talks with Israel, a newly declassified document shows.
Although the message from Mr.
Baker, now the White House chief of staff, does not explicitly link the farm loan credits to Iraq's intervention with the Palestinians, it provides the clearest evidence so far that the United States wanted something in return for the guarantees.


If Washington Needs Focus, Then Stanford May Provide It
College football's elite survived another Saturday with only one defection in the thinning ranks of unbeaten and untied teams.
Washington State lost to Southern California, 31-21, leaving seven Division I-A squads who have yet to experience defeat.
These are Alabama, Boston College, Colorado, Miami, Michigan, Texas A&amp;M and Washington.


Review/Television; A Howdy to Minnie Pearl, Price Tags and All
Country puts on formal duds tonight for "Hats Off to Minnie: America Honors Minnie Pearl," a two-and-a-half hour super-hoedown beginning at 8 on the Nashville Network.
Recuperating from a stroke, this veteran entertainer, who turned 80 years old yesterday, was unable to attend the special tribute, which was held in May at the Grand Ole Opry House in Nashville.
Just about everyone else, however, puts in an appearance one way or another.
Brief taped appearances are made by such noncountry luminaries as Roseanne Arnold, Geraldo Rivera, Jay Leno, Arnold Schwarzenegger, former President Ronald Reagan and President and Mrs.
Bush.
Among the country personalities on tape are Dolly Parton, Garth Brooks and Johnny Cash.
Appearing in person, with Barbara Mandrell as the confident host, are top country stars, young and old, including Roy Acuff, Chet Atkins, Roy Clark, Amy Grant, Reba McEntire, the Statler Brothers and Dwight Yoakam.


Sicilians Try to Combat the Mafia's Pervasive Taint
For most of a year that has been studded with spectacular murders of high public figures, Sicilians and other Italians have been pondering bleak questions: Will the dead weight of the Mafia hold back their land as it strives toward European respectability?
Will the mob that touches every life here and steers its politics and economy ever be beaten?
The Rev.
Paul Turturro, a silver-haired 46-year-old who has made a life of challenging the Mafia on its own turf, has his own perspective: "The Mafia has infiltrated all levels of society," he said during a visit to the Borgo Vecchio, the old quarter of axle-wide streets and rundown houses where every twist and turn seems to chronicle the mob's encroachment.


Market Place Anxiety Grips Cellular Industry
THE stock prices of cellular telephone companies operating in California plunged last week after a tentative ruling by California state regulators aimed at increasing competition.
The drop underscored the market's anxiety over whether the cellular industry's duopoly, the source of much of its wealth, will survive much longer.
The market also blanched at the prospect of stricter regulation in what is, at least for now, a lightly regulated industry.
The complex ruling will not take effect immediately and will be appealed over the next few months.
But the ruling is intended to introduce more competition and lower prices into the state with the nation's largest cellular telephone market and one in which regulators sometimes influence the pace of regulation in other states.


Cowboys Victory Is All Natural
Cowboys 28, Raiders 13
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 25 (AP) -- Emmitt Smith ruined the day for the largest crowd of the National Football League season.
Smith rushed for 152 yards and three touchdowns today as the Dallas Cowboys, who were playing on natural turf for the first time this season, maintained their one-game lead in the N.F.C.
East with a 28-13 victory over the Los Angeles Raiders.


Holtz Fails Stress Test, Is Penalized by Official
LOU HOLTZ says he really does want to toe the line, respect authority, and mind his p's and q's.
But stress can get the best of a college football coach.
So when Holtz saw what he believed was a flagrant hold on a Notre Dame player late in Saturday's game against Brigham Young at South Bend, Ind., he sent his headphones flying, and then his cap.


What You Should Know for Driving in Fog
To the Editor:
The National Transportation Safety Board has urged a study of how motorists might handle fog, you report Sept. 29.
As an automotive journalist, I'd like to comment.


T.W.A. Pension Fund Dispute
A Government agency is threatening to sue Carl C. Icahn, chairman of Trans World Airlines, to hold him responsible for $1.2 billion in pension payments to retired T.W.A. employees, The Washington Post reported yesterday.
The newspaper said the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the Government agency that insures workers retirement funds, told Mr.
Icahn he had to cover the gap in pension plans for retired T.W.A. pilots and machinists or contend with lawsuits that could cut deeply into his personal fortunes.


Eagles Make It Look Difficult vs. Cards
Eagles 7, Cardinals 3
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 25 (AP) -- The Philadelphia defense simply rose up and stopped the Phoenix offense as it got closer and closer.
Randall Cunningham's 40-yard touchdown pass to Calvin Williams in the second period was Philadelphia's only score in a 7-3 victory today that snapped a two-game losing streak.


Schedule of This Week's Expected Offerings of Equities
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alliance Worldwide Dollar Government Fund, an initial public offering of 4 million common shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Benton Oil and Gas Co., Oxnard, Calif., 4 million shares. S. G. Warburg.


But Why Single Out Police for Residency?
To the Editor:
I have been watching with great interest Mayor David N. Dinkins's call for a residency requirement for New York City police officers.
I realize this is a result of the unruly Sept. 16 police demonstration at City Hall.


Flap Over Value of Stock Options
John S. Reed is not a man too many people pick fights with.
As the chairman of Citicorp, the country's largest bank, Mr.
Reed is one of the nation's most powerful bankers and a prominent member of the Business Roundtable, an influential group of chief executives.
So why is Gary L. Roubos, the chief executive of a much smaller company, calling Mr.
Reed an ostrich?
The squabble involves how stock options are valued on a company's books.
Last week, the Securities and Exchange Commission ruled that companies had to provide, in their reports to shareholders, some value for the stock options granted to executives.


Topics of The Times; The Best Fall Show in Years
This fall has been different, another kind of out-of-season season.
Instead of breaking into their bright colors on schedule, the autumn leaves have kept the look of summer and in late October are still remarkably green.
The wet summer, which no one liked then, has proved a blessing for the trees, relieving them of the stress they suffer in dry times.
With less stress, the leaves age more slowly and hang on longer.
This has prolonged the autumn show, one of the best in years.
The northern parkways were memorable and the southern sections are coming along fine.
The city's trees still look pretty green although some ash in Central Park at 102d Street are a handsome mauve and golden birches are lighting up the lake in Prospect Park.


An Urban Aid Bill That Doesn't
After the Los Angeles riots in April, Congress vowed swift relief.
This month it finally passed an urban aid bill.
Only it doesn't provide much urban aid.
And what it does provide -- tax breaks for yacht buyers, real estate investors and wealthy savers -- is irresponsible, opening up gaping holes in future budgets.
President Bush, boxed in by election-year pledges, threatens to veto the bill because it would raise some taxes even as it cuts others.
That's an absurd reason, but a serendipitous outcome.


Benetton Takes A Look Back
Just as Rolling Stone is recalling the golden oldies of rock and roll as it celebrates its 25th anniversary, the Italian apparel company Benetton is recalling its own golden oldies with an eight-page advertising section in the magazine's Nov. 12 issue.
The section reprints Benetton advertisements dating to 1984, including some that generated criticism and publicity in about equal measures.
Perhaps the most notorious is a two-page ad from 1989 showing a white infant nursing at a black woman's breast.
Though that ad appeared in Europe, it did not run in American publications because of concerns over how it might be interpreted. (Those concerns are still prevalent; the ad will run only in issues of Rolling Stone sent to subscribers, while copies sold on newsstands will carry another ad in its place.)


Laurie E. Colwin, 48, a Novelist And Short Story Writer, Is Dead
Laurie E. Colwin, a novelist and writer of short stories on modern urban romance and life, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 48 years old.
She died of a heart attack, her family said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the quarterly earnings of two airlines misstated the loss reported by Delta Air Lines for its first quarter.
It was $106.7 million.


Jets Prepare for Stampede by Bills
The Jets and the Buffalo Bills are locked in a numerical battle that defies statistical analysis, stretches the laws of probability, confounds the oddsmakers.
Quick, someone call a numerologist.
The bottom line is that the Bills have the Jets' number.
The Jets have lost their last nine games with Buffalo, dating to 1987.
Bruce Coslet is 0-4 against the Bills as the Jets' head coach.
Only six players on the Jets roster were around when the Jets beat Buffalo, 31-28, in their 1987 season opener.


The Economy's Final Report Card Before Election
Voters may react mainly to what happens to jobs and wallets.
Economists respond to other measures, including the broadest and most revealing indicator of economic performance, which comes each quarter when the Commerce Department adds up the dollar value of all goods and services produced on American soil.
With publication of that figure, the gross domestic product, on Tuesday -- a week before Election Day -- President Bush may get one final chance to contend that the economy has finally begun to emerge from the rare limbo between recession and recovery in which it has hovered since mid-1991.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; PEROT SAYS HE QUIT IN JULY TO THWART G.O.P. 'DIRTY TRICKS'
At a time when Ross Perot's candidacy once again appeared to be transforming the Presidential contest, the Texas billionaire offered a new explanation today for his decision in July to abandon the campaign.
He said he had withdrawn after hearing that President Bush's campaign was scheming to smear his daughter with a computer-altered photograph and to disrupt her wedding.
Mr.
Perot offered no evidence, only quoting friends and an unidentified "top Republican."


And Down to Gulfstream They Come
"When they had the first Breeders' Cup eight years ago," Virginia Kraft Payson was saying, "I watched on TV. There was a great deal of controversy over whether it would work. There was even controversy over whether people would watch it on TV."
"But year by year, the Breeders' Cup has become more compelling," she said.
"Now it's an all-star show."


Sticking to Strategy
As support among voters shifted, the two leading candidates stuck to their tried and true campaign methods.
President Bush spoke about law and order, while Gov.
Bill Clinton said both his opponents were more preoccupied with each other than with the the future of Americans.
Articles, page A14.


20 Are Shot Dead in South Africa While Attending Zulu Ceremony
At least 20 people were killed when gunmen sprayed automatic rifle fire into a crowd attending a Zulu tribal ceremony, the police said tonight.
The killings, which took place Saturday night in Folweni township south of Durban, were the latest in a series in Natal Province, the center of the black fratricidal war between the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party and the African National Congress.


Review/Music; Taking the Country Out of the Country Singer
Lasers flashed.
Smoke machines smoked.
Scenery and scrims unfurled across the stage.
A singer emoted for cameras that were sending her image to a big video screen, while gleaming keyboard tones and booming drums enfolded her voice.
Reba McEntire, who has been named entertainer of the year and female vocalist of the year by the Country Music Association, was a long way from country-music tradition when she performed Friday at Radio City Music Hall, opening a two-night stand.
There's still an Oklahoma twang and a country quaver in her voice, but Ms.
McEntire is clearly headed for the realm of pop divas like Cher and Diana Ross, costume changes and all.
The set was a series of tableaux, with the band (on moving platforms shaped like clouds or hills) redeployed for each song, elaborate laser lighting effects and a new costume every few songs, from jacket to dress to cowgirl black leather to sequined leotard.
With all the technical coordination such a show needs, there was little chance for spontaneity; each song ended with Ms.
McEntire holding a theatrical pose, looking tragic or tearful or cheerful.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Bush Campaign Settles on a Sustained Message
Trust and taxes.
Over the last week, the Bush campaign seems to have settled finally on a succinct message and stuck to it.
You cannot trust Bill Clinton, it goes, plus he will raise your taxes.


Housing Lottery in a Bastion of Affluence
After six years of married life, two children, and a career path that had taken them to Newburgh and Syracuse, Gwen and Tom Pileski returned to their birthplace here a year ago and are still reeling from the shock.
For families like the Pileskis, she a 29-year-old nurse and he a 33-year-old corrections officer, this Long Island township ranks among the nation's least likely places to find affordable housing.
With its manicured hedgerows and storybook estates, "even a rat trap costs more than we can afford," Mrs.
Pileski said.


Sandra Stewart, Mark S. Epstein
Sandra Lee Stewart, a daughter of Betsey Haven of Oxford, Conn., and John M. Stewart of New York, was married yesterday to Mark Sanford Epstein, the son of Elissa Epstein of Atlantic Beach, L.I., and the late Herbert Epstein.
Jean Somerville Kotkin, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society in New York, officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Cantor David Benedict took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Epstein, 33 years old, graduated from Colgate University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a director of McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultants in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Warren F. Haven of Oxford and of Eliot Stewart of New York.


Scientists Assail Congress on Bill For Money to Test an AIDS Drug
The Federal Government's top scientists are angrily protesting a recent decision by Congress to bypass medical researchers and approve $20 million for human trials of an experimental AIDS vaccine.
Dr.
Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health, announced plans late last week to assemble a panel of leading AIDS experts to decide whether expanded testing of the vaccine, GP-160, should go forward.
And Dr.
David Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said in an interview that he opposed the increased testing until the situation was reviewed.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Oct.
G.D.P. . . . 3rd qtr.
Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
Sept.
Personal Income . . .
Sept.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  New Home Sales . . .
Sept.
Farm Prices . . .
Oct.


A Cobbler's Election Poll: Bush Won't Get the Boot
TALK about scoops!
Here are the results of the 1992 Presidential election: President Bush won narrowly, with Gov.
Bill Clinton fading and Ross Perot charging.
Of course, official voting doesn't occur for a week, a mere formality to maintain TV ratings.
Chris Kydes has his fingers on the electorate's souls -- and soles.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  'NO' TO UNION IN CANADA  Voters in Canada rejected a constitutional package intended to strengthen union and, in particular, to end Quebec's drive for succession.
The confederation is not likely to dissolve soon, but Quebec may gain some sovereignty.
A1  HINTS OF BRITISH ROLE IN IRAQ . . .
Britain, in exchange for intelligence, helped Iraq build up its military before Kuwait was invaded.
A1


During the exhibition match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, the Tuesday chess column by Robert Byrne will not appear. The column will resume after the match


Clues to Food Crops Are Found in Africa
ARCHEOLOGISTS digging in the Sahara Desert of southern Egypt have found 8,000-year-old seeds of sorghum and millet, indicating that the domestication of these important African food crops occurred much earlier than previously thought.
The discovery, reported in the current issue of the journal Nature, provides some of the first direct evidence for the early history of agriculture in a major region other than the Levant or pre-Columbian America.
The findings surprised experts because they had assumed that these plants were first domesticated in the African savanna to the south, presumably well after the introduction of cultivated barley and wheat in lower Egypt about 6,400 years ago.


Classical Music in Review
Benjamin Luxon
Baritone  Weill Recital Hall
The first good thing to be said about Benjamin Luxon's lieder recital on Friday night is that he chooses his repertory well: at the beginning, 7 of Schubert's most seductive songs; at the end, 10 by Hugo Wolf.
Between them were the three items from Carl Loewe's "Tom der Reimer." Without Loewe and his rich, narrative ballad style, no picture of the Romantic axis joining German poetry and music is quite complete.


Don't Let F.D.A. Get Cosier With Drugmakers; A Vitamins Agency?
To the Editor:
If there is any mischief going on, as "Vitamin Voodoo" (Topics of The Times, Sept. 24) alleges, it is in the Food and Drug Administration's interpretation of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990, which I co-sponsored and helped enact.
In an overwhelming 94-1 vote, the Senate adopted my call for a one-year moratorium on F.D.A. regulations that would distort the intent of that law and unfairly restrict every American's right to vitamins and other dietary supplements.
Congress reiterated support for a moratorium before adjournment, when such provisions were added to legislation to improve F.D.A. effectiveness.
President Bush is expected to sign this bill.


More on Politics
A POLITICAL NOTE An all-woman band recorded two songs in Manhattan to benefit Clinton.
The Metro Section, page B4. 2 KINDS OF POLITICS "Frontline" looks at campaign financing, and two television movies depict fictional campaigns.
Word and Image, page C18.


Top Yield 6.55% On Texas Bonds
The Texas Public Finance Authority tentatively priced $126 million of tax-exempt building revenue bonds yesterday through Rauscher Pierce Refsnes Inc., with a maximum yield of 6.55 percent for a bond due in 2012.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 3.60 percent in 1994 to 6.20 percent in 2005.
For other longer-maturity bonds, investors are offered an issue due in 2007 priced to yield 6.40 percent and another due in 2008 that is priced to yield 6.45 percent.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise Again on the Nasdaq
The number of over-the-counter shares sold short and not yet covered rose between mid-September and mid-October, the ninth straight monthly increase, the National Association of Securities dealers said yesterday.
The latest monthly figures reflect trades that took place on the Nasdaq system as of Oct. 7 and settled as of Oct 15.
These uncovered short positions are a widely watched gauge of investor sentiment, since they reflect the activities of a large contingent of professional sellers who specialize in ferreting out overvalued companies.


Sports Briefings; Rugby Is Target Of Black Leaders
Black sports leaders, reversing their early stand, today announced they were now opposed to South Africa's participation in world rugby, charging that white administrators had broken promises on financing development programs for blacks.
The African National Congress, the nation's leading black group, withdrew its support for tours by the national team a day after an allied black group alleged racism in the sport.


Corrections
A report in the Campaign Trail column on Saturday, about the use of a briefing video instead of briefing books in Ross Perot's Presidential campaign, misstated the relationship of John White to the campaign.
Mr.
White was an adviser before Mr.
Perot dropped out of the race in July.
Mr.
White has since endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton for President.


Boeing Profit Down 9% as Orders Slide
The Boeing Company reported yesterday that its earnings had fallen 9 percent in the third quarter, primarily because of a decrease in commercial jet deliveries.
Net income for the Seattle-based aerospace company totaled $364 million, or $1.07 a share, down from $401 million, or $1.17 a share, a year earlier.
Sales fell 10 percent, to $6.90 billion, from $7.66 billion in the third quarter of 1991.
Boeing projected that its total sales for 1992 would be in the $30 billion range.


Raymond P. Kurshan, Computer Executive, 69
Raymond P. Kurshan, for many years a leading figure in the computer industry, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.
He died of cancer, his son, Peter, said yesterday.


Classical Music in Review
Yevgeny Mogilevsky
Pianist  Carnegie Hall
Yevgeny Mogilevsky has a technique and musicality built for big places.
When Schumann's "Kreisleriana" asked for speed on Sunday afternoon, Mr.
Mogilevsky had it in excess.
When the "Arabesque" stipulated rubato, Mr.
Mogilevsky was broad as broad could be.
When the Prokofiev Eighth Sonata required extravagant pounding, this 47-year-old Russian pianist was the man for the job.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Bush Aide Calls Perot's Story 'Paranoid'
While saying he wanted to put the issue behind him, Ross Perot kept alive his story of Republican campaign skulduggery today, and the White House spokesman suggested the independent candidate was "paranoid." Other Presidential aides later tried to soften that tone.
In a surprise appearance at a press briefing that was being conducted by some of his aides, Mr.
Perot first said he accepted the denials from the Bush camp of a plot to embarrass his daughter.
But he then suggested that he did not believe the denials, since they had not been made until he had disclosed his suspicions in a television interview.


The Elvis Strategy
In no Presidential year has Elvis Presley been so inseparable from the action as in 1992.
Soon after the New Hampshire primary, the news media noted an odd phenomenon: interest in the Postal Service's Elvis-stamp election seemed to outstrip public concern for the primaries themselves.
The intensity of the national joke-cum-struggle over the choice between the old and young Elvis revealed, among other things, a profound dissatisfaction with the candidates actually on view.
The stamp election was more fun, and perhaps more meaningful, than the real one.
Thus when Ross Perot emerged to fill the void Elvis's ghost had revealed, Mr.
Perot was not only himself -- steely-eyed Mr.
Fixit -- he was also the weirdest Elvis stand-in anyone had ever seen.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Unanswered Questions; Bush, Clinton and Perot Demonstrate How to Let the Worst Go Unspoken
At the beginning of the Presidential debate last Monday night, with 90 million Americans looking on, Gov.
Bill Clinton was asked a straightforward question: How can voters believe that he can pay for all his campaign promises so painlessly?
It was an appropriate question.
The Democratic Presidential nominee promises to create jobs, reduce the budget deficit, cut taxes of the middle class, reform welfare, provide universal medical insurance, guarantee college educations for everyone qualified and spend $20 billion a year more on new public works projects.


The Talk of Hollywood; Uneasy Lie Crowns On Heads Of 2 Studios
This town is bracing nervously for the big Thanksgiving-Christmas movie season, but what studio executives, producers and agents were actually talking about today was the possibility of major changes at two big studios.
Rumored to be leaving are Joe Roth, the chairman of 20th Century Fox since July 1989, and Mike Medavoy, the chairman of Tri-Star Pictures since February 1990.
Both men are generally well liked in a community of barracudas, and the reasons for their possible departures are just a little hazy.


On My Mind; Perot's Little Helpers
Ross Perot finally paid off part of the debt he owes his country, by revealing the full richness of his character.
Now it is time for George Bush and Bill Clinton to pay back the debt they incurred by slathering this man with smarm and grovel.
They can say at last that Ross Perot is not simply a quitter but a liar to boot.
And they can say that since they believed it all along they should have said so instead of kowtowing to the man.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush, Sounding Like His Rivals, Tones Down His Attacks, Briefly
President Bush set aside his unremitting assault on Gov.
Bill Clinton for a few hours this morning to make a final attempt to address the currents of discontent in 1992.
He painted himself as a "conservative activist" combining the most popular attributes of Ross Perot and Mr.
Clinton.
But by midafternoon in Albuquerque, Mr.
Bush was back on the full-throated attack, talking about his opponents' "crazy ideas" and directing the ire of his supporters at the press while his advisers tried to come to grips with a rapidly changing political landscape.


Nerve Cell Rhythm May Be Key to Consciousness
Don't think of a hippopotamus.
Now that you did, think about where this image formed in your mind.
How did it come into being?
Do mental events, like this hippo, arise from the firing of large sets of brain cells or from something less tangible?
What is the stuff of self-awareness and the nature of consciousness?


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 8 A.M., NBC (Channel 4 in New York), "Today."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; A Scholarly Advocate for the Middle of the Road
When Stan Greenberg, the Ivy League academic and esoteric author from Connecticut, met James Carville, the political attack dog from Louisiana, all they had in common was Bill Clinton.
"Oil and water," said Mr.
Carville, the chief strategist for Mr.
Clinton's Presidential campaign.
"He was a Yale professor. That was a horrible strike against him as far as I was concerned."


Ralph Rosenborg, 79, Abstract Painter, Dies
Ralph Rosenborg, an abstract painter whose career spanned more than five decades, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Portland, Ore.
He was 79 years old and until recently had lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from a stroke, said Gary Snyder, owner of the SoHo gallery that handles Mr.
Rosenborg's work.


Abortion Issue Grows More Important in Congressional Races
While Presidential candidates hardly mention abortion, television commercials on the issue are becoming more and more important to House and Senate candidates, especially to those advocating abortion rights.
In Colorado, a television screen shows an ambulance and a gurney in silhouette.
A voice proclaims, "Working as a young deputy, Ben Nighthorse Campbell's strong pro-choice stand comes from seeing a young woman in an ambulance one night, the victim of a back-alley abortion."


Scientists Shed Old Timidity In Pursuing Secrets of Mind
NEUROSCIENTISTS, after decades of probing the anatomy of single nerve cells and simple brain circuits on grounds that the brain is too complicated to understand as a whole, are now boldly beginning to tackle fundamental questions about how the mind works.
In so doing, they are challenging a cherished belief that held sway for 350 years.
As promulgated by the French philosopher Rene Descartes, brain and body are made of physical substances that can be located in space and time.
But mind and soul are made of a mysterious substance which cannot be pinned down.


Patterns
Song and Dance
With the spring ready-to-wear shows next week, you'd think the fashion industry would be too busy to worry about anything but getting the last seams sewn up.
But it's also thinking about good works, namely raising money for charity.
The biggest event is "Fashion Follies," an extravaganza that will feature a stage show of song, dance, magic and, of course, fashion, starring celebrities from fashion and show business.


SALVADOR REBELS SUPPORT U.N. PLAN
Salvadoran rebel leaders said today that they would be willing to demobilize their remaining military forces by December under a United Nations proposal to break a deadlock in the carrying out of the country's peace accords.
The rebel commanders conditioned their acceptance of the proposal, however, on that of President Alfredo Cristiani, who has steadfastly opposed any rescheduling of deadlines in the settlement.
And although diplomats said Mr.
Cristiani had responded favorably to the plan in private, Government officials said they would not give a formal answer until Tuesday.


Nationsbank Will Create A Firm With Dean Witter
Nationsbank and Dean Witter plan to form a new securities company that would place brokers in hundreds of Nationsbank's 1,800 branches.
While many banks have brokerage units, the agreement announced yesterday appears to be the first move by a major banking company -- Nationsbank is the nation's fourth largest -- and a major brokerage firm to forge such a broad alliance.
As such, it signals a growing recognition that banks hoping to keep customers, who are fleeing the paltry yields on savings accounts and certificates of deposits, must be more aggressive in offering alternatives like stocks, bonds and mutual funds.


Stringer Is Democratic Nominee, Court Says
After weeks of electoral Ping-Pong, Scott Stringer was selected yesterday as the Democratic candidate to run for the State Assembly seat on the Upper West Side being vacated by Jerrold Nadler.
State Supreme Court Justice Martin Evans ordered the Board of Elections to place Mr.
Stringer on the ballot, ending a wild race for the nomination that, earlier this month, had seen Mr.
Springer and William Nuchow each declared the nominee at least once, said Douglas Kellner, chairman of the 67th Assembly District Committee.
Mr.
Nadler gave up the 67th Assembly Seat to run for the seat in Congress that was held by Ted Weiss until his death on Sept. 14.


Tandy Ventures Into the Unknown
John V. Roach became a bright young star when he created one of the first personal computers in 1977 and rode its success into the Tandy Corporation's chief executive suite four years later at age 42.
But with Tandy's profits at their lowest level since he took command in 1981 and its shares also scraping bottom, Mr.
Roach suddenly faces a distressing legacy of having managed Tandy into the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company of consumer electronics retailing.
In addition to a string of product disappointments, Tandy's core Radio Shack chain, some analysts say, is losing ground to electronics "super stores" like CompUSA that carry far more products, and telemarketing innovators like Dell Computer.
Though it is still the nation's largest electronics retailer, Radio Shack has closed more stores than it has added in the last six years.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 18 about the funeral of Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor, identified Shimon Peres incorrectly in some editions.
He is Israel's Foreign Minister.


Richard Pousette-Dart, 76, Dies; An Early Abstract Expressionist
Richard Pousette-Dart, a painter who belonged to the first generation of Abstract Expressionists, which helped catapult American art onto the world stage in the late 1940's, died on Sunday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
He died of complications from colon cancer, his family said yesterday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Perot Leads in $40 Million TV Ad Blitz
Led by Ross Perot, the Presidential candidates are engaged in the costliest advertising blitz of any general election campaign.
Already, they have poured more than $40 million into network television alone, and they expect to spend millions more by next Tuesday.
That figure represents only a portion of the spending on broadcast commercials because the campaigns are also spending large amounts in local markets and on radio stations.


Hottest Late-Night Series Is 'Wake Me Up for the Ball Game'
Oh, to be on the West Coast, where World Series games end at 10 P.M. and Sunday afternoon football doesn't threaten to delay "60 Minutes."
It's not only youngsters who cannot stay up late in the East to watch late-starting games of the fall classic.
It's also guys like me.
Now, I'm a big fan.
And I'm paid to watch.
But several times during Game 6, I discovered that I had drifted off.
"You're not sleeping, are you?" I was asked.
"Oh, no," I said, lifting my notebook quickly into a state of iota-writing readiness.


Can We, on the Other Hand, Trust Bush?; Slur on Latinos
To the Editor:
As a Dominican, I was outraged at the ethnic slur by Mary Matalin of the Bush-Quayle campaign that is quoted in your "Political Memo" about the Democrats' soaring hopes (front page, Oct. 18).
Ms.
Matalin labeled Gov.
Bill Clinton's supporters "Clintonistas," evoking visions of Clinton supporters as Sandinistas, Latin American revolutionaries.


A 2-Minute Mourning
The Jets looked as if they had a victory in their grasp tonight at Giants Stadium.
But they gave Jim Kelly too much time to rally the Buffalo Bills.
With 1 minute 50 seconds remaining and the Jets trailing Buffalo, 17-13, wide receiver Rob Moore drew a interference penalty in the end zone, which gave the Jets the ball on the 1-yard line.
On the next play Brad Baxter scored, and after the extra point, the Jets took a 20-17.


Classical Music in Review
Brooklyn Philharmonic  Brooklyn Academy of Music
The Brooklyn Philharmonic began its new season over the weekend without its new music director, Dennis Russell Davies, but nevertheless with a certain spring in its step.
The audience on Saturday night was large and happy; Lukas Foss, the orchestra's conductor laureate, conducted American music of all shapes and sizes, adding commentary between pieces.


Pre-election Test of Bonds Is Seen
Bond prices drifted lower yesterday and yields rose as investors seemed to be testing how far the market could fall ahead of the Presidential election next week.
While the prices of the 30-year bond and Treasury notes were down for the day, the losses at the end of trading were smaller than the declines earlier in the day.
"My sense is that we're just testing how far down we have to go to get investors comfortable with a new administration and a fiscal stimulus program," said Charles Liberman, the managing director of financial markets research at Chemical Securities Inc.
Long Rates May Rise More
Mr.
Liberman said he thought long-term interest rates could still rise some more because of the uncertainty over the outcome of the election and what kind of stimulus program the winner of the election might propose to try to get the economy moving beyond a slow walk.
The fear of such a program, which could enlarge the Federal deficit, has contributed to the recent selloff in the Treasury market.


Trump's Riverside Development Is Close to Reality


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Bill Laimbeer, Detroit Pistons center, $7,500 for a flagrant foul against David Wood, San Antonio Spurs forward, in a preseason game on Oct. 22.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Suspended Vernon Maxwell, guard, for one game for violation of team rules.


Israelis Bombard Targets in Lebanon
Israeli artillery, aircraft and gunboats pounded targets across Lebanon on Monday in fierce bombardments that were ordered as retaliation for a bomb ambush by Islamic fundamentalists that killed five Israeli soldiers.
Most of the shelling took place near the strip that runs along southern Lebanon, which Israel calls its security zone against attacks on its northern towns and settlements.


Classical Music in Review
New Music Consort  Manhattan School of Music
As its contribution to the Sonic Boom festival, the New Music Consort presented a program of works by women on Wednesday evening.
This was not a shallow exercise in political correctness: these pieces were remarkable for their harmonic, structural or coloristic inventiveness.


New Yorker Goes Scentless After Readers Hold Noses
WHEN it comes to scented fragrance advertisements, The New Yorker has decided the noes have it -- because readers have declared, in no uncertain terms, that their noses have had it.
The weekly magazine said yesterday that it would discontinue running ads that carry fragrance strips, effective immediately, reversing a policy it began in June of last year.
The reason to forgo the extra money that such advertising generates, said Steven T. Florio, the magazine's president and chief executive, was that the additional revenues were not worth antagonizing readers.


Bush or Clinton, Europe Expects No Shift in Foreign Policy
The idea that Gov.
Bill Clinton might be elected President next week seems to cause little aprehension among Western European leaders.
Most are more worried about their own political survival.
"We all become a little conservative as we grow older, so there's a tendency to think that things will go better with the person you know," Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain said in an interview in Madrid the other day.


Bills Need the Whole Game to Break the Jets' Hearts
The Jets dropped a 24-20 heartbreaker to the Buffalo Bills tonight, but it was not just another loss.
With a crowd of 68,181 and a national television audience looking in at Giants Stadium, the Jets took the lead in the final two minutes only to have the Bills rally for the winning touchdown on a 12-yard pass from quarterback Jim Kelly to running back Thurman Thomas with 51 seconds to play.


Review/Theater; Turgenev Adaptation With a Lot To Say
In an era when talk is a product designed to capture ratings and what passes for humor is created by committees of gag writers, there is something to be said for lively conversation and deft wit.
Both are in ample supply at the Atlantic Theater in Chelsea, where George F. Walker's "Nothing Sacred" is receiving its New York premiere.
Adapted from the Turgenev novel "Fathers and Sons" and set in Russia in 1859, "Nothing Sacred" is peopled with vivid characters who have a lot to say -- and say stylishly -- about politics, government, freedom, power, revolution, religion, tradition, class distinctions and love.


CZECH-SLOVAK TIE ON CUSTOMS UNION
The governments of the Czech and Slovak republics agreed today to a customs union between them when Czechoslovakia splits apart on Jan. 1.
The accord, reached at a meeting of Czech and Slovak leaders in the Javorina resort in the High Tatra mountains in Slovakia, is a key element in future relations between the republics.


Big Comet May Strike Earth in August 2126
WITH the kind of deliberate understatement that befits a 72-year-old organization with a reputation for sobriety, the International Astronomical Union, the world astronomy authority, has for the first time issued a warning of a potential collision between Earth and a speeding object swinging in from the fringes of the solar system.
The size of the comet is in the range that scientists assume is sufficient to disrupt the climate and end civilization.


Arazi Likely To Race in Cup Mile
By land and by air, from Europe and Canada and California, the horse stars of the world were gathering today at Gulfstream Park for the seven races Saturday that will crown champions in the $10 million Breeders' Cup.
And Arazi once more led the list in intrigue when his trainer said he "favors" running the colt in the $1 million Mile rather than the $3 million Classic.
Horses flew in from England and Ireland today to join over two dozen others who flew in from France on Sunday night, and they all joined Strike the Gold and Sea Cadet and the dozen others who arrived Saturday from New York, to say nothing of the superstars A.P.
Indy and Thunder Rumble and Pleasant Tap, who arrived on the same flight a few days before.


Santo Domingo Journal; Shepherds, or Wolves? Whatever, Flocks Grow
To believe Pope John Paul II, Bienvenido Alvarez-Vega is one of the Protestant "rapacious wolves" who are increasingly stealing Latin Americans from the Roman Catholic flock.
After the Pope used that phrase in a speech to a meeting here of Latin American bishops in mid-October, Mr.
Alvarez talked about religion in his roomy office at the Santo Domingo daily paper El Siglo.


Getting Dizzy With Ross Perot
For a smart man, Ross Perot displays an amazing instinct for political masochism.
Just as his reborn campaign was generating fresh momentum, he maladroitly revived fresh doubts about traits that bear directly on his fitness for office: his obsession with conspiracies, his fondness for dishing out unsubstantiated dirt and his willingness to trifle with the voters.
Why did he suddenly quit the campaign in July?
Repeatedly over the weekend, Mr.
Perot said it was because the Bush campaign had planned to distribute a faked, lewd photograph of his daughter before her August wedding.
He offered no evidence, but said he quit rather than "risk" family honor.
He also charged that Bush operatives had bugged his phones in a plot to ruin him financially.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Investigation; Officials Say Perot Charges Led F.B.I. to Try Sting at Bush Office
The Federal Bureau of Investigation set up a sting operation that involved sending an undercover agent this summer to the office of President Bush's campaign chairman in Texas to check Ross Perot's accusations that Republicans were spying on him, Administration officials said today.
In the course of the operation, the F.B.I. agent offered to sell Jim Oberwetter, the Bush-Quayle campaign chairman in Dallas, an audio tape and documents from Mr.
Perot's office for $2,500 in what Mr.
Oberwetter said today was an attempt by the bureau to "entrap" him.


Observer; The Future Foretold
What specific event triggered the downfall of President Perot?
Most historians pinpoint the infamous "roundup of the thousand-dollar suits."
Older Americans may remember that in campaign debate Perot had promised to rid Washington of lobbyists in thousand-dollar suits and alligator shoes.
Naturally nobody expected him to do so.
Politicians in those days constantly made colorful utterances called "sound bites" which voters regarded as idle campaign guff.


STEMPEL QUITS JOB AS TOP G.M. OFFICER IN RIFT WITH BOARD
Robert C. Stempel resigned today as chairman and chief executive of the General Motors Corporation amid speculation about his imminent dismissal and the failure of the board of the world's largest manufacturer to give him a public vote of confidence.
Mr.
Stempel's departure, the culmination of several days of reports of a widening rift between him and the board, represented a bitter realization that the apparent campaign against him and his record left him powerless to steer the huge, deeply troubled car-making empire.


Books of The Times; A Legacy of War: Barrage of Words
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf's recent autobiography, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," was a first draft of history, a colorful and colored pre-emptive strike in print.
But it has by no means stopped other interpretations of the political, economic, diplomatic and military aspects of the Persian Gulf war, as is obvious by a new round of books questioning its policies, conduct and aftermath.
Pentagon censorship spurred the need to peer behind the hidden aspects of what was (with a bow to Robert Southey on the Battle of Blenheim) "a famous victory."
While President Bush is generally praised by the authors of these books for putting together a coalition of nations with diverse interests, several criticize him for personalizing the war, giving a green (or at least a yellow) light to Saddam Hussein and failing to pursue a consistent foreign policy.


Plea Filed on Clifford Case
Lawyers for Clark M. Clifford formally asked a New York State judge yesterday to dismiss felony charges against him for his role in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal, saying the 85-year-old former adviser to Presidents is too ill to stand trial.
In papers filed with the judge, John A. K. Bradley, Mr.
Clifford's lawyers cited a state law that allows criminal charges to be dropped "in the interests of justice." Judge Bradley is expected to approve the motion.


Campaign Trail Appeals to Dodd
Outside the cafeteria in Aetna's corporate headquarters, it was many a politician's least favorite moment: time to step forward, extend a hand and greet the crowds arriving for lunch.
Placing himself squarely before the cafeteria entrance, Christopher J. Dodd looked over at a group of solemn-faced reporters and laughed.
"What an entourage," he gibed.
Then he turned, grinning broadly, to face the employees streaming in.


Classical Music in Review
Golden Fleece Ltd.
Sanford Meisner Theater Chelsea
The staging of new music-theater works is a hazardous business.
Golden Fleece Ltd. fought the odds by presenting three new pieces on Thursday night.
Only one of them, "The Bear," by Peter Foley, could be judged successful on its own terms.


Don't Let F.D.A. Get Cosier With Drugmakers
To the Editor:
Re "Senate Passes Bill to Charge Makers for Drug Approval" (front page, Oct. 8): While the prescription drug user fee bill will generate needed revenue for the Food and Drug Administration, it blurs the boundaries between the agency and the industry it is charged with regulating.
The act recognizes that Federal budget constraints, public health concerns and a prolific biotechnology industry have placed demands on the F.D.A. that it is unable to meet.
To help, government and industry have suggested drug companies pay for the approval process on new drugs.


Don't Let F.D.A. Get Cosier With Drugmakers; Mutant-Foods Policy
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 30 article on chefs whose environmental politics make the kitchen hotter details disagreement about boycotting genetically engineered food.
Whether or not one believes genetically engineered foods are desirable or should be boycotted, we believe consumers should reject the Food and Drug Administration's new policy on the safety and labeling of genetically engineered foods.
The F.D.A.'s new policy threatens to weaken established regulations protecting the food supply.
With genetic engineering, a virtually limitless number of genetically encoded substances, many of them not traditionally part of the human diet, can now be added to organisms used as food.
Crops under development include potatoes engineered to produce a moth protein that prevents bruising damage, tomatoes engineered to produce a fish protein that slows freezing and cucumbers engineered with viral genes that confer disease resistance.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
DANIELS WITHDRAWS AS DINKINS'S DEPUTY
Randy Daniels withdrew as a Deputy Mayor, indicating that his effectiveness as a press and community affairs adviser to Mayor Dinkins had been destroyed by allegations that he sexually harassed a woman who worked for him five years ago.
The Mayor, who announced the decision at a City Hall news conference Mr.
Daniels did not attend, stressed that the allegations remained unsubstantiated and that Mr.
Daniels continued to insist that he had been falsely accused and would fight to clear his name.
A1.
Countdown to a resignation. B3.


An Apology From Holtz On Incident With Referee
LOU HOLTZ, the Notre Dame coach, apologized yesterday to the supervisor of the referee he held in a headlock last Saturday in the Irish's game against Brigham Young at South Bend, Ind.
DAN WOOLDRIDGE, the supervisor of officials for the Big East, which produced part of the crew for the Notre Dame-B.Y.U. game, said Holtz regretted his hold on the referee, THOMAS THAMERT, which took place in the final minutes of the game.
Wooldridge had not yet seen a tape of Holtz's protest.
He said that Thamert, in a weekly report Sunday, said he felt that Holtz did not intend to cause harm or embarrassment in his protest of what he felt should have been a penalty.


Daly Speaks. Will Nets Listen?
Coach Chuck Daly of the Nets had hardly settled in to a courtside seat 30 minutes before game time at the Civic Arena tonight when he was besieged for autographs.
As players for the Nets and Cleveland Cavaliers took shooting practice, Daly signed one souvenir program after another, rising, finally, to tell a reporter: "I better go or I'll never get out of here."


Uncovered Short Sales Rise Again on the Nasdaq
The number of over-the-counter shares sold short and not yet covered rose between mid-September and mid-October, the ninth straight monthly increase, the National Association of Securities dealers said yesterday.
The latest monthly figures reflect trades that took place on the Nasdaq system as of Oct. 7 and settled as of Oct 15.
These uncovered short positions are a widely watched gauge of investor sentiment, since they reflect the activities of a large contingent of professional sellers who specialize in ferreting out overvalued companies.


For Congress From New Jersey
New Jersey's Congressional races have been turned inside out by redistricting, resignations and the loss of one seat.
The state's delegation has been reduced from 14 to 13, and four incumbents are retiring.
The result was three open seats in populous northern districts near New York City.
The state Republican Party, triumphant in the legislative elections last November, has entered several legislators in the Congressional races.
While some are attractive, all have joined in the party's effort to repeal Gov.
Jim Florio's worthy school aid and gun control legislation.
Our preferences are as follows:


DDB Needham Wins Accounts
DDB Needham New York has added two accounts, one expected, the other not.
Combined billings are estimated at $13 million.
The expected account is The Washington Post, which was previously at McElligott Wright Morrison White in Minneapolis.
As that agency dissolved amid disputes among its top executives, two of them, Tony Wright and John Morrison, left to join DDB Needham in September.


Panel Clears Trump Plan On West Side
Making final approval all but certain, the New York City Planning Commission yesterday voted unanimously for a scaled-down version of Donald J. Trump's $3 billion, 56-acre Riverside South development for the Upper West Side.
The project, with 7.9 million square feet of commercial and residential space and a 21.5-acre park, would be the largest single development undertaken by the private sector in the city's history.
The proposal now goes to the City Council, where approval is considered likely.
And there is virtually no chance that Mayor David N. Dinkins will veto the proposal, because he has long been an ardent backer of it.


Clinton Steers Clear of His Rivals' Fray


Promotion at D'Arcy
Ron Monchak, managing director at the Bloomfield Hills, Mich., office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, has been promoted to the new position of chairman, effective on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Monchak, 57 years old, has been with the agency, which handles accounts like Pontiac and Whirlpool, for 30 years.
Robin Smith, 52, deputy managing director, will succeed Mr.
Monchak as managing director.


Review/Photography; A Movement Idealizing Times Of Contentment Finds New Favor
For many years historians were about the only people in photography who had anything good to say about the turn-of-the-century movement known as Pictorialism.
Photographers, critics, dealers and collectors all scorned the style, even though in its heyday it attracted some of the most important artists in the medium, including Alfred Stieglitz, Edward Steichen and Gertrude Kasebier.
But with its fuzzy prints, genteel imagery and self-conscious artiness, Pictorialist photography seemed to many people the very definition of old-fashioned.
It embodied everything rejected in the 1920's by modernist photographers like Edward Weston and Paul Strand, who emphasized the razor-sharp depiction of subjects taken from everyday life.


IRELAND RENEWS ABORTION DEBATE
The long-awaited disclosure of the specifics of the Government's proposals for a new abortion law has thrown the Irish into another heated debate on when abortions should be allowed in this predominantly Roman Catholic country.
The issue will be put to a national referendum on Dec. 3, and Parliament is scheduled to approve the wording this week.
Three proposals by Prime Minister Albert Reynolds's Government to amend the Constitution on abortion set off vehement exchanges in Parliament last week.
There was considerable disagreement on what effect the proposals would have on the availabilty of abortion.


Thoroughly Feminized, Pants Are Back
Pants are back.
Not since the early 1970's have they so dominated fashion.
From Milan to London to Paris, designers in the fashion world are focusing on pants.


Review/Rock; Some Clicks and Tricks By Way of New Zealand
Chris Knox of Tall Dwarfs was grinning a mad, sideshow grin.
Standing on the stage of Maxwell's here on Friday night, wearing a T-shirt of which only the word "happy" could be discerned above the heads of the crowd, the leader of this New Zealand duo did seem to have some sort of trickery up his sleeve.
He leaned forward and started a clicky, canned drum track on a cheap Casio keyboard.
He hit a few rabid, distorted chords on his guitar, and the loose ends of the strings jittered in the air like antennae.
His partner, Alexander Bathgate, turned his back on the audience and began eking feedback out of his own guitar.
"She's a woman," Mr.
Knox sang, in a tremendous ode to post-modern female kind, "a woman who reads Sassy . . ."
Tall Dwarfs' show was rock-and-roll as a surreal two-ring circus.
Mostly unknown around the world, Mr.
Knox and Mr.
Bathgate are nevertheless influential figures in their own right.
In the late 1970's, they were part of two punk-era bands, the Enemy and Toy Love, which eventually gave rise to an entire generation of New Zealand garage bands, including the Chills, the Clean and the Verlaines; all these bands, as well as Tall Dwarfs after it formed in 1981, recorded for the New Zealand independent label Flying Nun.


With Cold War Over, Scientists Are Turning To 'Greener' Pastures
DR.
WILLIAM DANNEVIK, Dr.
John Ambrosiano and Dr.
Mike Wehner are physicists who used to work on nuclear weapons at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California.
They have now switched their skills to the task of making better forecasts about global warming.
Dr.
Henry W. Kendall, a 1990 winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics and a longtime anti-nuclear activist, has taken a leave from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to learn more about human impact on the global environment.
His goal is to galvanize the scientific community in the cause of environmental protection.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Presents Hard Line To Bring In North Carolina
Appearing in a televised question-and-answer session with a small group of North Carolinians today, Bill Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, worked to win over the state's independent, essentially conservative voters.
The strategy played out in an exchange with a young man named Shawn Searcy on "CBS This Morning." Mr.
Searcy voiced an objection to excessive Government largess toward the poor.
He said he believed that "if you don't work, you don't eat."


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra da Camera delFestival Internazionale di Brescia e Bergamo  Alice Tully Hall
Although the old age of great composers is usually a time for recollection and summation, certain figures are restless to the end.
Beethoven, Liszt, Janacek and Nielsen, for example, all found new paths just as evening fell.
Rossini is a case unto himself: while there is nothing radical or visionary in his late works, there's nothing ordinary either.
His "Sins of Old Age" is a dizzying array of satires, self-parodies and eccentricities, with wacky titles anticipating Satie ("Noisettes") and touching annotations of self-doubt.
It is music transcending ego.


COMPANY NEWS
DEHAVILLAND &amp; CO., Toronto, has awarded a $7 million three-year contract to TD Materials Inc. of Los Angeles to provide hard alloy extrusions for the Dash-8 models 100/300 commuter aircraft.
GE ASTRO SPACE, a subsidiary of General Electric Co., has won a $128 million contract to build a second satellite for Asiasat, a consortium jointly owned by Cable and Wireless P.L.C., China International Trust and Investment Co. and Hutchison Whampoa.


Classical Music in Review
Midori  Violinist Avery Fisher Hall
Celebrating her 21st birthday with a recital on Sunday afternoon, the violinist Midori may have banished once and for all the impression that she is merely the most talked-about and televised of young virtuosos.
The program was not perfect: Beethoven's "Kreutzer" Sonata lacked fluidity and lyric warmth, and the Mozart E-minor Sonata (K. 304), seemed burdened by gestures of self-conscious refinement.
But the weaknesses were outweighed by the strengths, among which were a ruthless pursuit of dramatic tension in the Beethoven and a pristine, melancholy tone in the Mozart.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
2.90
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.93
4.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.18
5.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.38
7.30
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.66
7.63
8.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.67
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.62
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Grim Analysis That Damage Could Not Be Undone
As Randy Daniels was defending himself Friday against an accusation of sexual harassment, senior aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins had already decided that, guilty or innocent, the new Deputy Mayor had become a liability.
There was virtual unanimity that day among the advisers who huddled with Mr.
Dinkins at City Hall that Mr.
Daniels could not survive the avalanche of publicity or the gravity of the accusation, four senior aides who were present said yesterday.


KEY SALES TO IRAQ WON BACKING IN '89
In September 1989, the Bush Administration approved the export to Iraq of two militarily useful computers, according to United States Government documents made public today.
The sale was arranged by Gerald Bull, a Canadian-born ballistics expert who had been convicted of arms-export violations in 1980 and had provided Iraq with components for a "supergun," the documents show.


Markova Moves to the Forefront by Setting a Pace of Her Own
For Olga Markova, the slim dark horse whose sleeper run took her to the winner's circle of the Boston Marathon earlier this year and has made her the women's favorite for Sunday's New York City Marathon, loneliness became a thing of the past when she became a long-distance runner.
Before she realized she was more than just the fastest girl in her class back home in the Russian industrial town of Koltino, where her family shared a two-room apartment, Markova watched her parents trudge to their factory jobs each day and wondered if she could fend off a similar future.


President Is Considered Likely Chief
Since his appointment as General Motors' president six months ago, John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. has kept a low profile in Detroit, huddled in meetings rather than rallying the troops.
"He seems to have kept his nose to the grindstone," one G.M. executive said.
That grindstone has yielded plenty of sparks.
With many noteworthy changes at the beleaguered auto maker, Mr.
Smith has given some executives reason for hope.
And with yesterday's resignation of the company's chairman, Robert C. Stempel, many G.M. insiders and company watchers consider Mr.
Smith the top candidate for chief executive.


Bridge
To test your dummy-play, cover the East-West cards shown in the diagram and plan South's play in four spades.
East has opened one no-trump, showing 15-17 points, and North and South have both bid aggressively.
West has led the heart jack, and East has taken the A-K of hearts and the club ace, continuing with a low club.
Clearly everything hinges on the diamond queen.
Spade finesses against East's king predictably succeed, and that player proves to have started with K-x-x.
After drawing trumps, how will you play diamonds?


Business and Health; New Ways to Help Injured Workers
HEALTH insurers and health maintenance organizations are jumping into the rapidly growing worker's compensation market, angling for a share of the $70 billion a year that employers spend to cover job-related injuries and illnesses.
The insurers offer networks of physicians who typically accept preset fees and abide by rules that encourage workers to return to work as soon as possible.
The growing interest in managing worker's compensation follows a surge in medical expenditures, which now are 50 percent of worker's compensation costs, up from 20 percent in the 1970's.
The other big cost is injury-related loss of earnings or impaired ability to work.
According to some experts, worker's compensation costs will soar to $120 billion by 1995.


Slain Founder of Germany's Green Party Is Buried


Roger Miller, Quirky Country Singer and Songwriter, Is Dead at 56
Roger Miller, the country singer and songwriter whose 1960's hits brought a strain of wisecracking rural humor into mainstream pop, died on Sunday in Los Angeles.
He was 56 years old and lived near Santa Fe, N.M.
He died of cancer, said his manager, Stan Moress.


Mazda Drops Luxury Line Plan for U.S.
The Mazda Motor Corporation sharply scaled back its efforts to enter the luxury automobile market today, saying it would abandon plans to set up a separate dealer network in the United States and Canada to sell new high-priced vehicles under the Amati name.
Mazda, struggling to remain profitable, also said it would stop work on one of the two luxury cars it has been developing for sale in North America, but would continue work on the other.


Finding a Way to Cope After Killing a Daughter
Daisy Hutson, the 68-year-old Queens woman who has told the police she fatally shot her crack-addicted daughter after enduring years of desperation and despair, said yesterday that she has had one sliver of comfort in her ordeal.
She has, she said, received hundreds of letters from people who have expressed sympathy and understanding, including many from those who have told their own stories of agony and bewilderment in trying to cope with children and other relatives ravaged by drugs.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Seibu Wins It in Japan  The Seibu Lions won the Japan Series for the third year in a row yesterday with a 10-inning, 2-1 victory over the Yakult Swallows in the seventh game.
It was the fourth extra-inning game in the series, but the first won by the Lions, winners of the Pacific League title.
The Swallows, the Central League champions, had tied the series with two straight 10-inning victories.
It was the fourth consecutive game decided by one run.
Hatsuhiko Tsuji scored the winning run after he had doubled and been bunted to third.
He scored on a sacrifice fly. (AP) TENNIS  A Save in Stockholm  Thomas Enqvist, the 1991 world junior champion from Sweden, saved three match points in beating Omar Camporese, 7-6 (8-6), 2-6, 7-6 (7-4), yesterday in the Stockholm Open.
Enqvist, ranked 62d in the world, next faces 10th-seeded MaliVai Washington, who had a first-round bye.
Serving at 5-6 in the final set, the 18-year-old Enqvist saved two of the three match points with booming serves.
On the third, Camporese missed an easy overhead.
The Italian, ranked No. 30, won the first point in the tie breaker, but Enqvist then hit another ace and never trailed the rest of the way.
Andrei Medvedev, also 18 and ranked 24th after winning three clay-court tournaments this year, eliminated Olivier Delaitre, 6-3, 6-2, and today will meet second-seeded Stefan Edberg.
Top-seeded Jim Courier, who has not competed since losing in the United States Open semifinals, will play tomorrow. (AP) HORSE RACING  Low Tolerance Wins  Low Tolerance, a shipper from Turfway Park in Kentucky and ridden by Jerry Bailey, streaked to a 2 1/2-length victory yesterday in the $47,000 La Corredora Handicap for fillies and mares at Aqueduct.
Lady Lear was second, and Maxamount third.
The victory was the fourth in 11 starts this year for Low Tolerance, who covered the mile and an eighth in 1:521/5 to earn $28,200 for Darby Dan Farm.
Low Tolerance returned $9.40 for $2 to win. (AP)


Attacks by Croatian Force Put New Strains on Bosnian Government's Unity
Deep divisions have opened within the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina as it struggles to cope with widening warfare between its military units and those of an ethnic Croatian force that has abandoned months of ambiguity and begun fighting openly for the ethnic partitioning of this former Yugoslav republic.
Croatian attacks on Bosnian Government troops and on Muslim townspeople and villagers across an arc of territory north, west and south of Sarajevo appear to have severely undermined, if not doomed, the alliance with Croatia on which Muslim leaders have relied throughout seven months of fighting with Serbian nationalist troops.


Towering Man-Made Nests Await Nurtured Eagles
Hidden deep in the dense marshlands of the Mississippi Gulf Coast, six man-made bald eagle nests, each weighing about 6,500 pounds, sit nearly complete atop 40-foot poles, awaiting their first occupants.
Looking a bit like baskets on a telephone pole, the aeries, woven of steel cables and tree saplings, blend into the terrain surprisingly well.
What scientists cannot predict is whether they will look like home to eagles.


Sports of The Times; Nagle's Quarterback Tutor
FOR the first time, Browning Nagle was under the Monday-night microscope.
And as the Jets lost to the Buffalo Bills, 24-20, their young quarterback emerged with a bruised shoulder, a bruised arch and a bruised learning experience.
Until he was removed with a damaged left shoulder late in the fourth quarter, Nagle completed 19 of 32 passes for 167 yards, but two interceptions sabotaged the Jets' chance of stealing a game from the defending American Conference champions.


Blackman to Miss Opener? Knicks Wince at the Thought
Rolando Blackman remained sidelined with back spasms today, and there is a possibility he might not be ready to play when the Knicks open the regular season in 11 days.
Blackman, who was expected to become the starting shooting guard after the Knicks acquired him in a trade last June, has missed all six preseason games and has not practiced since Oct. 14.
While Blackman said his back had improved during the last week, he still suffers pain whenever he moves suddenly.


Ex-Communists Ahead In Lithuanian Elections
Lithuanian voters, disenchanted with their failing economy and political bickering, gave a startling victory today to former Communists in the Baltic nation's first elections since independence.
In preliminary results, the Democratic Labor Party, a new group of reform-minded former Communists under Algirdas Brazauskas, won 44.7 percent of the vote and at least one-third of the 141 seats in Parliament.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; Source of Dirty Tricks Assertions Claims Life of Intrigue
The man at the center of new dirty-tricks accusations in the Presidential campaign is the owner of a dress shop in an isolated Arizona town who says he had a lurid international career as a secret agent.
The man is Scott Barnes, who Ross Perot said on Sunday was one of the people who told him Republicans were planning campaign dirty tricks aimed at Mr.
Perot's family and business.


Critic's Notebook; Pavarotti Lip-Syncs, And the Echoes Are Far-Reaching
The BBC, by all reports, is not happy with Luciano Pavarotti.
The British broadcasters bought the rights to a Sept. 27 concert in Modena, Italy, and discovered that the Italian tenor had silently moved his mouth (inexpertly, some of those present said) to recorded music.
Mr.
Pavarotti's part in this two-hour event was small, but the BBC paid for the real thing and wants some of its money back.
Mr.
Pavarotti says he did it because he had had no time to rehearse.
Deciding what the term "real thing" means has not been so easy since music first started using electrical current.
Once upon a simpler time, a musician made a noise and someone else's ears received it.
Now there are an awful lot of wires in between.
There is nothing artificial about them.
They have become part of the music.


The Game Looks to Foreign Fields
A major league all-star team with representatives from the World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays and the National League champion Atlanta Braves leaves for Japan today.
That is yet another sign that baseball, willingly or not, has embarked on an off season in which it will meet its future on many levels.
For the Japanese baseball powers did not even wait for the Toronto Blue Jays to win the first World Series played somewhere other than on American soil before expressing a desire to make this truly a world championship.


Benjamin Weiss, Investment Consultant, 82
Benjamin Weiss, a New York stock-market investor and art collector, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Past Murdoch Official Named Chief of a Rival
In an appointment that brought immediate protests, David Montgomery, a veteran of Rupert Murdoch's newspaper operations, has been named chief executive of the rival Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., the empire once controlled by the late Robert Maxwell.
One Mirror Group board member, Joe Haines, resigned over the appointment, saying it had been made by the banks that control the affairs of the group.


At Age 81, a Runner Can't Resist Her Old Pastime
When she was 75 years old and running her first New York City Marathon, Lois Schieffelin tripped on a sidewalk pothole, chipped her tooth and was escorted to an emergency room.
Schieffelin was so embarrassed by this fuss, she wore a Groucho Marx mask to the hospital.
She survived that ordeal in 1986, a wiser and sassier runner.


CHRONICLE
When runners in the New York City Marathon hit the eight-mile mark at Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues in Brooklyn on Sunday, they will be serenaded by the sporting melodies of JOHN TESH and his five-member band.
Known to television viewers as the co-host of the syndicated program "Entertainment Tonight," Mr.
Tesh also has a thriving career as a composer of music for sports events.
He has won two Emmy Awards, for the music he wrote for the telecasts of the Pan American Games in 1983 and for the Tour de France bicycle race in 1987.
He has just released his fourth album, "The Games," which features his music for last summer's Olympics in Barcelona.
He has also written television accompaniments to basketball, football, tennis, track and field events.


Teacher in Abuse Trial Says Woman Had Low Self-Esteem
A special-education teacher who taught the accuser in the Glen Ridge sex assault case described her today as an easily distracted and overly self-critical person with low self-esteem.
The witness, Jeanette DePalma, said the woman, who is mildly retarded with an I.Q. of 64, frequently said she was not performing as well as other mentally impaired students in her class.
Some of them often sought to encourage her, Mrs.
DePalma testified.


Royal Mistic Water Account in Review
Joseph Victori Wines in Maspeth, L.I., said yesterday that it had placed its Royal Mistic flavored spring water account in review, confirming a report in Adweek this week.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million, has been at Giganti Vaz &amp; Partners in Parsippany, N.J., for the last year.


Kohl Warns His Party of Higher Taxes and New Curbs on Migration
Chancellor Helmut Kohl told a party gathering today that the costs of rebuilding the ruined economy of the former East Germany had been so high since reunification that there was no way to avoid tax increases by 1995, and he also said that the country would face "a national state of emergency" unless the flow of asylum seekers into Germany were brought under control.
Speaking at the annual convention of his Christian Democratic Union, Mr.
Kohl conceded, as he has recently done several times, that rebuilding the industrial base of the formerly Communist part of Germany would cost more and take longer than the Government had predicted before unification two years ago.


Case of Teen-Ager in Crown Heights Killing Goes to Jury
After hearing prosecution and defense lawyers clash over inconsistencies in police testimony, a Brooklyn jury yesterday began weighing the fate of a black teen-ager accused of killing a Hasidic student during racial violence in Crown Heights.
Calling prosecution witnesses "damn liars," Arthur Lewis Jr., the defense attorney for Lemrick Nelson Jr., 17 years old, used his closing statement to depict a stumbling case filled with glaring inconsistencies and insufficient evidence.


American Express Posts Loss
The American Express Company announced late yesterday a $205 million loss in the third quarter because of expenses associated with its efforts to cut costs in its charge-card and travel businesses by closing offices, eliminating jobs and reducing other expenses.
Those expenses, called a restructuring charge by the company, totaled $342 million after taxes.
The company's charge-card business has been hurt by increased competition from banks and other credit-card issuers.
It said it expected to recover the restructuring charge by cutting $1 billion in expenses from the charge-card and travel businesses over the next three years.


No Headline
"If we have to take evasive action, the place to do it is out beyond Saturn. But we can leave that to our descendants." -- DR.
BRIAN G. MARSDEN, astronomer, of a comet aimed to strike Earth on Aug. 14, 2126.  [ C7:2. ]


Administration Denies Delaying Bank Action
The Bush Administration and banking regulators today denied charges that they had postponed closing ailing banks so as to push bad economic news until after Election Day.
At an unusual Congressional hearing just eight days before the polls open, the officials also defended their predictions that about 100 banks will be closed next year and criticized a recent study suggesting that up to 1,000 institutions would need to be closed in the coming years.


Educators, in Unusual Act, Endorse Clinton
More than 230 higher education officials, including 80 college presidents, broke from their usual nonpartisan political positions yesterday to endorse Gov.
Bill Clinton for President in a full-page advertisement believed to be the first of its kind.
"I feel the urgent need to speak out as an individual," Johnetta Cole, president of Spelman College in Atlanta, said at a news conference in Washington, "not because I happen to be a college president but because I am a concerned citizen who cares about the drift and despair in our society."


'Car Guy' Who Left Little Mark
In the end, the "car guy" never got a chance to show what he could do at the General Motors Corporation.
The formidable financial difficulties afflicting the auto maker swept away Robert C. Stempel, the chairman and chief executive, before he could put his stamp on the company's lineup of cars and trucks.
The mood in Detroit yesterday appeared to be one of sadness at the fate of a widely respected man thrust into what turned out to be an impossible situation.
Unlike his predecessor, Roger B. Smith, who was often depicted as a hot-tempered tyrant, Mr.
Stempel is well-liked by his colleagues, his competitors and rank and file workers.


The Flyers Have Lindros, but the Rangers Will Take the Goals
Neil Smith wouldn't call it a relief.
The Rangers' general manager watched Eric Lindros last night at Madison Square Garden.
He saw talent.
He saw power.
He saw a player he would like on his team.
But he also saw his Rangers rout the Flyers, 8-4, in the first meeting this season between the teams.
Philadelphia won the trade war last summer, getting Lindros from Quebec after an arbitrator was forced to sort out two Nordiques deals -- one with the Flyers, one with the Rangers -- and decide which would stand.
The Rangers won Round One on the ice.


By Design; Coats for Long Skirts
The first step to balancing the long-skirt silhouette was finding the right shoe.
Doing that got you halfway there.
But now that winter's coming, you'll have to work on the top half of your costume, which means finding the right coat or coverup.
What won't work is the boxy seven-eighths-length topper that was fine with knee-length hemlines.
Another proportion that doesn't cut it is a long skirt with a coat that ends right under the knee.
Both combinations look too sad-sacky for words.


Reporter's Notebook; Tourist in China: Akihito Does a Political Tiptoe
China is a big country to survey in six days, even if you are an emperor, travel on a personal Boeing 747 with an army of fretting chamberlains and speed to the Great Wall with thousands of Chinese paramilitary police lining both sides of the road for 50 miles.
But the challenge is even greater for Emperor Akihito of Japan, because every stop on his itinerary must serve an unstated agenda: to set aside China's fear that Asia's other great superpower still harbors the sense of cultural superiority, one that led it a generation ago to try to conquer the Middle Kingdom.


Paper Deal Could Be Undone by Unions
Even as Mortimer B. Zuckerman was telling reporters that "we are finally past the point of wondering whether the sale will go through," two possible snags remained to his purchasing The Daily News.
Both involve unions that have failed to come to terms with him.
The union representing the printers is planning to appeal a Federal bankruptcy judge's decision to approve the sale of The News to Mr.
Zuckerman, a real-estate developer who also owns U.S.
News &amp; World Report and The Atlantic Monthly.


Louise Zemlinsky, Portraitist and Voice Teacher, 92
Louise Zemlinsky, a portraitist and voice teacher, died on Oct. 19 at the Isabella House nursing home in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old.
Her death was announced yesterday.
She was the widow of the composer and conductor Alexander Zemlinsky, who died in 1942.


Evangelicals Gain With Covert Candidates
Janet Gastil, a 13-year incumbent with a safe seat on the La Mesa school board here in San Diego County, did not even realize she was facing serious opposition in the 1990 election until she woke up on the morning after the vote.
She had been defeated by an obscure fundamentalist Christian candidate who had avoided public appearances and had instead promoted himself in church newsletters, leaflets and "in-pew" registration at churches.


Market Place; A Sorry Record for G.M. Stock
The returns say it all: few stocks have been worse lemons in the last 10 years than that of the General Motors Corporation.
An investor who bought $100 worth of shares each in G.M., the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation at the end of 1982 could not have predicted how widely the returns would vary.
Not counting dividends, the $100 invested in Ford would now be worth $465.91.
The investment in Chrysler would also have fared well, now being worth $342.25.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Perot's Waves Prevent Political Sea's Clearing
Ross Perot has done it again.
With one aberrational political performance, he has sent the 1992 Presidential race spinning toward another week of uncertainty and frenzied polling.
With Mr.
Perot's latest allegations that the Bush campaign has been investigating him and plotting dirty tricks involving his family, the Texan has attempted to raise new questions about his hated opponent, George Bush.
But he has also managed to create new doubts about himself just as he was riding a new surge of approval.


Arnold Eagle, Cinematographer And Photographer, Is Dead at 82
Arnold Eagle, a documentary photographer in the 1930's and 40's who later worked as a cinematographer for Robert Flaherty and Hans Richter, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death has not been determined, said his wife, Dorothy, who announced the death yesterday.


Avard E. Fuller, 76, Fuller Brush Executive
Avard E. Fuller, a former chairman and president of the Fuller Brush Company and a son of Alfred C. Fuller, the company's founder, died Sunday in Daytona Beach, Fla.
He was 76 years old and lived in Westerly, R.I.
The Buckler-Johnston Funeral Home in Westerly reported his death yesterday and said the cause was a heart attack.


Why a Second Troupe Couldn't Use Delacorte
To the Editor:
"Why Ban Other Troupes From the Delacorte?" by Marjorie Heins (letter, Oct. 9) implies that New York City Parks and Recreation is flouting a State Supreme Court ruling that compels us to allow groups other than the New York Shakespeare Festival to use Central Park's Delacorte Theater.
The decision simply requires us to set out the contract terms of our agreement with the festival.
Full-scale dramatic productions require such activity before and after production as rehearsal and design, installation, breakdown and removal of sets.
On the days the Grass Roots Troupe performed in Central Park and Bryant Park, the Shakespeare Festival was completing the performance season and postproduction activities.
Thus, our inability to provide the Delacorte was not based on favoritism or other bias.


Sale of Daily News Approved by Court
Marking a new chapter in The Daily News's fight to regain financial health, a Federal bankruptcy judge cleared the way for the sale of the ailing newspaper to Mortimer B. Zuckerman.


What About the Children Left Behind?
School choice.
The Bush Administration and others have tightly embraced the idea as the most promising vehicle for education reform.
Its advocates insist that applying free market competition would make good schools even better and force weak schools to improve or shut down.
Now a report by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching puts choice in proper perspective: It is only one tool for reform, and unless managed carefully, risks harm.


Review/Music; Theme and Personality Merge in a Joint Recital
Music managers canvassing the world in search of engagements for their artists have a hard time selling song recitals, even when the musicians are a Dawn Upshaw and a Richard Goode.
Major instrumentalists (particularly if they have been seen on television) sell subscription series.
Listeners shy away from singers, put off perhaps by language barriers or simply the perceived label of "for connoisseurs only."
It is too bad that Sunday evening's concert at the 92d Street Y could not have been videotaped and sent off to various presenters as a marketing device.
It might have convinced the wary that there are ways to please audiences beyond the presentation of recognizable heroes in two-hour sound bites and that a concert of singing -- when given coherent themes and winning personalities -- can involve audiences and create shared events.


Abrams-D'Amato Race Becomes a Family Affair
The New York Senate campaign has just entered a new arena of ruthless, cutthroat competition.
It pits the Matriarch against the Modern American Wife, Mama vs.
Ms.
And it uses a gauzy new feel-good ad as an insidious weapon in an increasingly negative campaign.


Profit Down but Sales Up at P.&amp; G.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the maker of Ivory Soap and Tide detergent, said yesterday that its net income had fallen 19.6 percent in its fiscal first quarter, which ended Sept. 30, as a result of an extraordinary charge, but that revenue had risen 9.3 percent.
The consumer products giant said it had earned $431 million, or 60 cents a share, down from $536 million, or 76 cents a share, a year earlier.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday summarizing divisions within the New York City Board of Education referred incompletely to the position of Carol A. Gresser, the board member from Queens.
She opposes providing some explicit sexual information to young elementary school children.


Nassau Lawmakers Try to End Their Budget Deadlock
In the midst of a budget crisis, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors today approved hiring 250 county employees and borrowing $2.3 million to meet its payroll.
The actions came hours before the board began talks to find a long-term solution to the county's fiscal troubles.
The talks represented the first time in several months that Democrats and Republicans on the board have tried to find a compromise to a partisan budget deadlock.
But it was not clear whether the meeting this afternoon signaled an end to the feuding over who is to blame for the county's $130 million budget gap. 'A Political Circus'
Earlier in the day, the Republicans and Democrats on the board shouted at each other repeatedly in a two-hour meeting that had some people in the audience muttering that it was once again "chaos as usual." At one point, a frustrated citizen screamed, "Stop arguing and shut up," and the crowd of about 150 burst into applause.


Mysterious Democrat Comes Forth
Kevin G. Nealer, a Washington trade consultant, identified himself today as the mysterious Democrat whose meeting with European Community officials was blamed by Republicans over the weekend for the failure of world trade talks.
Mr.
Nealer said that in his meeting with the Europeans he had described the long-term political prospects for a trade deal only in very theoretical terms and had never intended to disrupt the trade talks.
Nor does he believe that he did disrupt them, Mr.
Nealer said.


Corrections
A picture in The Home Section on Thursday, with a report in the Currents column about a Metropolitan Transportation Authority program that finances temporary art for subway and railroad stations, was published in error.
The mural pictured is "Displacing Details" by Noel Copeland, who worked on it with children from the Henry Street Settlement.
It is on display at the Delancey Street station, on the F train line.


Accounts
*
Symantec Corp., Cupertino, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, for its estimated $5 million account, previously at Pinne/Herbers, San Francisco.
Goldberg Moser won the software manufacturer and marketer's account after a review in which the other finalist was DGWB Inc., Irvine, Calif.


An I.B.M, by Any Other Name
THE International Business Machines Corporation, fighting back against the clone industry that it spawned a decade ago, has introduced a new family of low-cost computers called PS/ValuePoints.
The ValuePoints do not blaze any new technological trails, but the I.B.M. nametag, the pricing and the way the computers will be sold are all significant.
Prices for the new computers start as low as $1,300 for a simple DOS system built around I.B.M.'s enhanced version of the Intel 386SX processor.
A PS/ValuePoint based on the more powerful i486DX chip, with eight megabytes of system memory, a 120-megabyte hard disk and the OS/ 2 operating system, costs $1,999.


Review/Television; 2 Imaginary Campaigns Put Women At Center
Tonight two new television movies look at American politics through the prism of fictional Presidential campaigns.
Some of the more general conclusions: Politicians are treacherous, if not downright murderous; no issue is hotter than national health insurance, and voters are lusting for change.
Unfortunately, television viewers may simply settle for changing channels.
On CBS at 9, "The President's Child" has taken a Fay Weldon novel, changed its plot, locations and character names, and stitched together an outlandish thriller starring Donna Mills, William Devane and James Read.
In Lifetime's "Majority Rule," also at 9, Blair Brown, a k a Molly Dodd, plays a United States Army general, a hero in the Persian Gulf, who becomes the first woman to run for President.
"If you want change," she announces, "I am change."


Honors
*
Schweitzer, senior vice president of CBS marketing and communications, New York, was named Entertainment Marketer of the Year by EPM Communications and Entertainment Weekly at the fourth annual Entertainment Marketing Conference in Los Angeles. *
The Uniworld Group, New York, took top honors at the 15th annual Communications Excellence to Black Audiences awards show, winning 17 awards.
The corporate award winners were the American Honda Motor Company and the McDonald's New York Cooperative.


Jerome Andrews, 84, Choreographer, Dies
Jerome Andrews, an American dancer and choreographer who taught modern dance in France after moving there in 1952, died yesterday in Paris.
He was 84 years old.
No cause of death was given.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Year of the Woman and the Odd Couple
More evidence that 1992 is the Year of the Woman in politics:
When Barbara Boxer, the California Representative from the Bay area, and Dianne Feinstein, the former San Francisco Mayor, both won Democratic Senate primaries last spring, it seemed only a matter of time before they would be sniping at each other as often as at their Republican adversaries because they had done so in the past.


Connecticut Senate Candidates Debate (Politely)
Connecticut's Senate candidates, who have attacked and ridiculed each other in television commercials in recent weeks, were absolute gentlemen tonight in a muted, polite debate before a statewide television audience.
The Democratic incumbent, Christopher J. Dodd, and the Republican challenger, Brook Johnson, did disagree on some issues -- notably how and which types of capital gains taxes might best be cut to stimulate the economy, and whether a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution would really help reduce the nation's budget deficit.
Mr.
Dodd called the amendment idea a gimmick; Mr.
Johnson said it would force lawmakers to focus on the task of budget cutting.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Perot's 30-Minute TV Ads Defy the Experts, Again
Even before channel-surfing became a national sport in this country, the paid political program had fallen out of favor.
Most viewers, the conventional wisdom went, would turn off such a program.
And those who did not were probably already supporting the candidate on the screen, anyway.
Then in early October, Ross Perot went on the air with a set of cardboard graphics and 16.5 million people tuned in for what amounted to a 30-minute lecture.
Since then, Mr.
Perot's paid political programs have consistently outdrawn many sit-coms. (On Friday night, a half-hour program in which Mr. Perot introduced his family attracted 10.5 million viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research.)


SHAKE-UP AT G.M.: The Economy's Seat on the Board; Any G.M. Strategy Will Be Dictated by the Weak U.S. Market
No matter who takes over at General Motors as Robert C. Stempel's replacement, or how good he is, the new chairman will be locked into a corporate strategy even before he takes command -- a strategy dictated by the nation's weak economy.
Simply stated, G.M. waited too long for ballooning sales to save the day.
Americans are buying cars and trucks at an annual rate of barely 13 million a year, far from the 15 million in the late 1980's had created enough demand to mask G.M.'s numerous inefficiencies.
And sales are likely to remain weak for months to come.


Unusual Clues Help In Long Fight to Solve Huntington's Disease
Based on clues from stumbling cows, sugar cane mold and the unusual genetics of a constituent that supplies power to every cell of the human body, neuroscientists say they are closer to solving the puzzle of Huntington's disease.
People have been hunting for the gene that causes Huntington's since 1983, said Dr.
Anne Young, a Harvard University neuroscientist and a leading expert on degenerative brain diseases.
It now looks as though the gene may be involved with mitochondria, cell constituents that make energy and drive life processes.


INSIDE
Former Communists Winning in Lithuania
Lithuanian voters chose a party of reform-minded former Communists to govern, preliminary results indicated.
The outcome in the legislative elections was a blow to Vytautas Landsbergis, who defied Moscow and then swept to power over the same opponents in 1990.
Page A10.
Good Budget News in Albany
New York State's leaders, who for four years faced huge midyear deficits, announced that they were facing something new: a surplus.
Page B1.
A Comet on the Way
Astronomers report a 1-in-10,000 chance of a catastrophic collision between Earth and a comet in 134 years.
Science Times, page C7.
Trump Plan Clears Hurdle
New York's Planning Commission voted unanimously for a scaled-down version of Donald J. Trump's Riverside South development.
Page B3.


An Heir Apparent Who May Leap From Selling Soap to Cars
John G. Smale, the 65-year-old former chairman of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company who has played a leading role in the management shake-up at the General Motors Corporation, is known for having a voracious appetite for tackling thorny problems.
But amid speculation that he may take over as chairman of the troubled auto maker from Robert C. Stempel, who resigned yesterday as chairman and chief executive, there are questions about whether Mr.
Smale can make the leap from selling soap to selling cars.


Iraqi Kurds Report Capturing Big Base Of Turkish Kinsmen
A senior Kurdish official said today that Iraqi Kurds had captured the main base of Turkish Kurdish separatists in Iraq after fighting for three weeks to oust them from strongholds along Iraq's border with Turkey.
"We received a telegram this afternoon saying their resistance has collapsed in the Khwakurk valley," said Hoshyar Zebari, spokesman for one of the Kurds' two main parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party.
The valley is in Iraq's mountainous northeastern corner near Iran and Turkey.


Judge Allows Zuckerman To Buy News
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday cleared the way for the sale of The Daily News to Mortimer B. Zuckerman, marking a new chapter in the ailing newspaper's long struggle to regain financial health.
"We swept the boards," Mr.
Zuckerman said jubilantly hours after Judge Tina L. Brozman rejected moves by two of the bankrupt newspaper's unions to block the sale.
She said she planned to sign certification papers making the sale official after clearing up some minor technicalities.


Don't Let F.D.A. Get Cosier With Drugmakers
To the Editor:
Re "Senate Passes Bill to Charge Makers for Drug Approval" (front page, Oct. 8): While the prescription drug user fee bill will generate needed revenue for the Food and Drug Administration, it blurs the boundaries between the agency and the industry it is charged with regulating.
The act recognizes that Federal budget constraints, public health concerns and a prolific biotechnology industry have placed demands on the F.D.A. that it is unable to meet.
To help, government and industry have suggested drug companies pay for the approval process on new drugs.


Leading Off, Playing The Field, It's Bonds
During the National League playoff, Barry Bonds talked about what a great city Pittsburgh was and how sad he would be to leave it.
But he evidently has decided he is leaving because, his agent said yesterday, he has put his house in a Pittsburgh suburb up for sale.
Bonds and Doug Drabek, the Pirates' best hitter and best pitcher, filed for free agency yesterday, the second day of the 15-day filing period but the first day that players submitted their names.


CHRONICLE
ANDREW HEISKELL has stepped down as chairman of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation, the organization he founded 12 years ago to transform the park from a seedy drug haven to an oasis of greenery and culture.
He has been succeeded by MICHAEL FUCHS, the chairman of HBO.
Mr.
Heiskell, the former chairman and chief executive of Time Inc., recalled that when he became chairman of the New York Public Library, in 1980, "Bill Dietel, who was head of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, said casually to me, 'If you're going to save the library, then you must save Bryant Park.'


Abrams's Pattern of Late Taxes
Several times over the last five years, State Attorney General Robert Abrams was late in paying school and property taxes on a country house in northern Dutchess County, and he incurred slightly less than $300 in penalties, a spokesman for his campaign said yesterday.
The spokesman, Timothy Gilles, said the late payments, for which Mr.
Abrams and his wife Diane were charged a penalty of 2 percent a month, came as a result of "two extraordinarily busy people falling behind occasionally on their stacks of mail."


BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., a New York-based financial services company 60 percent owned by Dai-Ichi Kangyo and 40 percent owned by Chemical Banking Corp., is offering $100 million of 5.5 percent notes due in 1995 at a price of 99.746 to yield 5.593 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Exide Corp., Reading, Pa., a leading battery manufacturer, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $150 million of senior unsecured notes due in 2002 and $110 million principal amount of subordinated deferred coupon debentures due in 2004 through Morgan Stanley.


Sports Briefings; Atlanta Looks To '96 Stadium
The stadium proposed for the 1996 Summer Olympics drew enthusiastic comments today from officials who got a look at plans for the 85,000-seat, three-tiered oval featuring exterior staircases.
After the Games, the Atlanta Braves would move there from Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.
The Braves have not agreed to the stadium design, which calls for 45,000 to 48,000 seats for baseball.
But a team official said there appeared to be no major obstacles to approving the project.


Striking a Political Note, Stumbling on a Pronoun
"It's our party and we'll win if we want to," bellowed the singer Lesley Gore, who wore a black tuxedo jacket, shiny black ski pants and couture combat boots to the first recording session of the Clintones yesterday.
The all-woman band of more than 100, brought together to record two songs to benefit the Presidential campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton, was a tableau of model-height women at BMG studios in Manhattan.
Ms.
Gore compensated for her diminutive stature by belting out the 1992 re-write of her famous refrain: "Win if we want to. Win if we want to."


Pothole Committee Does a Necessary Job
To the Editor:
In "Clumsy? Sue New York City" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30), Saul B. Shapiro complains that the city's prior written notice law (the so-called pothole law, which requires written notice of a street or sidewalk defect as a prerequisite to suing for personal injuries caused by such defect) "has been all but eviscerated by the Big Apple Pothole and Sidewalk Protection Committee, a corporation established by trial lawyers that pays its employees to comb New York's streets and report any defects to the city." This, Mr.
Shapiro says, is a bad thing because "you can slip or fall virtually anywhere in the metropolitan area and the city will be 'on notice' of any defect that caused your injury."
Mr.
Shapiro states that the city can't afford the personal injury suits brought by people injured as a result of the condition of the streets and sidewalks, and we should take away the victim's right to trial by jury to stop the injustice.


Industry Fights Massachusetts Plan on Recycling
Now that recycling has became popular, many consumers here neatly sort their paper, glass, plastics and other material and feel they have done their part to save the environment.
But the sorted trash still ends up in incinerators and landfills, environmentalists say, because there is no market for the material.
Environmentalists are trying to change that with a ballot referendum, sponsored by Gov.
William F. Weld, one that advocates and opponents agree would be the most sweeping recycling and repackaging measure in the country.


Equipment for Heavy-Duty Windows Cleaning
WINDOWS looks clean and uncluttered, but it still needs occasional straightening up, and the program does not make housekeeping particularly easy.
The opening screen of XTree for Windows, the Windows version of an old friend from pre-Windows days, is not at all uncluttered, but it lends itself to heavy-duty house-cleaning: finding, copying, moving, renaming, deleting and just about anything else you can do to a file, directory or disk.


Mets Trade for Another Fernandez: Tony, Shortstop
In their latest effort to restore the club to genuine competitiveness, the Mets acquired veteran shortstop Tony Fernandez yesterday in a trade with the San Diego Padres.
It was a deal more opportunistic than bold, but it was also a trade that couldn't be argued with.
The Mets sent right-handed pitcher Wally Whitehurst, outfield prospect D. J. Dozier and a player to be named to the Padres for Fernandez, a 30-year-old shortstop who has pop left in his bat and life in his legs.
"A no-brainer," Gerry Hunsicker, the vice president for baseball operation for the Mets, said of the deal. 1992 Average: .275
Fernandez, regarded as one of the superior all-round shortstops of the last decade, hit .275 with 32 doubles and 4 home runs this last season, his second in San Diego after seven years with Toronto.
Fernandez, a switch-hitter, was the leadoff man for an explosive Padres club and wound up stealing 20 bases and scoring 84 runs.
His .275 batting average was the fifth best in the major leagues among regular shortstops, third best in the National League.


2 Rare Candidates Battle in Wisconsin
A Republican Congressman who trumpets abortion rights is rare.
A female American Indian running for Congress is even rarer.
Except in Madison, the Midwest's enduring boutique of flower power, where Representative Scott L. Klug and Ada Deer are competing in one of the more unconventional House races this year.


Voters Assailed By Unfair Persuasion
ONCE again it is the season to beware the Big Lie, "granfalloons" and the fear-appeal technique.
These are but a few of the propaganda devices that psychologists are warning about in anticipation of an advertising blitz in the last days of this year's election campaigns.
Of course, it is every candidate's proper task to sway voters.
But psychologists who study persuasion techniques caution that many political advertisements are unfair appeals to bias and emotion, distortions of logic intended to subvert the reasoned evaluation that ideally lies at the heart of the democratic process.


People
*
Frank Fleizach and Bob Needleman, executive vice presidents and group creative directors, are leaving Lintas New York after 17 months.
A Lintas spokeswoman confirmed a report of the resignations in Adweek this week, adding that successors had not been named. *
David Metcalf, co-creative director at Lowe &amp; Partners, resigned, effective on Friday.
Mr.
Metcalf, who had worked for Lowe and a predecessor shop, Lowe Tucker Metcalf, since 1987, said he would disclose his plans shortly.


Sports Briefings; Injuries Force Oberlin to Forfeit
Oberlin College said today it would forfeit its North Coast Conference football game at Wittenberg on Saturday because of injuries that have left only 13 healthy players on the roster.
The forfeit extends Oberlin's losing streak to 26 games in a row, including seven this season.
Oberlin entered last Saturday's game with Allegheny with 29 players on the roster.
A trainer's report said 16 players were injured in the 56-0 loss and would be unable to play at Wittenberg.
The game will be counted as a forfeit to Wittenberg, which shares the conference lead with Ohio Wesleyan.


Review/Television; The High Cost of Playing Politics
The title of tonight's "Frontline" offering, "The Best Campaign Money Can Buy," is double edged.
The program shows how six-figure contributions not only finance the campaigns of Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush but also buy influence for the contributors.
This only too relevant hourlong documentary, co-produced by the Center for Investigative Reporting, gives troubling examples of the deals available to members of groups like the Managing Trustees (contributors of at least $200,000 to the Democrats) and the Team 100 (contributors of at least $100,000 to the Republicans).


Lilco Granted Tax Refund On Shoreham Power Plant
A state judge ruled today that the utility that built the ill-fated Shoreham nuclear power plant was entitled to a refund of some of the $700 million in property taxes it paid on the plant, which was shut down before it ever generated a dollar's worth of electricity.
In his ruling, Justice Thomas M. Stark of State Supreme Court in Riverhead found that the Long Island Lighting Company was entitled to a refund of at least $55 million, including interest, on taxes paid in the early years of the plant's construction.


Executive Changes
AVON PRODUCTS, New York, named Siri Marshall senior vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary.
FIRST UNION CORP., Charlotte, N.C., a bank holding company, named Leonard F. Springs senior vice president.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Styles of the Times on Oct. 18, about jewelry charms sold to benefit two organizations that help people with AIDS keep their pets, misidentified one group.
It is Pets Are Wonderful Support, or Paws.


Q&amp;A
Animal Tears
Q.  Do other mammals shed tears when wailing the way humans do?
A.
Zoo authorities say they have not observed any overwrought orangutans shedding tears.


Budget Surplus Is Projected By Analysts In New York
New York State's leaders, who for the last four years faced massive midyear budget deficits that spurred bitter political fights and painful spending cuts, announced today that they were facing something all but forgotten in the Capitol: a budget surplus.
The surplus, while negligible in size, nonetheless indicates that the state's $30.9 billion budget is in balance.
That alone suggests a significant turnaround not only in the state government's financial condition, but also in the way it approaches budgeting.


Florida Paper Tests Service: Information by '511' Number
In a potentially significant action, utility regulators in Florida are letting a newspaper use an easy-to-remember "511" telephone number so its readers can call for faxes and other information about news and sports reports and advertisements.
The Florida Public Service Commission voted last week to let The Palm Beach Post, part of the Cox Newspaper chain in Atlanta, offer the service temporarily in West Palm Beach.
The commission typically allows such experiments for two years but can withdraw permission at any time, especially if the Federal Communications Commission makes a conflicting ruling.


Corrections
An article yesterday about governorship races this year misstated the current party breakdown for the 12 governorships at stake.
Six are now held by Democrats and six by Republicans.


E.P.A. ISSUES RULE TO CUT ACID RAIN
The Environmental Protection Agency, in the first of several clean-air rules being issued between now and the election, established regulations today that will eventually cut in half permissible emissions of sulfur dioxide, a chemical that causes acid rain.
The rule, which will take until the year 2010 to reach its goal, also allows utilities to buy and sell pollution allowances.


Sex Harassment and Men in Power
Mayor David Dinkins's appointment of Randy Daniels as his new Deputy Mayor of New York City was bungled from the beginning.
Mr.
Daniels was obliged to step down yesterday, driven out after a former subordinate confirmed reports that she had accused him of sexual harassment five years ago.
Whether Mr.
Daniels has been wrongly accused is not known.
But if public officials had treated the accusation seriously and investigated thoroughly, some of the damage to Mr.
Daniels and his accuser, Barbara Wood, might have been avoided.


Dinkins Appointee Withdraws Over Allegation of Harrassment
Bowing to intense pressure, Randy Daniels withdrew as a deputy mayor of New York City yesterday, indicating that his effectiveness as a media and community affairs adviser to Mayor David N. Dinkins had been destroyed by allegations that he sexually harassed a woman who worked for him five years ago.
The Mayor, announcing the decision at a City Hall news conference that Mr.
Daniels did not attend, stressed that the allegations remained unsubstantiated and that Mr.
Daniels continued to insist he had been falsely accused and would fight to clear his name.


Can We, on the Other Hand, Trust Bush?
To the Editor:
I am amazed at how much ammunition a candidate's camp in this Presidential campaign gives its opponents.
For example, Mary Matalin, political director of the Bush-Quayle campaign, complains in "Clinton Mugs Bush" (Op-Ed, Oct. 13) that the Bush campaign was assaulted unfairly for questioning Gov.
Bill Clinton's actions during the Vietnam War.
She justifies the attacks on Mr.
Clinton's character by asserting, "If you cannot trust a candidate's statements about his past, you certainly cannot trust his promises for the future."
Be careful, Ms.
Matalin.
If that's the standard you set for Mr.
Clinton, your candidate must be prepared to be measured by the same standard.
And we cannot trust George Bush's statements about his past, specifically his involvement and knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Shake-Up at G.M.
Robert C. Stempel resigned as G.M.'s chairman and chief executive amid speculation of his imminent dismissal and a failure by the board of the world's largest manufacturer to give him a public vote of confidence.  [ Page A1. ]
No matter who replaces Mr.
Stempel, the chairman is locked into a corporate strategy even before he takes command -- namely, stopping the financial bleeding.
News Analysis.  [ D6. ]


ITALY SHOPOWNERS PROTEST TAX PLAN
For most Italians, the country's street-corner grocery stores, the "alimentari," are as familiar as the pasta and prosciutto they sell, or the high prices they charge, or the cool off-hand manners that tell the customer who really comes first.
But today the shopkeepers turned really mean.


Handley Says Home Isn't What It Used to Be
In their rich and erratic history, the Giants have a rich and erratic record of fan support.
Fans are now in a booing mode with this 3-4 team that has alternated losing and winning its last six games.


Space Station, Promised for '92, Is Still Mostly on Drawing Board
THIS is the year the space station was to begin flying as an orbital outpost for American astronauts, opening a new era of exploration in time for the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the New World.
NASA laid out the plan in 1984, saying the venture would cost $8 billion and take eight years.


Britain Traded Export Permits for Iraqi Arms Data
As part of an intelligence-gathering effort, the British Government helped Iraq build up its military forces in the years before the invasion of Kuwait in 1990 by allowing the illegal sale of arms-manufacturing equipment to Baghdad, according to evidence presented in a little-noticed trial here.
The case involves a British-based company that sold millions of dollars of machine tools to Iraq that were used to make arms.
According to British Government documents, two executives of the company provided British intelligence with frequent reports on the company's activities and on Iraq's efforts to obtain weapons technology.
To maintain the intelligence connection, the Government permitted improper sales to be made, the documents show.


CANADIANS REJECT CHARTER CHANGES
Canadian voters, after a bitter national referendum campaign, today rejected a complex constitutional package aimed at cooling secessionist passions in Quebec and preserving the country's unity.
The results were a stunning defeat for the country's political leadership, which had counted on the accord they forged at Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, two months ago to finally end the country's perennial constitutional wrangling.


Campus Journal; Taking U.F.O.'s for Credit, and for Real
Every fall semester at Temple University, Prof.
David M. Jacobs exposes himself to ridicule by teaching a course entitled "Unidentified Flying Objects in American Society." This year he made himself more vulnerable by asserting in a book that extra-terrestrials are among us and doing vile things.
"We have been invaded," he writes. "They want human sperm and eggs."


Business Technology; Seeking Concrete's Cause of Death
Mauro J. Scali stared suspiciously at the image on his video screen.
It looked like a well-marbled block of pate, but was actually a magnified view of a concrete sample sawed a few days earlier from a defective slab outside a warehouse in Virginia.
"I'd rather not say exactly where," said Mr.
Scali, whose work as a coroner of concrete requires considerable discretion -- and the occasional legal deposition.
He would not identify the client, either, but his samples usually come from the ready-mix supplier or the contractor, often arriving by overnight mail and sometimes by anxious courier.


Misty Memories From Deep Storage
Taking pictures has become progressively easier through the development of simple point-and-shoot and fully automated 35-millimeter cameras.
But methods of displaying pictures have not kept pace.
Albums, venerable but bulky, are hard to keep current.
And the main alternative, looking at slides, requires setting up equipment.
No wonder most photographs end up in shoe boxes.
Now a device that is just coming to market combines some of the features of a picture frame and an album.
It is called Showbox, and it can hold and sequentially display up to 40 snapshots.
In an era when electronics are increasingly becoming part of photography, it is completely mechanical.


Perot Spending More on Ads Than Any Candidate Before
Since re-entering the Presidential race at the beginning of the month, Ross Perot has embarked on what is likely to prove to be, week by week, the most expensive political advertising campaign in the history of the country.
In the first two weeks of this month, Mr.
Perot spent $24 million on commercials.
According to campaign disclosures received Monday by the Federal Election Commission, he spent almost $10.8 million over the next 10days.
On Monday night alone, he spent almost $1 million for an hourlong paid program on ABC.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
KNICKS -- Named Dennis D'Agostino director of publications and information.
Named Ed Oliva manager of community programs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Uses Latest Economic Figure to Support His Assertion of a Recovery
Searching for ways to undermine Gov.
Bill Clinton's appeal to recession-weary voters, President Bush today eagerly seized on an increase in economic growth to proclaim that the American economy is growing and "will lead the world to recovery."
Mr.
Bush spent most of the day steering away for from the feud that erupted over the weekend with Ross Perot over campaign dirty tricks, although he did keep the dispute alive early in day when he referred to Mr.
Perot's accusations as "crazy" on national television.


Correction


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.12
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.97
4.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.22
4.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.31
6.41
7.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.61
7.66
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.69
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.69
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Senators Ask Group to Set Partnership Roll-Up Rules
After Congress failed to pass legislation to regulate part of the securities industry, 18 Senators asked private industry this month to adopt similar rules voluntarily to deal with a type of restructuring for limited partnerships known as roll-ups.
By sending the letter to the National Association of Securities Dealers, the 18 Senators signaled that the self-regulatory organization may be in a better position than Congress to prevent abuses in the roll-ups of limited partnerships, a popular investment vehicle from the 1980's, often used as tax shelters.


Authorities Describe New York City Gang As 'Crash and Carry'
From the time they were teen-agers until their early 30's, they ran their operation like a business.
They worked in teams.
They assigned lookouts to see that the coast was clear.
Then, the authorities say, they would crash cars or vans into a fur salon or a jewelry store, a SoHo art gallery or an out-of-the-way Queens warehouse.
As glass rained down around them and alarm bells clanged in the night, they would snatch as many high-priced items as they could: mink coats, oil paintings, compact disks.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; He's on Every State Ballot, If Not on Every Voter's Lips
Andre Marrou is the other third-party candidate for President also securely listed on all 50 state ballots, the one who has actually gone out campaigning among the people every day for the last year without benefit of fortune, fame or faux pas.
Out here on his modestly buntinged campaign stage, Mr.
Marou, a gray-bearded politician openly anointed by a party convention serious enough to be on C-Span, has to field questions on why he never got into the national television debates and why he is denied portentous coverage of his strategy and coterie, of his negative and positive cuteness, and of his irreverence toward the bipartisan presumptions of politics.


Water Rates Also Hurt Low-Income Landlords
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 8 report that New York City water rates are pinching low-income co-ops ignores the harm rising rates are causing low-income privately owned rental housing.


Theater in Review
Yunus  La Mama E.T.C.
Annex Theater 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday Text by Yunus Emre; adaption, direction, music and lyrics by Ellen Stewart.
Based on translations by Talat Halman, Huseyn Kat and Erol Keskin; arrangements and additional music by Genji Ito and Yukio Tsuji; Turkish music, Ayla Algan and Ali Altunmese; set realization by David Adams, Jun Maeda and Mark Tambella; puppets by Sylvia Yalkin; costumes by Selcuk Gurisik; lighting by Howard Thies; sound by Tim Schellenbaum.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C., in association with Ya Da Tiyatro and T.A.L.
WITH: Ayla Algan, Beklan Algan, Mustafa Avkiran, Du Yee Chang, Rose Davis, Abba Elethea, Kaan Erten, Nadi Guler, Levent Guner, Jonathan Hart, Susan Huffaker, Huseyin Katircioglu, Erol Keskin, Asli Ongoren, Andrea Paciotto, Aka Shigeko Suga, Berk Sonmez, Zisan Ugurlu, Ching Valdes-Aran and Devin Yalkin.


Review/Theater: Spic-o-Rama; Making the Most of Dysfunctionality
John Leguizamo arrives on stage in "Spic-o-Rama" like a hip-hop star, leaping and bouncing in the flash of strobe lights to thunderous music and the cheers of fans.
Which makes it all the more amazing when the music fades, and the performer metamorphoses into the first of six characters in his new one-man show: 9-year-old Miggy, a bespectacled, geeky boy with a high-pitched voice, a serious overbite and floppy hands.
Mr.
Leguizamo is a star, no question -- he doesn't need a strobe to burn bright -- but he also announces himself from that moment as an actor of phenomenal range.
And there's 100 minutes of his tour de force still to come.
"Spic-o-Rama," which is at the Westside Theater, picks up where his previous survey of Hispanic New Yorkers, "Mambo Mouth," left off.
This time Mr.
Leguizamo's writing is more ambitious.
The evening is not a series of sketches but a play of sorts, complete with a Loy Arcenas set that impressionistically evokes an entire neighborhood.
All six characters in "Spic-o-Rama" belong to a Jackson Heights family that is preparing for the wedding of its oldest son.
As each relative takes a turn at center stage, the audience pieces together the full psychological portrait of a household that may give new meaning to the Spanish word for dysfunctional.


Federal Health Officials Propose An Expanded Definition of AIDS
Bowing to pressures from patients, doctors and others, Federal health officials yesterday proposed a new definition of AIDS that is expected almost to double the number of cases reported next year by including many more women and drug abusers.
The definition proposed yesterday by the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta is expected to have an important effect on public policy.
With a larger percentage of women and intravenous drug users among the total cases, it could lead to more spending for care and prevention for those groups.


Will the Games Begin in '94?
National Hockey League players might participate in the 1994 Olympics, but league owners and executives who oppose the idea had plenty to say yesterday at a Board of Governors' meeting in New York.
The issue has many ramifications.
It could become a litmus test of support for Gil Stein, the league's interim president, who has been campaigning to become the first commissioner.
He has been a strong advocate for Olympic participation.


Albert Bosco Reyes, Director, 51
Albert Bosco Reyes, a playwright, director and founder of the Nat Horne Musical Theater and School, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of stomach cancer, said Nat Horne, a co-founder of the theater that bears his name.
It is the second oldest active member of the Theater Row Association on West 42d Street, of which Mr.
Reyes was a founding board member.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about a law professor who lived in Staten Island and was twice an unsuccessful candidate for Congress in the 1950's rendered his name incorrectly.
He was Vincent R. FitzPatrick.


Decision to Burn Dioxin Divides Arkansas Town
After years of community strife and scientific dispute, environmental officials in Arkansas today gave final approval to the largest project ever undertaken in the United States to burn chemical wastes contaminated with dioxin.
An incinerator at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company pesticide plant in the heart of this city of 29,000 people will begin burning the wastes on Thursday, the officials said.
The old plant, once owned by a subsidiary of the Hercules Chemical Company, made Agent Orange defoliants used in the Vietnam War.


Corrections
A picture grouping on Saturday with an article about the race for Nassau County Clerk omitted one of the four candidates.
He is Jack Olchin of the Liberal Party.
His picture appears today on page B6.


In the Battle Over Riverside South, the City Could Be the Winner
When the New York City Council considers Riverside South, Donald J. Trump's 57-acre mixed-use development project, on the Upper West Side, what is at stake is more than Mr.
Trump's ambitions for the site.
The project is an opportunity to look toward broader urban policy issues.
What if the tables were turned in the review process?
What if this fiercely contested site, the target of heated debate for more than a generation, were given the opportunity to express its opinion about the way we plan and build cities?
How would
it
rate
us
?


For Congress From New York
New York has more unpredictable Congressional contests this year because of redistricting.
Here are recommendations in some contested races in New York City and in districts that include city and suburban neighborhoods.
Fifth District (Queens, Nassau and Suffolk):
Gary Ackerman, a Democrat, is running for a sixth term in a reapportioned district that now stretches into Long Island, well beyond his old Queens base.
Mr.
Ackerman worked effectively on famine relief and the plight of Ethiopian Jews, but his record is otherwise unremarkable.


Corrections
An illustration in Weekend on Friday with a review of an exhibition of early works of Robert Rauschenberg was positioned erroneously.
The left edge should have been shown as the bottom.


40 Years of Glory in the New Elizabethan Age
Even the Queen of England has her bad days, and in the last few months Elizabeth II has had more than her share.
But on Monday night, friends and subjects assembled in the vast Earls Court arena for a grand celebration of the 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne, a spectacle that was part royal pageantry and part half-time show at the Orange Bowl.


Truman Didn't Have to Overtake Dewey
To the Editor:
President Bush has repeatedly likened his campaign to the "come from behind" victory of Harry S. Truman in 1948.
Someone ought to tell the President that it is almost certain that Harry Truman did not come from behind.


From Warm Letters to Cold Warring, Romance Fades
With flowers in hand, Donald Davis, a 54-year-old Orange County truck driver, went to the airport last month to meet his fiancee.
It was the first time he had set eyes on Natalya Sadchikova, a 42-year-old woman he had seen in a catalogue of prospective mail-order brides from the former Soviet Union -- the dreamy, downtrodden Natasha whose poetic letters had charmed him during their two-year correspondence.
They shook hands and he brought her home, along with her 3-year-old daughter, Alina.


Sports Injuries to the Young Are Up Sharply, Doctors Say
ADULTS recall childhood as an endless blur of running and jumping, full of little cuts and bruises, but blissfully free of those nagging injuries that follow exercise later in life -- tendinitis, bursitis and stress fractures.
Now, however, orthopedists and pediatricians say these injuries are cropping up with alarming frequency in children: from stress fractures of the lower spine in young gymnasts to shoulder tendinitis in swimmers to shin splints in aspiring marathoners.


Pazienza to Fight Santana Next Month
VINNY PAZIENZA, former World Boxing Association welterweight champion, has signed to fight LUIS SANTANA of New York in a 10-round bout next month, a promoter said yesterday.
The nontitle bout is set for Dec. 15 at the Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino in Ledyard, Conn.
It will be televised nationally on the USA Network, according to LOU DUVA, Pazienza's promoter.
Both boxers will fight as junior middleweights at around 154 pounds, Duva said.


Exports by U.S. Aided Iraq 'Super Gun,' House Banking Chief Says
The Bush Administration in 1989 approved the export of American computers and missile-design software that were used to develop a high-powered Iraqi weapon known as the "super gun," the head of the House Banking committee said today.
The chairman, Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, charged that the computers and software for the weapon -- which could be fired on Israel and other Middle Eastern nations -- were approved for sale even though they had clear military applications and were obviously destined ultimately for Iraqi use.


Life of Acquisitions, on a Grand Scale
ACCORDING to Kenneth A. Lohf, there "definitely is such a thing as an acquisitive instinct," and he should know.
Mr.
Lohf, who is retiring next month as the rare book and manuscript librarian at Columbia University, has in 23 years more than doubled the university's collection of rare books by adding 275,000 volumes while increasing the number of manuscripts and documents from 3 million to 24 million.
This reflects a remarkable rate of acquisition -- 12,000 rare books a year, or 32 a day; 913,000 manuscripts a year, or 2,500 daily.
And while Mr.
Lohf was amassing such treasures for Columbia, he was spending his free time and much of his librarian's income building a private collection of several thousand volumes of works by England's soldier poets of this century.


Metropolitan Diary
WOLFE is a Wolfe is a Wolfe: Kenneth Kowald observed two elderly gentlemen on an obviously nostalgic visit to the Lower East Side Tenement Museum.
As they left, he overheard:
First man: "You must admit, that man was right."


O'Brien Looking Ahead With a Vengeance to '96
Dan O'Brien, world-record holder and tragic hero of Madison Avenue, is an outspoken man with a four-year makeup plan.
He thinks the Olympic decathlon in Barcelona, Spain, was lackluster without him.
He predicts that his ex-admate, Dave Johnson, will not be much of a factor by the 1996 Games in Atlanta.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy grew at a surprisingly brisk pace of 2.7 percent in the July-September period and surpassed its pre-recession peak for the first time.
Republicans seized on the figures, contending that the economy was shaking off its prolonged lethargy, but Democrats offered a less optimistic view.  [ Page A1. ]
Consumer confidence dropped in October for the fourth straight month, indicating that Americans are still deeply worried about the course of the economy.  [ D2. ]


Opposition Factions in Iraq Meet to Form United Front
Iraqi opposition members gathered today in their broadest meeting ever on Iraqi soil to form a united front against President Saddam Hussein.
"We must come out from this conference unified," one of the two main Kurdish opposition leaders, Jalal Talabani, told more than 200 delegates at the opening session of the conference here in the Kurdish-controlled north.


A Tale of Two Cities In a Movie Maker's Life
Henry Jaglom knows exactly what his critics think of him, and in "Venice/Venice" he tries to beat them to the punch.
Brazenly casting himself as a revered American film maker ("I am very much a maverick in America") at the Venice Film Festival, he holds court in restaurants and at poolside while giving interviews about his oeuvre.
But he also allows a beautiful French journalist named Jeanne (Nelly Alard) to point out that "people accuse you of looking at your bellybutton." Those who single out that aspect of Mr.
Jaglom's work in other films (among them "Eating," "Tracks" and "New Year's Day") are not about to miss it this time.
Mr.
Jaglom looks at his bellybutton, figuratively speaking, with such tireless intensity that the act takes on a certain fascination.
He is also willing to devote vast attention to the many talkative, vulnerable-sounding women who crop up in his films, women who gaze warmly into the camera and voice their innermost thoughts on a specific subject, in this case movie romance.
One says, "I just expected that I would be taken care of and life would be beautiful." Another wonders why her life is not more like "The Philadelphia Story." Mr.
Jaglom's specialty is creating the perfect climate in which such thoughts can be expressed.


Foster Fills a Missing Link in Steelers' Offense
The Pittsburgh Steelers lost running back Tim Worley to a drug supension before the season.
So when they opened training camp with a new head coach (Bill Cowher), a new offensive coordinator (Ron Erhardt) and a new one-back offense, the one back was missing.
Cowher liked what he saw in the preseason from quarterback Neil O'Donnell and replaced Bubby Brister with O'Donnell as the starter.
Cowher decided on Barry Foster as his main back.


Executive Changes
FIRST UNION CORP., Charlotte, N.C., a bank holding company, named Leonard F. Springs senior vice president.
NORTH AMERICAN MORTGAGE CO., Santa Rosa, Calif., named several executive vice presidents: Robert Gallagher, Martin Hughes, Robert Allen, Pete Bonnikson and Michael Conway.
Named senior vice presidents were: Alan Avery, Rebecca Boyd, Joan Evans, Rod Hardon, D. Alan Hoff, Martha Nelson, Robert Rosen and Stacey Shrock-Stevenson.
Mr.
Gallagher was also named chief administrative officer and Mr.
Hughes chief financial officer.


Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky Journal; Russia Permits Just a Peek at Nature in the Raw
Ever since Czar Aleksandr II sold Alaska to the Americans, Kamchatka has been Russia's easternmost frontier -- a peninsula roughly the size of Montana, with snow-tipped volcanoes, sputtering geysers and miles of untouched birch forests that turn amber in the fading light of autumn.
Here, nine time zones away from Moscow, nature is still undefeated, in contrast to the rest of Russia, where the environment was regularly sacrificed to the reckless god of industrial development.
On Kamchatka, the rivers are still clean enough for freshwater crayfish and spawning salmon, while in winter the snow in its volcanic craters is so white that local people describe it as almost blue.


Hard-Fought Race for Congress
For voters in the Fourth Congressional District in western Nassau County, one of the major issues this political season may come down to a question of definitions: what is an insider, what is an outsider and which would you rather send to Congress?
Both of the leading candidates, David A. Levy, a Nassau Republican strategist, and Phil Schiliro, a Democrat and veteran Congressional aide, are running their first campaigns for national office.
Their backgrounds reflect the different paths to power for professional politicians in the 1990's.


Breeders' Juvenile Victory Often Has Its Downside
Fact: No horse has ever won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile one year and the Kentucky Derby the next year.
Further fact: No horse has won the Juvenile one year and then won any of the Triple Crown races the next year.
"The timing is right: Breeders' Cup in the late fall, Kentucky Derby in the spring," Nick Zito said today outside Strike the Gold's stall at Gulfstream Park.
"But something seems to keep a horse who wins the Juvenile as a 2-year-old from winning the Derby as a 3-year-old. It may simply be horse flesh."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; He's on Every State Ballot, If Not on Every Voter's Lips
Andre Marrou is the other third-party candidate for President also securely listed on all 50 state ballots, the one who has actually gone out campaigning among the people every day for the last year without benefit of fortune, fame or faux pas.
Out here on his modestly buntinged campaign stage, Mr.
Marou, a gray-bearded politician openly anointed by a party convention serious enough to be on C-Span, has to field questions on why he never got into the national television debates and why he is denied portentous coverage of his strategy and coterie, of his negative and positive cuteness, and of his irreverence toward the bipartisan presumptions of politics.


FUROR ON ABORTION ENDING IN SILENCE
After a furious debate in its waning hours, Congress earlier this month approved a bill to allow military personnel and their dependents to have abortions at military hospitals overseas.
President Bush opposes the bill, as he has for the past three years, and is trying to let the measure die a quiet death.
Strangely enough, the bill's most fervent supporters have barely protested, even though the legislation has never before advanced this far.


Market Place; Microsoft Looks To Headier Future
MICROSOFT, the nation's largest software publisher, has been on a roll recently.
In the last 12 months, its stock has shot up 50 percent, making William H. Gates, the chairman who holds more than a third of the company's stock, the nation's richest man.
Microsoft's first quarter, which ended in September, was a spectacular one, with earnings of $209 million , or 70 cents a share, on record revenues of $818 million.
Full-year earnings per share are expected to top $3 in 1993, up from $2.41 this year.


Nervous Israelis Starting to Line Up Their Tanks
The Israeli Army massed tanks today for a possible move north across the border into Lebanon, and its planes and artillery struck targets there for a second straight day.
Lebanese security officials reported two people killed and three wounded in the Israeli raids.


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about a settlement out of court involving the appointment of six Bronx principals misstated the title of the official who investigated the case, as well as the relationship of his office to the New York City Department of Investigation.
The investigator is the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City School District, Ed Stancik; his office is independent from the Department of Investigation.


Patricia B. Ewell, Actress, 93
Patricia B. Ewell, who acted in Broadway plays in the 1920's, 30's and 40's, died on Sunday at her home in Dennis, Mass.
She was 93 years old.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.
Performing under her stage name, Patricia Barclay, Mrs.
Ewell started her career with the Theater Guild.
She appeared in plays with Claude Rains and Spencer Tracy, among others, and she also worked in regional theaters across the country.


Corrections
The weekly chart headed "At the Box Office" yesterday, showing the gross revenues for the weekend's top 10 films, misstated two films' total revenues to date.
For "The Last of the Mohicans," total revenues were $49.8 million, not $50 million; for "The Mighty Ducks," total revenues were $26.7 million, not $27 million.
In addition, the chart misstated the number of screens showing "Pure Country." It is 993, not 1,681.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST N THE SENATE RACE: A TOSSUP
A week before Election Day, the New York Senate race is a tossup between Senator D'Amato and State Attorney General Abrams, even as Mr.
Abrams's fellow Democrat, Bill Clinton, retains a double-digit lead over President Bush in the state, according to a new statewide New York Times poll.
Yet nearly one-quarter of voters said they were still undecided, an unusual percentage this late in a race, and an apparent sign of dissatisfaction with both candidates.
A1.
Abrams on the campaign trail.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY  THIEVES CRASHED, THEN LOOTED
For 15 years, they ran it like a business.
Their enterprise, the authorities say, was to crash into a fur salon or a jewelry store or a SoHo art gallery or a Queens warehouse and then, as glass rained down around them and alarm bells clanged in the night, they would snatch as many high-priced items as they could.
A Federal grand jury in Manhattan indicted 14 members of what the authorities say was a gang whose business was theft and murder.
A1.
CITY HALL AND POLICE DISPUTE ARRESTS
The arrest of two students in front of Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn yesterday resulted in accusations of police brutality and promoted the latest squabble between City Hall and the New York City Police Department.
B3.
FOR INJURED STUDENTS, A NEW FEAR
Nicolay Hammond and Roxanne Dixon, serious students who wanted to improve their school, were shot on Oct. 19 by an assailant who blazed away in front of Evander Childs High School in the Bronx.
B3.
ASSESSING TRUMP'S PLAN
When the City Council considers Riverside South, Donald J. Trump's development project on the Upper West Side, what is at stake is more than Mr.
Trump's ambitions for the site.
An appraisal, B3.
REGION  RECALLING TALK OF DEATH
A state psychologist, testifying in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sexual assault trial, said the woman at the heart of the case suffered from nightmares after the March 1989 episode and spoke with her parents about death.
The testimony created a stir because there had never been any mention of those conversations, or the woman's mood, in the months of investigation before the trial.
B6.
A COLLISION CLOGS LINCOLN TUNNEL
Forty-eight people were injured in a chain-reaction accident in the Lincoln Tunnel involving three commuter buses.
B6.
COURT LETS ADOPTION STAND
A young man who did not know he had fathered a son until 18 months after the birth is not entitled to overturn the child's adoption, New York State's highest court ruled.
B6.
A BATTLE BETWEEN INSIDERS
Voters in the Fourth Congressional District, in western Nassau County, must choose between two political insiders.
The Republican, David A Levy, is a strategist for Nassau County Republicans.
The Democrat, Phil Schiliro, is a veteran Congressional aide.
B7.
Dodd vows to fight for jobs.
B8.
Accord on race in Elizabeth, N.J.
B6.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B2  Chronicle B5


Three-Goal Flurry Foils the Islanders
What a difference a period makes.
Three goals in three minutes at the very beginning of the third period, and suddenly the Los Angeles Kings had not only reversed a 2-1 deficit, but had the Islanders down, 4-2, and scrambling around their own zone like five skaters sharing a blindfold.
Not much later, the Islanders shared something else they didn't want: responsibility for the 4-3 loss at Nassau Coliseum tonight that brought their three-game winning streak to an end.


Theater in Review
Women in Black Men in Gray  Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday Two one-act plays adapted and directed by Brian Jucha; assistant director, Robin Riddell; lighting by Roma Flowers; costumes by Kasia Walicka-Maimone.
Via Theater, Anne Bogart and Mr.
Jucha, co-artistic directors, presented by Downtown Art Company.
WITH: R. P. Brink, Sheryl Dold, Tamar Kotoske, David Neumann, Barney O'Hanlon, Tina Shepard, Karla Silverman, Megan Spooner and Lisa Welti.
When the program's cast of characters lists a Judge, Defendant, Counsel for the Prosecution and Counsel for the Defense, one generally can expect a trial play.
But when the stenographer breaks into song during the Judge's opening remarks and, a short time later, the entire courtroom forms a chorus line singing ribald lyrics to a sort of cha-cha beat, one quickly realizes it is not going to be a typical episode from "Family Court."


Food Notes
Sweet SoHo
Over the weekend the clocks were set back but the pastry business in SoHo moved forward.
Once Upon a Tart, a bright, welcoming, minimally decorated storefront, its windows filled with sweet and savory tarts on glass cake stands, made its debut.
Individual raspberry tarts touched with glaze are set on a veneer of pastry cream in crumbly cookie crusts ($3.75 each).
The chocolate walnut tart ($10) with a moist, rich filling will serve six.


Review/Opera; Plot Is as Plot Does; Rossini Celebrates The Expressive Voice
It is difficult for a contemporary listener to understand why "Semiramide" was once Rossini's most popular opera.
But surely one reason was that for all its Babylonian stage apparatus, for all its formulaic struggles between thwarted lovers and rulers and climbing aspirants, for all the dutiful invocations of matricide and regicide, the opera is almost completely about the human voice.
The plot merely provides the occasions for display of the voice's own apparatus, struggles and passions.
So why, then, was the cast for the Metropolitan Opera's first performance of "Semiramide" this season, on Monday night, devoid of any well-known stars or vocal virtuosos?
Rossini's own wife sang the title role in the work's premiere in 1823; Adelina Patti and Nellie Melba sang it at the first Met performances in the 1890's.
More recently, Joan Sutherland had won acclaim in the title role, the Babylonian queen who is a cross between Jocasta and Lady Macbeth.
With similar assurance, Marilyn Horne had made a specialty of the trouser role of the young Arsace, who is both the Oedipus and the Hamlet of this tale, seeking to avenge the murder of his father and very nearly marrying his mother.
Even the supporting male parts are demandingly full of filigree.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton, Gazing Beyond Nov. 3, Outlines Vision
As his opponents continued to squabble, Gov.
Bill Clinton sought higher ground for his campaign today, describing in sweeping terms the tone and priorities he would bring to the White House.
"The important thing is, what are we going to do after the election," he said in Augusta, Ga., on the first stop of a Southern swing.
"Because after the election, there'll be no charges to answer, nobody to make fun of, only the American people, their problems and their promise out there.


If Cuomo Really Wants More Community Care
To the Editor:
"The White Elephants of Mental Health" (editorial, Oct. 10) makes it seem that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo supports the closing of the mental hospital in Gowanda, N.Y., because he wants to invest more money in community-based care for the mentally ill.
That is not the case.
Indeed, Governor Cuomo opposes legislation sponsored by Assemblywoman Elizabeth Connelly that would require funds saved from closing hospitals to go to community-based programs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CANADIANS GROPE FOR SOLUTION
News analysis: The voters' rejection of a constitutional reform plan leaves Canada still groping for a solution to its most longstanding problem: reconciling French-speaking Quebec with the English-speaking rest of the country.
A1  BEGGING TO LEAVE SARAJEVO
Huddles of desperate people gather each day at the United Nations building in Sarajevo to plead for help in escaping the besieged city.
But only a tiny minority get seats on departing relief planes.
A1


Bullets Dim Girls' Talk Of Life And School
Nicolay Hammond and Roxanne Dixon, their wounds bandaged, huddled over a newspaper account of the shooting outside their high school.
Recalling the awful moment, Nicolay said, "You dropped to the ground like a fish, but I didn't."


Perot: Arguing He's a Viable Candidate


Real Estate; Bailout Deal That May Be One of a Kind
A TEXAS-BASED company is moving forward with improvements on properties that it acquired from the Resolution Trust Corporation in a controversial package sale that apparently will be the last of its kind.
The Patriot American Corporation, which agreed more than a year ago to buy a $450 million package of hotel and office buildings from Resolution Trust, finally completed its first part of the purchase in August.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; He's on Every State Ballot, If Not on Every Voter's Lips
Andre Marrou is the other third-party candidate for President also securely listed on all 50 state ballots, the one who has actually gone out campaigning among the people every day for the last year without benefit of fortune, fame or faux pas.
Out here on his modestly buntinged campaign stage, Mr.
Marou, a gray-bearded politician openly anointed by a party convention serious enough to be on C-Span, has to field questions on why he never got into the national television debates and why he is denied portentous coverage of his strategy and coterie, of his negative and positive cuteness, and of his irreverence toward the bipartisan presumptions of politics.


James E. Bristol, 80, Pacifist and Ex-Pastor
James E. Bristol, a former Lutheran minister and longtime activist for the American Friends Service Committee in the United States and overseas, died Monday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 80 years old.
The committee said the cause of death was heart disease.


U.S.-Europe Trade Talks Still Stalled
The United States and the European Community have been unable to make progress this week in world trade talks because each demands that the other make the first move, American and European officials said today.
Ray MacSharry, the European Community's Agriculture Commissioner, has tried repeatedly in telephone calls from Brussels, including Monday night, to persuade Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan to hold another meeting aimed at resolving a trans-Atlantic impasse over farm subsidies.


The High-Energy Board Room
In March, Ross Perot, long removed from his days as a corporate board member, said, "If there's anything duller than being on a board in Corporate America, I haven't found it." Had Mr.
Perot still been a member of the board of the General Motors Corporation this week instead of a Presidential candidate, he might have been singing a different tune.
When outside directors on the troubled auto maker's board pressed for and finally received the resignation of the chairman and chief executive, Robert C. Stempel, they caused reverberations far beyond Detroit.
Many predict that the awakening of the once sleepy G.M. board will redefine the cozy relationship that often exists between the nation's top executives and the hand-picked members of their boards.


The Canadian Impasse
The failure of Canadian leaders to persuade voters to accept their constitutional reform plan has left the country still groping for a solution to its most longstanding problem: reconciling French-speaking Quebec with the English-speaking rest of the country.
A majority in Quebec voted "no" on Monday in a referendum on a package of constitutional changes intended to satisfy Quebec's desire for recognition of its distinct culture.
The Quebecers felt that the changes did not go far enough.
They were joined, paradoxically, by Nova Scotia, four western provinces and the Yukon Territory, which clearly felt that the concessions to the French speakers went too far.


South African Runner to Earn a First Just by Starting
If Willie Mtolo's family hadn't been so poor when he was growing up, he would probably be a favorite to win next year's Tour de France.
As it was, the Mtolos were as poor as any other Zulu farm family trying to scratch out a living in South Africa.


The Bond Market Rallies; 30-Year Bonds Up 1/2 Point
The bond market rallied yesterday with prices for the 30-year bond rising by more than half a point -- precisely the opposite of what might have been expected, given the day's economic news.
The performance led some analysts to conclude that the market might have found a bottom for the time being, although the uncertainty surrounding the Presidential election makes that bet risky.


Columbia University to Honor 4 Journalists
Four journalists -- from the United States, Peru and Uruguay -- have won the 1992 Maria Moors Cabot Prizes, which are given by Columbia University for "advancement of press freedom and inter-American understanding." The awards are to be presented tomorrow night at the university.
These are the winners, who will each receive a gold medal and $1,000:


Having Fun While Fishing in the Fall


Jets Add Nagle Injury To List Of Woes
The Jets added another chapter to their maddening saga with the Buffalo Bills on Monday night, and just like in other recent episodes, the Jets came up short in the end.
Besides the slim 24-20 scoreboard deficit, the Jets may have suffered another major loss.
Starting quarterback Browning Nagle, who strained his foot in the first quarter of the game and played until late in the fourth quarter, is now questionable for the Miami game.
Although X-rays taken today of Nagle's injured left foot were negative, the team's doctors will examine him again Wednesday.


Coleman Becomes Puzzle in Mets' New Lineup
The organizational debate about acquiring shortstop Tony Fernandez lasted all of three or four heartbeats.
For the Mets, though, the debate about what to do next is likely to rage for a couple of months.
For while Fernandez's acquisition answers the problem of what the Mets will do for a shortstop in 1993, it only begs the question of what the Mets should do with Vince Coleman.


RJR Nabisco's Profit Rises 48% on Foreign Sales Strength
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation reported a sharp 48 percent increase yesterday in third-quarter net income, helped in large part by strong foreign food and tobacco sales.
The consumer products giant, whose brands include Camel and Winston cigarettes, Oreo cookies and Planters peanuts, said its earnings had risen to $182 million, or 13 cents a share, from $123 million, or 7 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.


Threat of Crime Rises On the Main Highways
Describing Alex M. Vega as "the coldest, most selfish, most brutal, callous person that I've ever been involved in prosecuting," a judge in Binghamton, N.Y., sentenced him earlier this month to a minimum of 44 years in prison.
On July 18, 1991, Mr.
Vega stopped his truck along Interstate 88 on the pretext of helping a woman whose car had run out of gas.
Instead of helping her, he raped and robbed the woman, 48-year-old Dianne L. Hoppert, and then killed her by shoving her from an overpass.


Deeds of Good and Evil In Wartime Denmark
Kenneth Madsen's film "A Day in October" treats one of the more heroic chapters of World War II, the Danes' rescue of most of their Jewish population during the Nazi occupation, as an inspirational history lesson in the guise of a thriller.
But the film is so intent on commemorating noble deeds by decent people that it is not very suspenseful.
Its attitude is also one of restrained self-congratulation.
The Danish characters are all unambiguously wonderful, while its German officer (Ole Lemmeke) is a familiar cartoon of Nazi evil.
Set in the fall of 1943, "A Day in October" follows the painful awakening of the Kublitzes, a Jewish family in Copenhagen, to the full extent of the Nazi peril.
Solomon Kublitz (Daniel Benzali), the head of the household, is a nervous bookkeeper who believes that he and his wife, Emma (Tovah Feldshuh), and daughter, Sara (Kelly Wolf), should try to wait out the occupation.
It is only when Sara impulsively brings home Niels Jensen (D. B. Sweeney), a wounded Danish freedom fighter, that Solomon begins facing reality.


Dottie Green, a Baseball Pioneer In Women's League, Dies at 71
Dottie Green, the savvy, strong-armed catcher for the original Rockford (Ill.) Peaches, who dominated the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League from its inception in 1943 to its demise in 1954, died on Monday at her home in Natick, Mass.
She was 71 years old.
According to Mary Bond, the longtime friend who took care of her during her final illness, she died of cancer.


60-Minute Gourmet
CUISINES around the world use citrus to enliven, preserve, color and enhance all sorts of foods.
Greek cooking, with its grape-leaf rolls, lemony soups and tart sauces, is one of the most striking examples.
Oriental cooks routinely add lemon, or lemon peel, to stir-fries.
In French cuisine, lemon is used in basic sauces like hollandaise and bearnaise, and extensively in desserts like creme caramel, sorbets and sherbets.


Sanderson Is a Free Agent
Scott Sanderson became a free agent yesterday after the Yankees decided not to exercise their option on the veteran right-hander's contract.
In buying out the last year of his contract for $250,000, they saved $2.25 million.
Had they exercised the option, they would have had to pay Sanderson a $2.5 million salary.
The Yankees had indicated they would use the money to pursue a midlevel free-agent pitcher.
Two names that have been mentioned are Jimmy Key, the recent World Series hero for the Toronto Blue Jays, and Jose Guzman, who pitched for the Texas Rangers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Politcal Pulse -- Michigan; Michigan Figures to Be, as Usual, Unpredictable
Michigan has a certain affinity for the political outsider.
In recent years such diverse figures as George C. Wallace, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Edmund G. Brown Jr. and Pat Robertson have made strong showings in caucuses or primaries here.
It is a state of great political volatility.
Two years ago, for example, former Gov.
James J. Blanchard seemed to be cruising toward re-election.
On the Thursday before Election Day, he led in one poll by 55 percent to 35 percent.
Five days later, he lost.


Walter Krementz, 81, Chief of Jewelry Firm
Walter Krementz Jr., the longtime head of a major jewelry company, died yesterday at the Morristown Memorial Hospital in Morristown, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in New Vernon, N.J.
He also had a home in Bermuda.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Bridge
Like golf and tennis, but more unobtrusively, bridge now has a senior circuit.
All national and regional tournaments now have events for seniors, defined as 55 and over, creating a problem, perhaps, for some who do not wish their age to be public property.
Dan and Natalie Hertz of Harrison, N.Y., form one of the most successful senior pairs in the country.
They won their 11th Senior Regional title of the year, a Senior Pairs, in McAfee, N.J., on Sunday, and captured the Senior Knockout Teams at the Summer Nationals in Toronto in July with some help from the diagramed deal.
To a Slam Via Astro
The cue-bid by Dan Hertz as West was the Astro variety, showing spades and clubs with emphasis on clubs.
After a splinter bid by North, showing short spades, East bid the suit and continued to slam on the next round.
Five spades asked for six if East's trumps were good, and they were.


Johnson Retains Middleweight Title
REGGIE JOHNSON, stunned briefly in the ninth round, scored a unanimous decision over LAMAR PARKS to retain the World Boxing Association middleweight title in Houston.
Johnson (32-2-1) caught Parks with a right jab in the second round and Parks rallied in the third, but Johnson regained control of the bout until the ninth when Parks slammed the champion into a corner.
Johnson retaliated before his hometown fans later in the round and then coasted to the victory. (AP)


Bowe May Win, but May Not Be Champ
The World Boxing Council may refuse to recognize RIDDICK BOWE as heavyweight champion if he beats EVANDER HOLYFIELD next month.
The W.B.C. president, Jose Sulaiman, said yesterday that the Holyfield-Bowe winner would have 30 days to negotiate a title defense against the winner of Saturday's elimination bout between LENNOX LEWIS of Britain and RAZOR RUDDOCK of Canada.


Furor Over 'Choice'; Carnegie Report Critical of Concept Fans Debate on Improving Schools
No education issue today is as provocative as choice, allowing parents to choose their children's school.
And as Monday's release of a new report criticizing choice proved, few are so ideological and divisive.
The report, from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, and a number of recent academic papers are part of a broad counterattack by many educators against the idea that schools will only improve through market-style competition.
And these studies in turn have provoked fury among supporters of choice, who denounced the Carnegie report in particular as biased.


Corrections
The Credit Markets column in Business Day yesterday about bond market developments on Monday misstated the yield on the $750 million in 10-year notes issued by the International Business Machines Corporation.
The yield was 7.35 percent, which was 55 basis points (0.55 percentage point) over the comparable 10-year Treasury note at the time the I.B.M. notes were priced.


Food Stamps Used in Scam To Sell Meat
The Federal authorities asserted yesterday that they had uncovered the nation's largest food-stamp fraud through a sham retail meat market in Brooklyn that illegally redeemed $43 million in stamps in less than two years.
In a civil lawsuit, the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn said the intricate scheme involved grocers and restaurateurs in New York City, Long Island, Yonkers and northern New Jersey buying food stamps at half their face value.
The retail merchants then used the stamps to buy meat supplies from the Brooklyn wholesaler, the Puello Meats and Provisions Company.


Bomb Found, Gore Cancels
The discovery of an explosive device at a Colorado school not far from the site of a planned appearance by Senator Al Gore caused him to cancel a campaign stop tonight.
Carl J. Meyer, a Secret Service spokesman, said the device was found in the bleachers of a gymnasium at Rocky Mountain High School in Fort Collins, Colo.
The Fort Collins Police Department called the Secret Service, and the device was examined and removed.
The Associated Press reported that the school's principal said a bomb threat had been telephoned to the school.


Reichmann Stake Cut In O. &amp; Y.
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest property manager, filed a bankruptcy reorganization plan in Toronto yesterday that would turn the parent company over to creditors but leave control of the United States operations in the Reichmann family's hands.
Under the best of circumstances, however, the Reichmann brothers of Toronto, Olympia's owners, would be presiding over a heavily indebted, much reduced American empire.
Their United States properties are concentrated in New York City, where they are the largest commercial landlords.


For the Trends That Some Embrace, a Polite Bow From Hazan
FOR more than 20 years, Marcella Hazan has been the high priestess of Italian cooking for many Americans.
And if, thanks to her, there is far greater understanding of Italian food in this country than in that earlier, pre-balsamic era, her guidance remains in demand.
Her newest book, "The Essentials of Classic Italian Cooking" (Alfred A. Knopf, $30) recapitulates her landmark "Classic Italian Cookbook," first published in 1973 and "More Classic Italian Cooking," published in 1978.
In its 512 pages, the new book recasts some recipes in light of current trends, and provides 50 new ones.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife; Unrepentant, Marilyn Quayle Fights for Family and Values
Her speech at the Republican National Convention two months ago infuriated Democrats and mainstream feminists and made some Republicans wonder if she hadn't become an electoral liability.
But the last full week of the campaign began with Marilyn Quayle emphasizing the same themes she has been sounding since the Presidential race began.
Addressing a "Women for Bush-Quayle" rally at a downtown park here at sunset Monday, the Vice President's wife mentioned the words "family" and "values" several times, though never together.
She did not use the words "trust" or "character" at all, but still managed to imply that Gov.
Bill Clinton, in contrast to President Bush, was lacking in both departments.


U.N. Relief Official in Somalia Quits in Dispute With Headquarters
Amid a faltering relief effort and increased violence in Somalia, the senior representative of the United Nations there submitted his resignation Monday night in a dispute over his free-wheeling style and what he considered to be lack of support in New York.
The official, Mohammed Sahnoun, was said by his spokesman to be frustrated by the United Nations insistence that he win support of a recalcitrant Somali warlord before deploying 500 United Nations troops that arrived in the capital, Mogadishu, nearly a month ago.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MITEK SYSTEMS INC., San Diego, a computer equipment manufacturer, has signed a letter of intent to acquire the Data Entry Products division of privately held HNC Inc., San Diego, for up to $4 million.
RESURGENS COMMUNICATIONS GROUP INC., Atlanta, a long-distance telephone company, and Metromedia Communications Corp., a subsidiary of Metromedia Co., said they had signed a letter of intent to merge.


Turbulence Shakes Horses In London-Florida Flight
In horse racing, a "rough trip" means a hard or punishing race.
But 18 horses flying from London to Florida for the Breeders' Cup endured the ultimate rough trip on Monday when their chartered airliner encountered severe turbulence for an hour about midway in their 10-hour trans-Atlantic flight.
Stablehands escorting the horses reported today that the plane dropped 500 feet, throwing some horses to the floor and shaking up the rest, including such stars as Dr Devious, Zoman, Selkirk and Sheikh Albadou, the sprint winner of last year's Breeders' Cup.


Defending State's Jobs Is Priority, Dodd Maintains
Senator Christopher J. Dodd told labor and business groups today that his priority in a new term would be defending Connecticut jobs while working to restart the national economy.
Mr.
Dodd, a Democrat seeking a third term, sharply criticized the Bush Administration for offering aid and trade concessions to Russia, China and Mexico while not acting to end the recession at home.


Holding the Father to His Legal Obligations
To the Editor:
"The man I got pregnant by," Paulette Mason writes in "I'm 38, and Running Out of Time" (Op-Ed, Oct. 3), "doesn't want to have anything to do with me or the child. I want to have the baby." Ms.
Mason (a pseudonym) is basing her decision on false premises and misleading information.


Just a Local Hero and Soon Maybe More
He must be dreaming.
He must be, because Drew Bledsoe has lived a life that sometimes seems surreal and dreamlike, as if this is happening to someone else.
But it's him, all him.
Bledsoe is 20 years old, and the junior quarterback of Washington State, which until last Saturday afternoon was unbeaten, although also generally unnoticed.
He is rolling up statistical mileage with each passing week, and he has been, for some time, the object of attention by a number of teams in the National Football League.


Review/Television; True Tale of Ambition, Failure and Cannibalism
Americans who learned about the Donner party from a paragraph in a textbook are likely to remember it as a grisly footnote to the history of America's westward expansion.
But PBS's unsparing account tonight on "The American Experience" of the ordeal of the men, women and children who found themselves trapped high in the Sierra Nevadas for a brutal winter does justice to the astounding endurance even of those who in desperation survived by eating the flesh of those who died.
If "The Donner Party" reminds you of "The Civil War," credit Ric Burns, the co-producer and writer of that fine series.
Here, again, are the rich old photographs; the deeply eloquent and well-delivered passages from diaries; the thoughtful observations of historians; the music of the period.


Books of The Times; The Private Budget Deficit of America's Families
The Forgotten Americans  By John E. Schwarz and Thomas J. Volgy 219 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $19.95.
Right up to the eve of the Presidential election, the key word in the campaign has been jobs: keeping them and creating them.
But something much deeper runs through "The Forgotten Americans," a timely book that goes to the heart of the changing work ethos in the United States.
Its important revelations promise to challenge the conscience of Washington for a very long time.


Accusations Of Brutality By Police
The arrest of two students in front of Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn yesterday resulted in accusations of police brutality and prompted the latest squabble between City Hall and the New York City Police Department.
The president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, Phil Caruso, accused the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, Fritz W. Alexander, and two City Councilwomen of meddling in police business by appearing at the police station house where the two students were taken.
Mr.
Alexander responded that it was within his role to look into such arrests and that he had gone to the scene merely "to see what was going on."


Two Teen-Agers Charged in Elevator-Shaft Death
Two East Harlem youths have been charged with killing a mildly retarded teen-ager because he had complained to his parents that they were taking money from him, the police said yesterday.
The victim, 19-year-old Nicol Sowell, had been reported missing by his mother in February 1991 after he left one morning to meet two friends and never returned.
It was these two friends, the police said, who lured Mr.
Sowell to an abandoned building, tied him up and dropped him down an elevator shaft, killing him.


CHRONICLE
GIAN CARLO MENOTTI, the 81-year-old Pulitzer Prize-winning composer and director, has been named artistic director of the Rome Opera.
The three-year-contract that he plans to sign on Friday when Dr.
GIAN PAOLO CRESCI, financial administrator for the opera house, calls on him at his home in Scotland, begins with the 1993-94 season.
"This has been very surprising," the maestro said yesterday from Yester House, his 85-room home near Edinburgh where he lives with his son, daughter-in-law and two grandchildren.
"First, Dr. Cresci called me a week ago, inviting me to stage two operas this season, my work 'The Consul' and a new production of 'Lucia di Lammermoor.'


Court Denies Father's Late Request to Overturn Adoption
A young man who did not know he had fathered a son until 18 months after the birth is not entitled to overturn the child's adoption, New York State's highest court ruled yesterday.
The man's former fiancee, who broke up with him without telling him she was pregnant, later gave the child up for adoption.
And the man learned of the boy's birth only after he and the mother began dating again.
They have since married.


The G.O.P. Won the Cold War? Ridiculous.
The claim heard in campaign rhetoric that the United States under Republican Party leadership "won the cold war" is intrinsically silly.
The suggestion that any Administration had the power to influence decisively the course of a tremendous domestic political upheaval in another great country on another side of the globe is simply childish.
No great country has that sort of influence on the internal developments of any other one.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Aides Try to End Story But President Keeps It Alive
Ross Perot's top campaign aides tried diligently today to put an end to stories about his unsubtantiated accusations of Republican dirty tricks, but President Bush kept the story alive by calling Mr.
Perot's charges "crazy" and "strange."
At a news briefing at Perot headquarters here, Sharon Holman, Mr.
Perot's press secretary, dismissed questions about his accusations as "yesterday's story" and said the independent candidate for President wanted to get back to the issues.


Director's Faith in a Nightmarish True Story
"It's a relentless story," said Ric Burns, the writer, director and, with Lisa Ades, co-producer of "The Donner Party," a documentary film that will be broadcast tonight by PBS on "The American Experience." "One layer after another gets stripped away from these people, and in the end, any sense of community, any intra-family feeling, disappears. At the end it's each family fighting alone to survive."
For most Americans, the Donner story is a little-known nightmare.
Mr.
Burns, interviewed in the Upper West Side offices of his company, Steeplechase Films, said he saw in the tale a distinctly American tragedy.


Devils Re-sign Two Forwards
BILL GUERIN and JARROD SKALDE, the two talented forwards the Devils demoted to the minor leagues five games into the season, were recalled yesterday and may play tonight at Hartford.
Guerin was recalled from Utica, where he had two goals and four assists in five games, and Skalde was recalled from Cincinnati, where he had a goal and two assists in four games.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; '60 Minutes' Producer Differs With Perot Account
In saying he dropped out of the Presidential race because Republican operatives had planned a smear campaign against his daughter, Ross Perot has repeatedly insisted that he went public with his accusations only because they were about to be broadcast on the CBS News program "60 Minutes".
But the show's executive producer, Don Hewitt, said today that Mr.
Perot was more that just a reluctant participant in the dramatic disclosure of his accusations.


Sauce Makers Smile At the Rage for Pasta
AMERICANS eat more than four billion pounds of pasta a year.
And they're not eating it plain.
Despite the nostalgic image of Grandma in her apron tending a pot of simmering sauce for hours, what's sauce for pasta nowadays usually comes in a jar.
Since the pasta industry is still ballooning, with annual consumption having doubled since 1975, it continues to pull the sauce business along with it.
Supermarkets and groceries are scrambling to find enough shelves for all the sauces.


Daniels to Fight Allegation; Vows to Oppose Bid by Stein
One day after withdrawing as a deputy mayor of New York City, Randy Daniels spent much of yesterday vowing to fight the allegations of sexual harassment that derailed his appointment and to work vigorously to prevent his former boss, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, from becoming Mayor.
Mr.
Daniels, who says he has filed a $21 million libel suit in State Supreme Court against the television reporter whose charge of sexual harassment touched off the storm, said he would file other suits this week.
As of 4 P.M. yesterday, he had not filed the libel suit.


The Federal Bureau of Temptation
A sting can be a legitimate law enforcement deception, or an abuse of police authority.
What the F.B.I. did to the Bush-Quayle campaign in Texas is such a screeching abuse that it demands strong redress from Congress.
It is not the job of government to try to seduce innocent citizens into manufactured crimes.
This startling case arose from a complaint by Ross Perot and a tip from an informant the F.B.I. doesn't trust.
Mr.
Perot charged that opponents were planning to wiretap his Dallas office.
To check it out, the F.B.I. sent an undercover agent to test Jim Oberwetter, chairman of the Bush-Quayle campaign in Texas.


CONFLICT OVER DAM THREATENS PRAGUE
Czechoslovakia's Government threatened today to resign over its inability to influence the conflict around the diversion of the Danube River.
The Slovak Republic, which will become an independent country on Jan. 1, opposes calls by Prime Minister Jan Strasky to suspend the damming of the river.
In operations begun on Saturday, the river is being dammed with boulders to divert it to the huge Gabcikovo hydroelectric plant on Slovak soil.


Coming Soon: The Vietnam Peace
Confronted with evidence that its secret archives could shed light on the fate of Americans missing since the Vietnam War, Hanoi has finally opened those records.
The Bush Administration can best reciprocate with two overdue steps of its own: Lift the U.S. veto on international bank lending to Vietnam, and establish diplomatic ties.
America's punitive policies toward Vietnam have done little to advance U.S. interests.
Successive Administrations barred Americans from most commerce with Hanoi and pressed allies for similar restrictions.
This boycott isolated Vietnam from the democratic ferment fostered by foreign trade and investment in Eastern Europe and China.


Howard Stern Is the Object Of F.C.C. Fine
The Federal Communications Commission announced its intention today to impose a $105,000 fine on a Los Angeles radio station for what it said were repeated, indecent broadcasts by the New York disk jockey Howard Stern.
The proposed fine, against radio station KLSX-FM in Los Angeles, would be the largest ever imposed by the commission for violating its rules against indecent broadcasting.


William Moore, 59, A Critic and Scholar Of Dance by Blacks
William Moore, a critic and scholar who specialized in black dance, died on Saturday at his home in New York City.
He was 59 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his sister Margaret Moore.


The Pop Life
Shot in the Foot
The reggae singer Buju Banton's song "Boom Bye Bye," which advocates killing homosexuals, was a time bomb that just exploded, and the intended targets don't seem to have been the victims.
Recorded on an independent Jamaican label, Shang, two years ago when Mr.
Banton was 17 years old, the song has just now reached radio stations.
It's point is explicit: "Faggots have to run/Or get a bullet in the head."
The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, known as Glaad, quickly protested to the radio stations playing the song, including WRKS and WBLS in New York City.
Since The Daily News reported the protests on Friday, almost everybody involved with the record has been running for cover.


Koca Popovic, Official Under Tito, Dies at 84
Koca Popovic, a former Chief of the General Staff, Foreign Minister and Vice President of Yugoslavia under Tito, died Thursday at the military hospital in Belgrade.
He was 84 years old and lived in Belgrade and in Dubrovnik, Croatia.
His death was reported yesterday in the United States.
The scion of a wealthy Serbian banking family, Mr.
Popovic turned to Communism early, became a hero of the Partisan fighters in World War II and rose to enter Tito's inner circle.
Student unrest and demands for reform prompted him to resign in 1972 in disagreement with Tito's refusal to change his authoritarian ways.


Norman I. Schvey, 70, Wall Street Executive
Norman I. Schvey, a former managing director of Merrill Lynch, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Schvey died of lymphona of the bone marrow, said Marian Bott, a spokeswoman for the family.


U.N. Elects 5 Countries to Security Council
Spain, New Zealand, Brazil, Djibouti and Pakistan were elected today to two-year terms on the United Nations Security Council by the General Assembly.
They will replace Ecuador, Zimbabwe, India, Austria and Belgium, whose two-year terms will expire on Jan. 1.


Holding the Father to His Legal Obligations; Helping Hands
To the Editor:
Our compassionate program of practical assistance is designed to meet the needs of women like Paulette Mason (Op-Ed, Oct. 3).


BMW Puts Account In Review
BMW of North America Inc. said yesterday that it would place its account in review.
The account, estimated at $80 million to $85 million, has been at Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc. in New York a month shy of 18 years.
The unexpected disclosure was followed by one just as startling: Although BMW asked Ammirati to participate in the review, the agency, which created the "Ultimate driving machine" identity for the German maker of luxury cars, declined.


F.B.I. Seizes Records of New Medico
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation entered the corporate headquarters yesterday of New Medico Health Care Systems of Lynn, Mass., the operator of a national chain of brain-injury rehabilitation centers, and seized records.
The F.B.I. said the move was part of a national investigation of "alleged health care fraud."


Baylor Reaches Top With Rockies
Don Baylor became the first manager of the expansion Colorado Rockies yesterday, and perhaps his patience was one of the attributes that got him the job.
For several years, Baylor hungered for a major league managerial job.
He was upset, but remained patient in the face of his failure to get one.


Shearson Account Goes to Ayer
Shearson Lehman Brothers said yesterday that it had awarded Ayer Inc. in New York its estimated $20 million account, previously at Chiat/ Day/Mojo Inc. in New York.
In August, Shearson dismissed Chiat/Day/Mojo after 20 months on the account and excluded that agency from the review to select a replacement.
The move foreshadowed last week's decision by Shearson's parent, American Express, to dismiss Chiat/ Day/Mojo from the $60 million creative portion of its flagship charge-card account.


Far From the Governor's Office, but Not From Politics
With handicapping for a Democratic Presidential cabinet already under way, a name that pops up on some lists belongs to a Republican, Thomas H. Kean.
Mr.
Kean, the former Governor of New Jersey and now president of Drew University, also happens to be chairman of President Bush's re-election effort in New Jersey, but some analysts think he could become Secretary of Education if his old buddy, Gov.
Bill Clinton, is elected President.


No Headline
"We'd shoot for a government about one-tenth the size it is now. Government would exist to protect against force and fraud." -- ANDRE MARROU, the Libertarian candidate for President.  [ A1:6. ]


G.M.'s Financial Erosion Undermined Stempel
The boardroom purge that cost Robert C. Stempel his job as chairman and chief executive of the General Motors Corporation was motivated in large part by the marked deterioration of the auto maker's finances, once the envy of corporate America.
Although G.M.'s losses have commanded most of the company's headlines during the past two years, the erosion of other financial measures -- most notably, the underfunding of G.M.'s pension fund by some $12 billion -- have been equally alarming.


CHRONICLE
ELLSWORTH KELLY likes to install his own art shows, so he turned up in Washington yesterday to make sure that the works to be shown in an exhibit that opens Sunday in the West Wing of the National Gallery were properly displayed.
He had even made a scale model of the seven rooms where the 40 paintings and reliefs, 60 drawings and collages and 20 photographs from his developmental years in France -- 1948 to 1954 -- will be shown.
The works trace his shift from the figurative to the abstract.
As Mr.
Ellsworth, who was described by the gallery's director, EARL A. POWELL 3d, as "one of America's greatest colorists and abstract expressionists," roamed the show with reporters at a preview yesterday morning, he reminisced about the first exhibition of his work in this country at the Betty Parsons gallery in New York in 1956.


Psychologist in Abuse Trial Says Accuser Was Suicidal
A psychologist testified today that the mildly retarded woman whom four former schoolmates are accused of sexually assaulting in March 1989 was apparently suicidal after the episode and suffered from nightmares and guilt.
The prosecution witness, Dr.
Susan Esquilin, said the young woman had experienced a broad range of emotional anxieties -- and had spoken with her parents about death -- after the sexual encounter in a Glen Ridge home.


INSIDE
Israelis Line Up Tanks
The Israeli Army massed tanks for a possible move into Lebanon, and its planes and artillery struck targets there for a second day.
Page A3.
School-Choice Battleground
No other education issue today is so provocative as allowing parents to choose a child's school, and few are so divisive.
Education, page B10.
New Definition for AIDS
Federal health officials proposed a more comprehensive definition for AIDS that will encompass more women and drug abusers.
Page B9.
Warm Letters to Cold War
A Russian mail-order bride seeking an American husband in New York has ended up in a shelter.
Page B1.


Lipps's Stay With Saints a Short One
The veteran wide receiver LOUIS LIPPS was waived yesterday by the New Orleans Saints, four and a half weeks after they signed him.
Lipps, 30 years old, played in just two games for the Saints before he pulled his right hamstring and was placed on injured reserve.
A nine-year veteran and twice an All-Pro, Lipps was waived early in the season by Pittsburgh after a contract dispute that kept him out of training camp, the entire preseason and the Steelers' first two regular-season games.(AP).


AT LUNCH WITH: Derrick Bell; The Charms of a Devoutly Angry Man
FOR an angry man, Derrick Bell is surprisingly good company.
His smile is warm, his tone mild, his gestures welcoming even as he talks of the unbridgeable gulf between blacks and whites.
The same man who presents an unyielding front to his opponents quickly reveals his own vulnerabilities.
He can be politically strident, yet personally charming.
Racism and injustice obsess him, but he somehow avoids grimness and despair.


Mandarich Will Miss Rest of Season
Offensive lineman TONY MANDARICH, who sat out the Green Bay Packers' first seven games because of illness and injury, will miss the entire season because of the effects of a concussion.
General Manager RON WOLF said Monday that reports from tests last week by doctors at the Cleveland Clinic indicated that Mandarich is suffering from post-concussion syndrome.
As a result, Wolf said, Mandarich will not be allowed to practice or play until next season.


Salvador Peace Plan Hits Snag With Rightist Move
As military leaders sharply criticized a United Nations proposal to reschedule the demobilization of leftist rebels, the rightist party that governs El Salvador moved today to block the rebel army's conversion into a political party.
One day after rebel leaders endorsed the United Nations plan, which would extend the date for their full disarmament from Oct. 31 to Dec. 15, diplomats said President Alfredo Cristiani criticized aspects of the plan in a long letter he sent today to the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.


In Peru, the Law Impedes Property Equality
To the Editor:
I was surprised not to find in "Squalid Slums Grow as People Flood Latin America's Cities" (front page, Oct. 11), your otherwise fine article on Peru's growing urban slums, any mention of the law's contribution to the tremendous growth of Peru's informal housing stock and, more generally, of the country's informal economy.


Poll Finds D'Amato and Abrams Virtually Even in Senate Contest
A week before Election Day, the New York Senate race is a tossup between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, even as Mr.
Abrams's fellow Democrat, Bill Clinton, retains a double-digit lead over President Bush in the state, according to a new statewide New York Times poll.
After six weeks of rancorous campaigning, Mr.
Abrams leads Mr.
D'Amato among registered voters by just 3 percentage points, 38 percent to 35 percent -- or within the survey's margin of sampling error.
Nearly one-quarter of voters said they were still undecided, an unusually high percentage this late in a race, and an apparent sign of wide dissatisfaction with both candidates.
When undecided voters were pressed to say which way they were leaning, the contest became a virtual draw, with 42 percent saying they favored Mr.
Abrams to 41 percent for Mr.
D'Amato.
Mr.
Abrams leads only in New York City, while the Senator holds a slight edge upstate and a double-digit lead in the suburbs on Long Island and in the Hudson Valley.
Clinton Shows Strength
The tight Senate race stands in stark contrast to the Presidential contest, in which the survey -- conducted Saturday through Monday -- showed Mr.
Clinton leading Mr.
Bush 45 percent to 28 percent in the state, with 15 percent supporting the independent candidacy of Ross Perot.
That contrast is an apparent testament to the effectiveness of Mr.
D'Amato's relentless television advertising attacks on Mr.
Abrams, who had led him in most polls over the last several months.


Mayoralty Of Elizabeth Is Entering A New Era
It's hard for J. Christian Bollwage, a Democratic councilman since 1983, to see how he could lose the campaign to be this city's next mayor.
Even his sole rival seems inclined to agree.
"I now know what it's like to be David fighting Goliath," said the Republican candidate, James W. Dembeck.
"The G.O.P. has no money. When they asked me to run, I was under the impression that they had leadership, organization and money. It's really a biweekly kaffeeklatsch."


Personal Health
WITH summer over, now is a good time to assess the damage the sun has wrought upon your skin.
While skin cancer is the most serious consequence of excessive sun exposure, sun-induced premature aging is more universal.
If you are a sun worshiper who cultivates a "healthy" tan each year, chances are the skin you have repeatedly browned now looks up to 20 years older than the more sun-protected parts of your body.
Even if you never deliberately bask in the sun, if you typically spend one or more hours a day outdoors, say, walking to work, doing yardwork or playing tennis, your skin is likely to show the ravages of sun damage.


Theater in Review
C.
Colombo Inc.
Export/Import, Genoa  New York Theater Workshop 79 East Fourth Street East Village Through Nov. 8 Written by Leo Bassi; directed by Christopher Grabowski; set, costumes and lighting by Anita Stewart; sound by Mark Bennett; production stage manager, Liz Small; production manager, George Xenos.
Presented by New York Theater Workshop, James C. Nicola, artistic director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director.
WITH: Leo Bassi, Steve Elm and Edwin Newman.
Leo Bassi is a performer provocateur, a one-man Blue Man.
Everything he says or does in his show, "C. Colombo Inc.: Export/Import, Genoa," is intended to move his audience to laughter, anger and other visceral responses, like ducking.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 23
Oct. 16
Oct. 25
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
209.0
209.8
205.7
Distillate stocks
133.3
131.5
134.8
Crude imports, daily
6.3
7.8
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.3
1.5
Crude stocks
330.4
327.3
347.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
89.2
88.3
81.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Aerial Photography Aboard the Shuttle


Holding the Father to His Legal Obligations; Have the Baby
To the Editor:
I found Paulette Mason's "I'm 38 and Running Out of Time" (Op-Ed, Oct. 3) painful, probably because I can identify very closely, from a different angle.
Although I am not pregnant, I am 39, a freelance musician, single and unattached.


Sports of The Times; Cito Gaston's 'Necessities'
THE man sitting home in Fullerton, Calif., watched all of the World Series, and, as this particular man might be expected to do, kept a close eye on the manager of the Toronto Blue Jays.
This wasn't just any manager, it was Cito Gaston, the first black man to manage a team into a World Series.
The man sitting home wasn't just any viewer, either; he was also known to millions as the man who once said on national television that blacks conceivably lacked the "necessities" to manage effectively in the major leagues.
The viewer was Al Campanis, the onetime vice president of player personnel for the Dodgers, who, shortly after his headlined remarks on "Nightline" in April 1987, was fired by the Dodgers.


Eich-Tasting Dishes With Little Fat
THIS entire menu has only two teaspoons of added fat.
But the salmon has plenty of the good kind of fat, the kind that may help to prevent heart attacks.
Still, few puritans in the world eat something merely because it is good for them; first it has to taste good.
In flavor, this menu goes overboard.
The sharpness of the mustard and the tartness of the lime provide a superb contrast to the rich salmon.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Bush Eases Hammering Of the Press
President Bush has recently been hammering the news media almost as hard as he's been hammering Gov.
Bill Clinton, drawing big laughs and cheers by displaying his favorite bumper sticker: "Annoy the Media: Re-elect Bush."
And, in fact, some annoying has been undertaken by some of Mr.
Bush's fans, mainly harmless jeers and hisses, but here and there a bit of shoving, poking and hair pulling.


AMERICAN MATCHES FARE CUTS ON EUROPEAN ROUTES
American Airlines yesterday matched European fare reductions enacted earlier this week by Continental Airlines.
The price cuts, previously matched by Trans World Airlines, average 35 percent in fares from nine United States cities to various European capitals.
The move by American means that the reductions are likely to be followed by other major carriers.


Bashing and Trashing Becoming the Word
This must be the year of the negative campaign.
Not one regular-season basket has yet been recorded in the National Basketball Association, but the mudslinging has already begun in earnest.
Magic Johnson vs.
Isiah Thomas
Thomas once had his own room at Johnson's house in Los Angeles, which Johnson called the Isiah Room.
They traveled together during summers.
When their teams met in successive N.B.A. finals, they kissed at midcourt before every game.


Yeltsin Calls for Disbanding of Opposition Group
In an atmosphere of mounting political confrontation, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia called today for the disbanding of the National Salvation Front, an opposition group made up of ultra-nationalists and old-guard Communists that held its founding congress last weekend.
At a meeting with top officials of the Russian Foreign Ministry, Mr.
Yeltsin said the front was both unconstitutional and politically destabilizing, and declared its activities "inadmissable."


Insult My Mom, Please
Bill Clinton has a powerful new weapon with which to smite George Bush: his mom.
In American politics, as in American culture, almost anything goes.
A candidate may attack his opponent's most cherished beliefs, his livelihood, his class, his schooling, his background, his character.
He may question his adversary's patriotism, his courage, his intelligence, his manliness, his upbringing, his basic decency.


Firm's Suspension as Trader Is Lifted by Chicago Board
Lee B. Stern &amp; Company, the trading and clearing house that processed a barrage of suspicious Treasury futures trades that briefly rocked bond markets around the world last Thursday, was cleared today by the Chicago Board of Trade to resume trading.
The board also lifted its restrictions on Lee B. Stern; his son Daniel, and Lester Moucher, the three principals of the company.
Their memberships were suspended when the firm was unable to cover an estimated $8.5 million in losses piled up by Darrell M. Zimmerman, the trader at the center of last week's turmoil.


Soup, Wonderful and Warming: Begin With (!) Lamb Bones
AS fall arrives and the evenings become cooler, my body cries out for hearty, warming, savory soups.
Unfortunately, the bones needed to make the base for many of these soups -- whether bought at the supermarket or butcher shop -- are relatively expensive nowadays.
The standard choices, beef and veal bones, are particularly costly, chicken and turkey somewhat less so.
Another possibility, often overlooked, is lamb, the bones of which are basically never used and so are routinely discarded by butchers.


Abrams Tries to Tailor a Message for All Venues, Audiences and Moods
Ever the nervous student, Robert Abrams scanned a yellow legal pad moments before addressing a group of about 30 Democratic Party faithful on a recent afternoon.
Scribbled at the top, a timeless reminder: "Say nice things about the party."
Great idea.
He did. Everyone clapped. On to the next stop.


Is It Time for the Old Pros On Giants to Move Over?
Whether they like it or not -- indeed, whether they're ready or not -- the younger Giants are suddenly becoming the present and not the future.
Week by week, the Super Bowl look of the Giants is disappearing.


48 Injured in Bus Crash Inside the Lincoln Tunnel
Forty-eight people were injured during the morning rush hour yesterday in a chain-reaction accident in the Lincoln Tunnel involving three commuter buses.
One of the tunnel's three tubes was shut down for more than 90 minutes after the collision, and New York-bound traffic was backed up for miles.
Three people suffered serious neck injuries, and there were reports of a broken jaw and broken noses, said Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the tunnel.
Most of the injuries were cuts and bruises, he said, and all but five people, who refused treatment, were taken to six hospitals in Manhattan.


Kurds in Turkey Reported to Yield Area
Iraqi Kurds who have been fighting to drive Turkish Kurdish separatists from northern Iraq asserted here today that the rebels had agreed to leave the border area after losing a key stronghold.
"It seems the P.K.K. is accepting all the conditions that were stipulated" by the Iraqi Kurds' regional parliament, said Barham Salih, a representative of one of the Iraqi Kurds' two main parties.


English Retires to Work for Union
ALEX ENGLISH, the Denver Nuggets' career scoring leader, announced his retirement as an active player yesterday and said he would take a position with the National Basketball Players Association.
English, who played with the Nuggets for 10 seasons, was traded to Dallas in 1990 and played in Italy last season.


Texas Utilities Prices 2 Issues
The Texas Utilities Company went into the market yesterday to price a total of $250 million in first-mortgage bonds divided between 31-year and 7-year maturities.
Underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company are selling $150 million of 8 3/4 percent bonds due in 2023 at 99.261 to yield 8.82 percent, or about 122 basis points more than the Treasury's 30-year bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Scott Newhall, 78, Newspaper Editor In San Francisco
Scott Newhall, the editor of The San Francisco Chronicle from 1952 to 1971, died Monday at Henry Mayo Newhall Hospital in Valencia, Calif.
He was 78 years old and had homes in Piru, Calif., and San Francisco.
He was a member of a pioneering California family and the great-grandson of Henry Mayo Newhall, after whom the hospital was named.
His son Skip said he died of pancreatitis.


At the Bottom of Desperation, Sarajevans Fill Refugee Lines
Early each morning, at the forbidding wall of tank barriers, razor wire and sandbags that protect United Nations headquarters here, huddles of desperate people press forward -- some bent over with age and others holding the hands of children barely old enough to walk, pleading with blue-helmeted French sentries to take pity on them and let them through.
If they wait long enough, perhaps for hours, the petitioners may be admitted up the concrete ramp to the United Nations building, where they will have a few minutes to make their case for what many of them believe to be a matter of life and death.


U.S. ECONOMY GREW AT A RATE OF 2.7% DURING 3D QUARTER
The economy grew at a surprisingly brisk pace of 2.7 percent in the July-September period, the Commerce Department reported today.
This was the sixth consecutive quarterly advance in gross domestic product, the most comprehensive measure of economic activity within American borders.
The dollar value of the output surpassed the pre-recession peak registered in the 1990 second quarter.


Holding the Father to His Legal Obligations; A Latchkey Education
To the Editor:
"Watch for all hell to break loose with the latchkey child who is raising himself or herself," Neil Sullivan warns in an Oct. 4 letter


Mixed Yields for C.D.'s and Money Funds
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were mixed in the week that ends today.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based interest rate publication, said that while money market accounts slipped again, yields on certificates of deposit, particularly six-month C.D.'s, were up nationwide.
Robert K. Heady, the publisher of the rate publication, said that not since April 1990 had the yield on a six-month certificate risen as much as 4 basis points on The Monitor's index of 20 major banks nationwide.


McDonnell Posts Loss and Blames C-17
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation reported today a loss of $15 million for the third quarter of 1992, a result of a $269 million charge the company took to cover the costs of strengthening the wings of its C-17 transport plane that were damaged during stress tests earlier this month.
The loss, which was somewhat higher than Wall Street analysts had expected, contrasts to profits of $77 million, or $2.02 a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenue in the third quarter dropped 11 percent to $3.96 billion.


Book Notes
Printing Madonna
When Beacon Press tried recently to hire R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, one of the country's largest printers, to print one of its books, "Gay Ideas: Outing and Other Controversies," by Richard Mohr, a professor of philosophy at the University of Illinois, the publishing house was turned down.
Too controversial, Beacon editors were told. Too sexually explicit.


Where the V.S.O.P. Goes Down A.S.A.P.
In this British colony of six million people, most of them Chinese, the preferred drink is fine aged French Cognac, not served neat in classic snifters but in tall tumblers, often over ice or mixed with fruit juice or soft drinks.
But wine merchants and restaurateurs never criticize Hong Kong's unconventional approach to Cognac because, after all, they are dealing with the greatest Cognac drinkers in the world.
According to the French Trade Commission, Hong Kong ranks first in per-capita consumption of Cognac, a position it has held since the mid-1980's.
Last year, Hong Kong consumed 3.6 million bottles of Cognac, which is more than half a bottle for every man, woman and child in the colony, said Frederick Yip, the marketing manager for Jardine Riche Monde, the agent for Hennessy.


California Agency Is Offering Bonds
The California State Public Works Board is offering $140 million of tax-exempt lease revenue bonds priced to yield a maximum of 6.875 percent for a 6 3/4 percent bond due in 2012 priced at about 98.645.


Bernard N. Moore Oil Executive, 86
Bernard N. Moore, a former chief of exploration for the Atlantic Richfield Company, the oil company, died on Oct. 20 at his home in New Haven.
He was 86 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his son, David.


Mandela Ally Is Slain; Zulu Rivals Accused
Gunmen killed a senior official of the African National Congress today in Natal, and the congress accused its Zulu rivals, the Inkatha Freedom Party, of a role in the slaying.
More than 50 people have been killed since Friday in a new surge of violence in Natal, scene of entrenched violence between the country's two most powerful black groups.


Knicks Go Sour And Lose To Jazz
The Knicks did not play up to midseason standards last night, but thankfully for them, it was only a preseason game.
Looking sluggish and perhaps slightly fatigued, New York lost to the Utah Jazz, 103-98, at Madison Square Garden and dropped to 5-2 this exhibition season.
The Knicks never found an answer for Utah shooting guard Jeff Malone, who led all scorers with 33 points, most of them on long-range jumpers.


Working Estate In Tuscany, Far From Lafite
DEEP in the forest 10 miles north of this sleepy country town is Badia a Coltibuono, one of the finest wine-making estates in Tuscany.
No one knows who first settled at Badia a Coltibuono, or who first made wine here.
The name, which means abbey of the good harvest, dates from the 11th century.
In 1051, Vallombrosan monks, a congregation of the Benedictine order, arrived in this remote corner of Tuscany and began to build a monastery.
The Firidolfis, the feudal lords of the region who invited the monks, had already been here for at least 400 years.
The remains of their seventh-century fortress, Montegrossoli, can be seen nearby.
But on the western edge of the Badia estate, archeologists have been working for a decade unearthing the ruins of an Etruscan settlement, Cetamura, which is at least 2,000 years old.
The Etruscans were dedicated wine makers.


OUSTED CROATS GO TO SEIZED TOWNS
Sixty Croatian men and women who lived peacefully in this farm village until it was destroyed by Serbian fighters last year returned today under United Nations protection to see the rubble of their homes.
The scene here, as in many villages destroyed in the Balkan war, is horrible to survey.
Every one of the 160 houses has been destroyed or heavily damaged, and everything of value carried away.
Some walls still stand, but not a roof or window remains.


Canada, Still Divided
The Canadian establishment's proposals for a new constitution have been turned down flat by Canada's voters.
The major political parties, the premiers of all 10 provinces, tribal leaders and leaders of business, labor and the media supported the final compromise resolution.
But the people, unimpressed, said "No!"
America can take no comfort from the prospect of continued divisive wrangling in the house of its closest ally.
But everyone can profit from observing what an aroused public can do when it doesn't like where its leaders are leading.


Julie Andrews to Return To the New York Stage
Julie Andrews, the actress and singer who was propelled to stardom on Broadway but who has not appeared in a stage musical in more than three decades, will return to the New York theater in "Putting It Together," the Stephen Sondheim revue scheduled for a 12-week run Off Broadway at the Manhattan Theater Club beginning March 2.
The show, directed by Julia McKenzie, will be presented in the 299-seat City Center Stage 1 theater, an unusually intimate setting for such a prominent cast, which, in addition to Ms.
Andrews, includes Michael Rupert, James Naughton, Rachel York and Christopher Durang.
Originally produced last January in Oxford, England, by Cameron Mackintosh, it includes 29 Sondheim songs, mostly written after the 1977 production of "Side by Side by Sondheim," a previous revue.


Behind the Election Oratory Lies a Well-Oiled Machine


Public &amp; Private; Putting Hatred To a Vote
Cause and effect is always an iffy kind of thing, but reasonable people may discern a relationship between Ballot Measure 9 and the firebomb murders of Hattie Mae Cohens and Brian Mock in Salem, Ore.
Four people, barely out of their teens and already devotees of white supremacist groups, have been charged with lobbing a Molotov cocktail into the apartment where the black lesbian and white gay man lived.
The murder indictment said motive could be found in "defendants' perception of the race, color and sexual orientation" of the victims.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; Divining Clinton's Gut-Level Strategy
When the subject turned to the talking heads on television who were proclaiming the Presidential race over as soon as the debates were, James Carville narrowed his eyes into angry little slits.
He grabbed the basketball sitting near his desk at the center of the Clinton campaign "war room," clutched it with both hands like a man planning to do violence to a ripe melon, and started to sputter.
"I'm mortified, mortified, mortified, mortified," said Mr.
Carville, the Clinton campaign's chief strategist, diviner and spiritual center.
"It just drives me crazy. Every piece of hot air, pontifical wisdom that's come out over the past year has been wrong. I'm not nervous. It's more like gripping fear."


Bridgeport Proposes Blocking Off Streets To Cut Drug Buyers
Karen Daden sits on her porch on the East Side of Bridgeport and watches the cars spin down her street, "fancy cars with those resident beach stickers for Stratford and Fairfield and Westport."
"Mostly they're white males in their 20's," she said.
"They pull over, get their drugs and head back to the highway. Meanwhile, we've got older people in this neighborhood who are prisoners of their homes. They can't go out because not only is there gunfire every night, there's gunfire in the daytime, too."


National Book Medal For James Laughlin
James Laughlin, the founder and publisher of New Directions, has been named the winner of the 1992 National Book Foundation Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters.
The $10,000 award is to be presented at the 42d annual National Book Awards ceremony, on Nov. 18 at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Races; Uphill Fights for 4 Women in Midwest
Gloria O'Dell wheels about Kansas in a dusty Oldsmobile with 116,000 miles in an uphill effort to unseat the most powerful Republican in the United States Senate.
Now and then, a voter will read Ms.
O'Dell's little green nameplate -- "Candidate U.S. Senate" -- and ask with a star-struck look about her opponent: "Do you know Bob Dole? I mean, have you actually met him?"


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL  Nets Lose in Ottawa
Steve Kerr hit a jumper and a 3-point basket in a 13-4 run early in the fourth quarter, lifting the Cleveland Cavaliers to a 113-97 exhibition victory over the Nets last night.
The victory at the Ottawa Civic Center ended a three-game losing streak for the Cavaliers (3-4) and evened New Jersey's preseason mark at 3-3.
Larry Nance had 17 points and 12 rebounds to lead a balanced attack that saw the Cavaliers shoot 61 percent from the floor.
John Williams scored 15 points on 5-of-5 shooting from both the field and the foul line, while Mike Sanders and Craig Ehlo each had 12 points.
Drazen Petrovic led New Jersey with 17 points.
Derrick Coleman had 15, and Chris Morris, Kenny Anderson and Rafael Addison each had 10.. (AP)


It's Your Move, Only if You Understand the Language


Policeman Accused In Rape in Brooklyn
A 26-year-old police officer was charged yesterday with raping a Brooklyn woman in her apartment last month.
Officer Sean F. Lawrence, who is assigned to the 83d Precinct in Brooklyn and who was off-duty at the time of the incident, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges of first-degree rape and first-degree sexual abuse before Justice Nicholas Coffinas of State Supreme Court.
Justice Coffinas released him without bail pending a hearing Nov. 12.


Ally &amp; Gargano Gets BMW Dealers
The newly formed association of metropolitan New York BMW dealers yesterday named Ally &amp; Gargano in New York to handle its $3 million account.
The agency won over Cox Landey &amp; Partners in the final stages of the review.
In a telephone interview, Ron Napoli, chairman of the 35-dealership association in Mount Kisco, N.Y., said, "We felt Ally was the best equipped to handle our business." Other agencies participating in the competition, which began last month, were, Charlie &amp; Company in Nashville; Goldsmith/Jeffrey; Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss; Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Staglino.


For the First Time, Puckett's a Free Agent
Kirby Puckett, considered the franchise in Minnesota, took a step yesterday that the Twins could have averted five months ago.
Puckett, among the handful of baseball's premier players, declared himself a free agent, instantly creating competition for the Twins.
Fourteen other players, including Dick Schofield of the Mets and Scott Sanderson of the Yankees, also filed for free agency, raising the total to 73.


Books of The Times; Love and Death as the War Goes On All Around
The English Patient By Michael Ondaatje 307 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
"A novel is a mirror walking down a road," muses one of the characters, recalling Stendhal, in Michael Ondaatje's new book, "The English Patient," a co-winner in England (with Barry Unsworth's novel "Sacred Hunger") of the 1992 Booker Prize.
In the mirror of "The English Patient" we see bombs exploding and burning airplanes falling out of the sky.
We see a woman playing hopscotch in the hall of an Italian villa and a statue of the Virgin Mary rising out of the sea.
Sometimes these images coalesce to form astonishingly vivid pictures in the reader's mind.
At other times, they seem laboredly poetic.


Winds Sweep African Soil To Feed Lands Far Away
Hot and potent, the October winds scoop the thin topsoil off the African savanna, swirl the dust high into the skies and thrust it west on a journey that can stretch thousands of miles.
Scientists tracking this dust say it bears a message as harsh as the law of the jungle: The severe and lethal droughts of Africa are a boon for life in the Atlantic Ocean and for soil and vegetation in the Americas.


Battle for Senate Is Feeling Impact of Presidential Race
Prospects for a Clinton landslide in New York have helped unite typically fractious Democrats, who are working for the kind of big margin that would send Republican Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato back to Long Island and many of them to Washington.
Their coordinated campaign, which is culminating in a 100,000-phone-calls-a-night blitz, is aimed in particular at fighting complacency and luring those Democrats who have long supported Mr.
D'Amato over to back his opponent in the Senate race, State Attorney General Robert Abrams.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
After an absence of nearly a year from the corporate debt market, Discover Card, owned by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, yesterday priced $1.1 billion of senior asset-backed certificates through underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds.
The certificates being offered to the public are backed by credit-card loan receivables and sold through a Discover Credit Card Trust 1992-A established solely for that purpose.
Underwriters said the senior class has a weighted average life of 36 months, with an expected maturity of May 15, 1996, and a legal maturity date of May 16, 1998.


Water-Project Spending Falls Short for 2d Time
For the second year in a row the Dinkins administration has not spent all of the money it could have for repairs of the city's water mains, sewers, treatment plants and other environmental projects.
The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, Albert F. Appleton, who last December said he hoped to meet his capital-spending goals for this year, said yesterday that there were good explanations for why he did not spend the money allotted to his agency in the city budget, including that most projects cost less than expected.


Marlins Have Old Business To Finish
Baseball club owners hate arbitration when it is used to determine their players' salaries, but lawyers for the Florida Marlins told a New York State Supreme Court justice yesterday that arbitration is the proper forum for their dispute with a minor league club.
The justice, Shirley Fingerhood, withheld her view on that issue, but she disagreed with the Marlins' lawyers that it would be premature for her to become involved in the dispute.


Medical Madness on Capitol Hill
Congress has given the Defense Department two wildly inappropriate medical missions.
In a devious budget maneuver it made the Army, which has almost no expertise in breast cancer, the nation's chief underwriter of breast cancer research.
And in a mindless capitulation to lobbyists, it told the Army to conduct a large trial of an AIDS vaccine that few experts think is ready.
The desperate need now is to salvage medical good from this legislative fiasco.


No Headline
"The media tears them all down, so nobody looks good. So you don't really vote for anyone. All you're left with is: Who will do the least damage?" -- BILL BAIER of Grand Rapids, Mich.  [ A22:2. ]


Corrections
A subheading in the Book Notes column yesterday about an honor for James Laughlin, the publisher of New Directions, was printed in error.
It referred to a report that had been omitted in editing.
That report appears separately today on page C20.


INSIDE
Missteps Seen in Trade Talks
World trade talks are paralyzed because of a series of missteps by American and European negotiators, officials on both sides say.
Page D1.
Subsidies to Insure the Poor
Facing a deadline on health coverage for the uninsured, Gov.
Jim Florio has proposed to subsidize the coverage through private groups.
Page B1. 'All in Pain' at G.M.
With plants closing and the chairman out, "we're all in pain at General Motors," one worker said.
Page D1.
Russian Says Hiss Didn't Spy
A high-ranking Russian official said an archive review had cleared Alger Hiss of spying for Moscow.
Page B14.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about propaganda in political campaigns misstated the year that Walter F. Mondale and Gary Hart competed in the Democratic Presidential primaries.
It was 1984.


A.T.&amp; T. in Video Chip Pact
In a bid to develop the still unproved market for consumer videophones, A.T.&amp; T. and Compression Labs Inc. said yesterday that they planned to develop sets of microprocessors for other manufacturers wanting to produce video systems compatible with A.T.&amp; T.'s Videophone 2500.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the first to the market with a consumer system, will soon get competition from the MCI Communications Corporation, which plans to begin selling a $750 video telephone next year.
That would be half the price of A.T.&amp; T.'s model, which went on sale in the summer.


Indonesian Films Squeezed Out by U.S. Giant
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Kevin Costner and Michael Douglas are killing off the film industry in the world's fourth-most-populous nation.
Foreign films predominate in Indonesia.
According to recent entertainment listings in one popular Jakarta newspaper, 66 of 81 theaters were showing foreign films, most of them American.


MacLean Scores And Devils Rejoice
The gloves went up in celebration on the Devils' bench, eagerly awaiting John MacLean to congratulate him on the end of his goal drought.
MacLean touched every glove offered by his teammates and there was clearly a sigh of relief on his part as he sat on the bench midway through the first period tonight at the Civic Center.


In Suburbs, Vexation On Senate Candidates
It is possible to find people who say they are strongly for Alfonse M. D'Amato, or strongly for Robert Abrams.
It's possible -- but it's much easier to find people like Mike Matzkin, who was asked today if he had made up his mind about the senatorial election.
"I've made up my mind that they're both idiots," snapped Mr.
Matzkin, a camera company executive, as he stepped off a commuter train here.
"You can feel free to quote me on that. What are they going to do, sue me?"


For Congress From the Suburbs
Some of the more provocative Congressional contests this year are in New York City's suburbs.
Here are our recommendations in some key contested races, based on interviews and an analysis of candidates' records.
Second District (Suffolk County):
It's disappointing that Representative Tom Downey, who went to Washington in 1975 as a young Democratic reformer, has let power go to his head.
He still bristles at criticism of a 1990 junket to Barbados, where he and other lawmakers mixed with lobbyists who had business before their committee.
Even so, on many domestic issues and especially child care and welfare, Mr.
Downey continues to provide an unusually knowledgeable voice.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 8 A.M., CBS, (Channel 2 in New York), "This Morning." interview.
10 P.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Prime Time Live." interview.  Ross Perot
TODAY: 8 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live," interview.
10 P.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Prime Time Live," interview.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TODAY: 10 P.M., ABC (Channel 7 in New York), "Prime Time Live," interview.


A New President Is Chosen At Safeway Supermarkets
Safeway Inc., a major supermarket chain based in Oakland, Calif., has named Steven A. Burd president of the company.
Mr.
Burd, 43 years old, succeeds Peter A. Magowan, who will continue as chairman and chief executive.
The appointment was effective Tuesday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
TLC GROUP L.P., New York, said all lawsuits brought against Reginald F. Lewis, chairman and chief executive of TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., by creditors and bondholders of McCall Pattern Co. have been ended.
As part of the settlement, Mr.
Lewis will receive $1 million from McCall's insurers.


More Cases, Costs and Fears Under Wider AIDS Umbrella
In recent years, Katrina Haslip, who is infected with H.I.V., has suffered several bouts of bacterial pneumonia and an abnormally low count of immune system cells.
She has never been considered as having AIDS, but if a proposal to expand the Federal Government's definition of the disease goes through, she will be.
To Ms.
Haslip, a 33-year-old health educator with an AIDS organization in New York City, that diagnosis will have the taste of triumph, a vindication of her efforts to have Federal officials ment recognize the scope of AIDS among women.


Brooklyn Is At the Center Of a Dispute On the Police
As a tense Crown Heights braces for a verdict in a murder trial stemming from last year's racially charged violence, the Brooklyn community has moved to the center of the long-running feud between the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and Mayor David N. Dinkins.
A day after the arrest of two students at Medgar Evers College left one officer injured and led to allegations of police brutality and a student protest at the local station house, the Mayor strongly defended his decision to send Fritz W. Alexander 2d, the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, to Crown Heights.


Market Place; Ross Cosmetics: The Report Is In
THE results are finally in, and Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers does not appear to have been played quite so fast and loose as many people thought.
But that's about as far as the good news goes.
Rumors have been flying about Ross since June, when the company disclosed it had been secretly controlled for several years by its largest supplier -- a disclosure that made Ross stock plunge 66 percent.
Surely the troubles do not end there, traders suggested.
Ross must also be cooking its books -- maybe even laundering money, they whispered.


F.B.I. Did What It Had to in Investigation
To the Editor:
"The Federal Bureau of Temptation" (editorial, Oct. 28) questions the use of a sensitive investigative technique employed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in a case involving Ross Perot and wiretap allegations about the Texas chairman of the Bush-Quayle campaign.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON SUSPENDS OUTPUT OF A SWEETENER
Johnson &amp; Johnson suspended production of its artificial sweetener as it awaits clearance to sell the product in the United States and other countries.
The current stockpile of the product, called Sucralose, is enough to meet demand for the foreseeable future, a spokesman said yesterday.
The halt caused the health-care company to lay off 25 people in New Jersey and 35 in Georgia.
The company said it did not know when it would resume production.
Sucralose now sells only in Canada, where the company was cleared to market the product in September 1991.
The company's shares rose 37.5 cents yesterday, to $49.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


McDonnell To Contract Work Out
As part of a reorganization announced in August, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation may start trimming costs by contracting out some work that has been performed in house, company spokesmen said today, confirming a published report.
The cost-cutting strategy, which can save millions of dollars but costs workers their jobs, is just taking hold among aerospace companies, which are having to become more competitive as orders for airliners, fighter planes and weapon systems have declined.


Yugoslavs Face Hard Winter as the Blockade Bites
The truncated Yugoslav federation is reeling under the impact of the five-month-old United Nations economic blockade, which has sent prices soaring, brought major industries to a halt and left a dispirited population of 10 million facing the hard Balkan winter with little heat or hope.
But the blockade, imposed on Serbian-dominated Yugoslavia by the Security Council late in May for the leading role taken by Serbs in the Balkan war, has produced a political rift pitting Yugoslavia's President and Prime Minister against Slobodan Milosevic, the hard-line nationalist President of the Serbian Republic.
Mr.
Milosevic's downfall, along with an end to ethnic fighting, is widely seen as necessary if the the sanctions are to be lifted.


About Consumer's World
Articles about consumer products and services, formerly published Saturdays on the Consumer's World page, will now appear in this section.


Somalis Try a Food Center Without Gunmen
As the time for a midday meal approached for 500 precariously thin mothers and children, an unusual atmosphere of calm pervaded the outdoor kitchen here as huge vats of rice, beans and oil burbled on open fires.
The ugly hallmark of feeding centers in Somalia -- the beating of desperate, hungry people by armed men as they lunge for food -- was absent.
In a situation that is revolutionary in Somalia, there were no gunmen at the gates of this newly established center for the hungry to decide who gets in and who doesn't, no gunmen around the sacks of food and no gunmen to intimidate the hungry as they lined up for their scoop from the cooking pot.


New Pact for Meyer
The DePaul basketball coach, JOEY MEYER, has signed a multiyear contract extension, the school announced yesterday in Chicago.


The Stars and Stripes, Deconstructed
SIXTY artists have redesigned Old Glory, and few, if any, of the works resemble Betsy Ross's handiwork.
The reinterpretations, by artists like Roy Lichtenstein, Glenn Ligon, Judith Shea and William Wegman, are part of the exhibition "A New American Flag" at the Max Protetch gallery through Jan. 9.
The artists were invited to create flags that they felt would better represent Americans today.
Joyce Robins deconstructed the flag, creating a heap of ceramic ribbons and stars (at right).


William W. Foshay, Law Firm Head, 82, And Golf Executive
William Ward Foshay, a leading corporate lawyer, professional golf official and philanthropist, died on Tuesday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 82 years old.
He died after a long illness, a family spokesman said.
An expert on corporate law and securities, Mr.
Foshay practiced for 40 years with the firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, serving as its chairman from 1972 to 1979, when he retired.
He organized and headed the Securities Law Committee of the City Bar Association in New York.
He was the chief legal adviser to the First Boston Corporation and did the legal work on the Ford Motor Company's first stock offering.
He served as a director of the Marine Midland Bank, Congoleum, the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation and Pitney Bowes, among others.
Mr.
Foshay was president of the United States Golf Association in the 1960's, officiated at the United States Open and was the chief rules arbiter at the Masters tournament.
Wide Institutional Ties
He served as a board member of the New York Public Library, the Children's Aid Society, the Arthritis Foundation, Fishers Island Club and the Hobe Sound Company.
He was also a benefactor of Harvard and president of the Dunlevy Milbank Foundation.
Mr.
Foshay was born in Port Chester, N.Y.
After graduating from Harvard College in 1931, he studied at Oxford, and was graduated from Harvard Law School in 1935.
He was married for 44 years to the former Ella Dunlevy Milbank, who died in 1982.
Then he was married for eight years to the former Cynthia Banks Alexandre, who died last year.
He is survived by his son, William W. Foshay Jr. of Orange, Va.; three daughters, Katharine Plum, Barbara Foshay Duke and Ella Milbank Foshay, all of Manhattan; nine grandchildren; one great-grandchild, and three stepchildren, DeWitt Alexandre Jr. of Far Hills, N.J., Cynthia A. Rogers of Far Hills and Anne A. Brett of Weston, Conn.


Candidate Perot Might Learn From Strategist Perot
Looking at the way he has planned his campaign, almost any candidate would long to have Ross Perot as a campaign manager.
But few handlers would like to have him as a candidate.
As a tactician, Mr.
Perot has devised a campaign strategy that focuses a strong, clear message on the economy and using his vast financial resources to get that message out through paid advertising.
At the same time he has minimized his weaknesses, limiting time on the stump where he can be a rambling, awkward speaker and, for the most part, keeping away from reporters who tend to draw out his white-hot temper.


Arazi to Forgo Classic's Dirt for Mile's Grass
Arazi, the mystery horse from Europe, was entered today in the $1 million Breeders' Cup Mile on the grass instead of the $3 million Classic on the dirt as he raced along the road to redemption in America.
The European champion led a herd of 21 horses from the Continent who joined 71 others in formally entering the $10 million series of seven Breeders' Cup races at Gulfstream Park Saturday.
But although he seemed to be taking the prudent path in terms of racing distance and surface, Arazi was nonetheless installed as the second choice to the English star Selkirk in a strong field of 14.


Walter Butler Mahony Jr. Editor, 77
Walter Butler Mahony Jr., a retired executive editor of Reader's Digest and a member of its board, died on Saturday at his home in Bedford, N.Y.
He was 77 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Islander Uncertainty Beyond Sideboards
Outside the Plaza Hotel on Central Park South, the men, all of them well-dressed and smiling, climbed into the long limousine for a ride back to Long Island.
What was wrong with this picture?
Nothing really, except that three of the men were members of the Islanders' new managing partnership and a fourth was Bill Torrey, the former chairman and general manager.
Perhaps the Islanders' rapidly changing front-office roster is ready for another overhaul.


Study Documents Lead-Exposure Damage in Middle-Class Children
Children from middle-class families are as likely as poor children to suffer losses in intelligence after exposure to low levels of lead early in life, according to a new study.
The study appears to answer critics who have suggested that research on the exposure of poor children to lead might have failed to take into account other factors, like socioeconomic standing or genetics, that could affect intelligence.


Vietnam's Scars Reach a New Generation
AS a small child she found her father cold and distant, consumed by paralyzing memories of Vietnam combat.
He would act as if she were not even in the room, and spent hour after hour playing videotapes about the war.
Years later, the woman recalls the pain.


Fears Over the Post-Stempel Era
Fred Mosley was in his pickup truck Monday morning, making a sandwich run on his break, and brooding, as usual, over the General Motors plant closing next year.
Would he be transferred to another plant -- and how long would the next auto plant stay open?
Would his wife quit her job and follow him, or would she insist they stick it out in Michigan?
Was Bob Stempel in or out?


Spike Lee's Request: Black Interviewers Only
Four weeks before the opening of his widely anticipated film "Malcolm X," Spike Lee, the director, has laid down a challenge to newspapers, magazines and television stations around the country.
He has told them that he prefers black journalists to interview him.
The request has touched off a storm.


Review/Ballet; Nowhere Near Kansas, Paul Taylor's 'Oz'
"Oz," presented at the Paul Taylor Dance Company's opening on Tuesday night, is total Taylor, radiating a luminous purity that other choreographers today would not dare attempt.
A madcap fantasy with a wistful flavor unlike that of the L. Frank Baum books, this Taylor premiere possibly has too much originality for its own good.
Mr.
Taylor reportedly read 17 of the books that began with "The Wizard of Oz" by Baum and introduced the Kingdom of Oz and a spunky Kansas heroine, Dorothy, to generations of believers in munchkins.
In all there were 39 Oz books, 14 of them written by Baum from 1900 to 1920 and the rest by successors, chosen by his publishers, through 1951.


Bonds Gain on a Presidential Poll
Like a sailboat picking up a sudden gust, the bond market got a second wind just before trading finished in New York yesterday.
The late action left the market a little higher on the day, with the price of the 30-year bond up 3/32 , to yield 7.6 percent, down from 7.61 percent Tuesday.
The late finish was powered by the results of a new Cable News Network poll which showed that the Presidential race had narrowed to 40 percent for Gov.
Bill Clinton and 38 percent for President Bush.
With a margin of error of three points, some traders saw the Democrat's lead, which was in double digits just days ago, evaporating.


Gross National Letdown
President Bush smiled when he learned this week that economic growth during the third quarter reached a surprising 2.7 percent, almost twice the previous rate.
But his smile shouldn't be broad.
The new figure almost certainly exaggerates the health of the economy, which continues to creep along at a painfully slow pace.
Even the 2.7 figure is half the normal rate of recovery and not enough to bring down unemployment.
And there are plenty of reasons to question whether the third-quarter pace will continue.
Part of the uptick was due to an aberrant surge in defense spending, another part to consumers drawing down savings at an unsustainable rate.
And the figure may well be revised downward once the Commerce Department checks its technical procedures for handling inflation.


Robbed of Car, Wallet and Footing, Not Wits
A Brooklyn man whose car was hijacked in the Bronx yesterday was forced from the vehicle at gunpoint, taken to the roof of a housing project, robbed of his wallet and then left dangling from a rope 19 stories above the ground, the housing police said.
Although he clung to the rope for about 45 minutes with only one foot resting on a window ledge, the man, Andre Modeste, escaped without serious injury, suffering only minor rope burns on his hands, the police said.


A French Director Surprises Himself By Filming in Vietnam
The setting is French colonial Vietnam in 1929.
The central characters are a young French girl, fatherless and barely able to make ends meet, and an older Chinese man, cultivated and rich.
The two have an affair.
What makes the lush, erotic drama "The Lover" unusual is not so much the depiction of the affair, which transcends race and age, but the fact that the movie is the first Western film in decades to be made in Vietnam.
The movie, based on the best-selling autobiographical novel by Marguerite Duras, opens tomorrow.


China Edges Out 2 Leaders (Deng's Orders?)
One of the lingering mysteries after the recent 14th Communist Party congress is what happened to the political fortunes of one of China's most powerful families.
President Yang Shangkun, who with his younger half-brother spent the last few years amassing growing power in the party and in the army, had been considered a prime candidate to succeed Deng Xiaoping as China's paramount leader.
But after some puzzling events at the party congress, that now seems much less likely.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Oct. 16 about the lower Connecticut River Valley gave an incorrect figure for the monthly shipments of ivory from Zanzibar to Deep River, Conn., in the 19th century.
It was 12,000 pounds.


Army Investigating Scores of Complaints Of Sex Harassment
After complaints from scores of women, the Army has started an extensive investigation into sexual harassment at two large bases in St.
Louis, senior Army officials said today.
The complaints were brought to the Army's attention by consultants it had dispatched last summer to see whether sexual harassment was widespread on bases.
The consultants were sent to seven installations around the country as a result of the Army's eagerness to avoid a harassment scandal like the one that grew out of a convention of Navy aviators last year.


The Oregon Trail of Hate
Bigotry is on the ballot next Tuesday in Oregon, Colorado and in Portland, Me.
Voters in those states will consider initiatives that would legitimize discrimination against homosexuals.
All three campaigns originated with fundamentalist Christian groups that portray legal protections for gays as undeserved "special rights." The Oregon and Colorado measures have received strong backing from Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition, which has been organizing furiously this fall in local races across the nation.


Perot Goes on Attack
Trying to put his populist campaign back on track, Ross Perot used a Denver rally to assert that President Bush cannot win and to declare that he and his supporters had revolutionized American politics.
Article, page A22.


Borden Announces Loss And Wide Reorganization
Borden Inc. said yesterday that it would make a sweeping reorganization that would idle as many as 3,500 employees, or about 8 percent of its work force.
It also said it lost $376.8 million in the third quarter largely because of more than $644 million in pretax charges for the restructuring and for accounting changes.
The loss is in contrast to net income of $98.8 million, or 67 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenues were $1.86 billion, essentially unchanged from the $1.87 billion of the third quarter of 1991.


Melvin Dixon, 42, Professor and Author
Melvin Dixon, a professor of English at Queens College whose works on African and African-American literature were widely praised, died on Monday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 42 years old.
Professor Dixon died of complications from AIDS, said his sister, Cynthia Peters, who also lives in Stamford.


Lenders Split On Backing O.&amp; Y. Plan
The bankruptcy reorganization plan of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest property manager, drew a more favorable response from Canadian than American creditors yesterday.
Some lenders to the Toronto-based parent company saw it as an important step toward a settlement.
Lenders to the American operations, however, spent an impatient day puzzling over how well this convoluted plan would protect their interests.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kitchens of Distinction
Marquee Chelsea
Patrick Fitzgerald, the singer and bassist of Kitchens of Distinction, may be too genial for his own good.
On Friday night, lights strobed and twirled and flashed as Dan Goodwin's socking drums and Julian Swales's fast-strummed, echoing, ringing guitar turned each song into a propulsive blur.
The band's music is on the pop border of English dream-pop, a style in which noise engulfs songs as if they can no longer hold back the chaotic emotion within.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
IT'S normal for parents and grandparents to disagree on some matters of how the grandchildren should be raised.
The issues range from the trivial to the profound: What's a proper bedtime?
Are toy guns allowed in the home?
What religious instruction, if any, should a child receive?
What makes these disagreements problematic isn't their content.
Rather, it is the intensity of the emotions and the symbolic issues underlying the relationships among the three generations.
"When your parents criticize how you're raising your children, it can evoke a feeling that they're not approving of you, or that you're not yet grown up," said Dr.
Nancy K. Schlossberg, a professor of counselor education at the University of Maryland at College Park.
She recalled disagreements with her own mother 25 years ago, when her daughter was a toddler.
She allowed her daughter to be messy at times, as a way of encouraging the girl's creativity.
Her mother thought she wasn't nearly strict enough.


Arnold Fortuna In Finnegan Merger
Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston and Finnegan &amp; Agee Advertising in Richmond said yesterday that they had merged through an aquisition of Finnegan by Arnold Fortuna.
The merged agencies will have combined billings of $247 million and 400 employees.
Terms of the deal, which is effective Jan. 1, were not disclosed.
In a telephone interview, Ed Eskandarian, Arnold Fortuna's chairman and chief executive, said he had had his eye on Finnegan for a couple of years.
"It was a natural," he said, adding, "It sets a platform for our future growth in the Southeast region and complements our mutual client, McDonald's." Both agencies have regional accounts for the McDonald's Corporation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. directors are preparing to promote John F. Smith to chief executive, but they are signaling that he will have six months to a year to prove he can perform radical surgery on the auto maker.  [ Page D1. ]  Two of G.M.'s three nonautomotive units reported higher third-quarter profits.  [ D7 ]
Ford Motor lost $158.9 million for the third quarter, down from a loss of $574.4 million in the 1991 period.  [ D7. ]


For Kenya's Top Entrants, It's More Than a Test Run
They are an intriguing study in kinetic energy: Two Kenyans, untested at the marathon distance, blessed with blazing road-running speed.
"I have heard about the marathon," said Sammy Lelei.
"I hear people say they have run until they walk, and I wonder what will happen."


Review/Television; Assessing the Candidates' Health-Care Ideas
If, with so few days left before you have to pull the lever, the differences between the Republican and Democratic proposals for health care still seem fuzzy, you could do worse than tune into tonight's edition of "The Health Quarterly" at 10 P.M. on Channel 13.
Roger Mudd visits families caught in what he calls "the great American health-care squeeze." All are worried about the loss of health insurance, a condition that afflicts 37 million people, most of whom make too much money to qualify for Federal help but too little to buy insurance on their own.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Calling the Election; TV Projections Again at Issue in West
The quadrennial debate is in full swing here about whether the networks call Presidential elections too early and thus discourage and disenfranchise West Coast voters.
Say, for instance, that Bill Clinton is projected the early winner in states up and down the East Coast and across the Midwest just as Californians, caught in eternal time-zone warp, are leaving their jobs.


Saul S. Weinberg, 80, Archeology Professor
Dr.
Saul S. Weinberg, professor emeritus of art history and archeology at the University of Missouri at Columbia and the founding director of the university's Museum of Art and Archeology, died Saturday at his home in Columbia.
He was 80 years old.
The museum said he died after a brief illness and had been doing research for the university's excavations at Tel Anafa, Israel.


New York City to Give 9 Awards for Design
Nine design, renovation and construction projects in New York City will receive Art Commission Awards for Excellence in Design at a ceremony to be held today at 5:30 P.M. at City Hall.
The recipients will include Platt &amp; Byard Architects, for its master plan for the renovation of the Flushing Town Hall in Queens, and the city's Department of Transportation, for its design for a traffic signal post that will be used on city streets.


C.I.A. Chief on Iraqi Loan Case
In an unusual and harsh indictment of the Central Intelligence Agency's handling of a billion-dollar bank-fraud case involving Iraq, the agency's director has ordered all employees to cease speaking publicly about the matter and has forbidden them from destroying any related documents.
The directive, in a three-page message sent Tuesday to every employee of the C.I.A., also acknowledged that the agency had failed to respond adequately to inquiries about the case from Congress and the Justice Department and vowed to improve cooperation with investigative bodies.


Sports of The Times; Call It The Lock Of the Irish
SOME college programs are known as "clean" while others are branded as "dirty." But who makes the distinction?
That's what Lamar Thomas wanted to know.
Shortly after the Miami Hurricanes had beaten Virginia Tech, 43-23, in Blacksburg, Va., on Saturday, Thomas, a senior wide receiver, sat on a stool in the visitors' dressing room.
He was partly savoring Miami's 25th straight victory, but also wondering about the program's image.


Johnson Gets Down to the Business of Politics
Brook Johnson was taking to the campaign trail for these final days of his race to unseat United States Senator Christopher J. Dodd, and not for the last time today the Republican businessman cast politics in terms of his experience.
The race for President, he told a supporter, was coming down to "nervous time" for people thinking of voting against President Bush.
"It's like in a company, when you've decided to replace an old piece of equipment," he said.
"When it comes down to doing it, you start asking, what if the new one doesn't work?"


I.B.M. to Sell Its Chips To Other Manufacturers
I.B.M. executives said today that the world's largest computer maker would begin offering memory chips for sale on the open market in large volume for the first time.
But the company will try to make them more attractive then those sold by its competitors by including them in larger systems of computer parts that will enable the customer to take advantage of I.B.M.'s design and packaging capabilities, the executives said.


Currents; A Glowing Bed, a Rocking Chaise
MICHAEL HURWITZ takes organic forms to extremes in his furniture designs.
Ivy creeps over his teak and marble "Mosaic Desk With Arbor," and birds flutter around a 15-foot-long bronze and wood room divider that doubles as a cage.
The pieces are included in one of a pair of solo exhibitions that open today at the Peter Joseph Gallery in Manhattan.


Spike Lee's Request: Black Interviewers Only
Four weeks before the opening of his widely anticipated film "Malcolm X," Spike Lee, the director, has laid down a challenge to newspapers, magazines and television stations around the country.
He has told them that he prefers black journalists to interview him.
The request has touched off a storm.


AT HOME WITH: Mr. Fish; Who Is That Clown In the Trailer?
STEP right up, ladies and gentlemen, and see the extra-wide trailer where the one, the only Mr.
Fish lives when he's not out clowning around.
Marvel at all the comforts of home in an aluminum box a mere 12 feet wide and 40 feet long: a full-size bathtub, a washer-dryer, a videocassette recorder.
Cast your very own eyes on the color-coordinated living area, where Mr.
Fish himself is hammering out an answer to the age-old question, which makes bigger bubbles, a spoonful of glycerine or a gallon of Mr.
Bubble?
Make that rubber-hammering.
And no, Mr.
Fish (a bushy-maned clown in the Big Apple Circus named John Lepiarz) and Mr.
Bubble (a soap solution in a bottle) are not related.


W. T. Carroll, 90; In 1940's, He Held Connecticut Offices
William T. Carroll, a Democrat who served as a Connecticut State Treasurer and a Lieutenant Governor and as a three-term Mayor of Torrington, died on Sunday at the Valerie Manor Health Care Center in Torrington.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Carroll was a lifelong resident of Torrington, in western Connecticut.
A former city Treasurer, he held the State Treasurer's post from 1945 to 1946 but was defeated for re-election.
He ran successfully for Lieutenant Governor in 1948 as Chester Bowles's running mate but, like Governor Bowles, was defeated in 1950 when the Republicans narrowly reclaimed the Statehouse with John Davis Lodge as chief executive.


David J. Bohm, 74, Physicist and Writer On Quantum Theory
David J. Bohm, an American-born physicist who taught at the University of London for 22 years, died Tuesday.
He was 74 years old.
A colleague, Basil Hiley, said Mr. Bohm died of a heart attack.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
EVEN if your house is well insulated, unsealed cracks and other air leaks may be robbing you of comfort and raising your heating and cooling bills.
Weatherstripping around doors and windows can help, but for the maximum benefit, spend a day or two scouting out and plugging leaks in less obvious places.
To detect air leaks in a building, professional energy auditors use instruments ranging from infrared scanners to tubes that emit thin streams of smoke. (To find an energy auditor, check the listings in the Yellow Pages under Energy Conservation Services, or call your local utility company.) You can test for leaks by holding thread or a strip of tissue paper near spots where outside air may be slipping inside.
If the thread or tissue wavers, you've found a leak.


Florio Offers Plan to Pay Health Costs
Facing a 30-day deadline for changing the way New Jersey pays for its uninsured residents' health coverage, Gov.
Jim Florio today proposed subsidizing private health-care groups like health maintenance organizations to cover those residents.
But Mr.
Florio left it to legislators to find a way to pay for the new coverage.
New Jersey's present method of financing health care for the uninsured -- a surcharge on the insurance bills of those who can afford to pay -- has been struck down by the courts, and the Governor and legislative leaders have agreed to end it by Nov. 30.


Candidates On Television
The New York Senate candidates, Robert Abrams and Alfonse M. D'Amato, have these scheduled television appearances in the coming days: SATURDAY: 9.A.M. to 9:30 A.M.
Separate interviews with each candidate on WPIX-TV, Channel 11 in the New York City area.
SUNDAY: 11:30 to 12:30 A.M.
Joint debate on WNBC-TV, Channel 4 in the New York City area.


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 9
The four teams that have reached the halfway mark of the 16-game season, Denver (5-3), Kansas City (4-4), the Los Angeles Raiders (3-5) and Seattle (1-7), all in the A.F.C.
West, get the weekend off for the last of the season's byes.


American-Russian Oil Venture Is Stalled
The American partners in White Knights, a pioneering joint venture in western Siberia with a Russian oil and gas production company, have "stopped funding, for the moment," because of a dispute over taxation, according to an executive of one of the American partners, Phibro Energy.
But another company, Occidental Petroleum, announced yesterday that it had begun exporting oil from Russia as part of another joint venture, also in western Siberia.


In Barnstorm Tour, Abrams Emphasizes Women's Issues
Concentrating almost exclusively upon the single theme of abortion rights, Robert Abrams traveled by chartered plane to five upstate cities today, condemning Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato as "an extremist on abortion" and an "enemy of women's rights to privacy."
Though interrupted at several stops by reporters pressing him on other issues, polls, attacks and mud-slinging on the campaign trail, he struggled throughout the day to keep the trip focused on women's issues.


WHERE TO FIND IT
"ALL people are not perfect," said W. Burdette Hunton, strolling past a row of dress forms made by his concern, the Wolf Form Company, in Englewood, N.J.
Most of the forms were, in fact, a perfect women's size 8, which clothing manufacturers favor for sample garments.
But there was also a custom-made women's size 16, with inches added to waist and bust; a child's form with a removable head, and a generous men's size 50, ordered by an opera company.
People with polished skills and pattern-perfect measurements seldom have problems fitting garments.
But for most stitchers, a clothing form can be a vital tool, particularly if it is customized.
Fitting problems are often eliminated by using a form, and for sophisticated methods of clothing construction, like French draping, a form is a necessity.


Klecko Is Indicted
A Federal grand jury in Philadelphia yesterday indicted 67 people, including the former Jets defensive lineman JOE KLECKO, in an alleged three-year auto insurance fraud scheme that targeted a Sun Company refinery.
According to the indictment, the defendants conspired to collect on car damages that never occurred.
The car owners reported that the damage resulted from emissions from Sun's Marcus Hook refinery.


Salvador Leader Suspends Military Cutbacks
In a sharp response to a United Nations plan to postpone full disarmament of Salvadoran guerrillas, President Alfredo Cristiani said tonight that he will suspend his actions to reduce the size of the armed forces.
Mr.
Cristiani said in a televised speech to the nation that he would allow the rebels until Dec. 15 to complete their demobilization under the country's peace accords, as proposed by the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.


Perot Plan Prescribes an Economic Disaster; Deficit Delusion
To the Editor:
In "Perot Medicine for Clinton" (Op-Ed, Oct. 7), Robert Litan is the latest Brookings Institution scholar to recommend some kind of two-part economic plan to jump-start the economy: a temporary stimulus by way of deficit spending on infrastructure and investment tax credits for the first two to three years of a Clinton administration, to be followed by Ross Perot's plan for higher taxes and further budget cuts to eliminate the deficit.


Water to the Rich Shouldn't Be World Preservation Ethic
To the Editor:
Re "Slaking California's Thirst" (editorial, Oct. 13), in which you commend a bill approved by Congress that says "water developed with Federal funds is a commodity no different from food and fuel that can be bought and sold within reasonable limits to the highest bidder":


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; As Race Looks Tighter, Theme Is Truth and Trust
Eyeing polls that suggest a closer race and facing a new round of negative Republican commercials, Gov.
Bill Clinton counterattacked today by accusing President Bush of routinely breaking promises to the nation and of running "the most reckless campaign with the truth" in modern American history.
"Every time Bush talks about trust, it makes chills run up and down my spine," Mr.
Clinton said in a speech here this evening that was extraordinary for the harshness of the attacks on Mr.
Bush.
"The very idea that the word 'trust' could come out of Mr. Bush's mouth after what he's done to this country and the way he's trampled on the truth is a travesty of the American political system." Varieties of Dishonesty
Referring to his adversary as "ol' Bush," and "George," Mr.
Clinton accused the President of lying about the accomplishments of his Adminsitration, lying about Mr.
Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas, and so on, for 10 searing minutes before a cheering audience.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: House Race; Again, an Unknown Puts Gingrich in a Tight Race
After surviving two unexpected brushes with political death, Representative Newt Gingrich appeared safe last summer when he squeaked through the Republican primary in a newly drawn, seemingly Republican district in the Atlanta suburbs.
But after barely ducking two fastballs to the head, the man the Democrats love to hate seems to be facing another one.
In a year when anti-incumbent fervor keeps scrambling the conventional political arithmetic, Mr.
Gingrich is viewed as being in a tight race with the third political unknown in two years to take a shot at him.


Miscellany
*
Cassidy &amp; Associates, Washington, added another company to its network of public affairs companies.
Beckel Cowan, a political strategy firm, was formed by Bob Beckel, who was named chairman and chief executive, and Glenn Cowan, who was named president.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Illinois; Senate Race Tightens Amid Dispute Over Ethics
The bitter, bruising, potentially historic Senate race between Carol Moseley Braun and Richard S. Williamson is winding toward its final days with a fifth of the voters undecided and the once rabid heroine-worship of Ms.
Braun appearing to have cooled.
In polls taken for The Chicago Tribune, Ms.
Braun's lead has fallen from 34 percentage points in mid-September to 18 points this week, eroded by accusations that she avoided paying the Government for her mother's Medicaid bills, a steady drone of attacks on her ethics by Mr.
Williamson and the appearance that she has coasted on her celebrity.


Is Oldsmobile Name a Marketing Lemon?
A MONTH after the General Motors Corporation began looking for a new advertising agency to help revive its troubled Oldsmobile division, the company is considering dropping the Olds brand altogether.
The Washington Post reported yesterday that General Motors executives were considering phasing out the Oldsmobile name because of consumers' negative feelings toward the 95-year-old car line.
An Oldsmobile spokeswoman said dropping the Olds name was not likely, but that it was possible.
"Nothing is sacred, including the name," said Jill Witzenburg, the spokeswoman.


Silence of the Churches
To the Editor:
"How to Slow the Slaughter" (editorial, Oct. 16), your suggestions for dealing with the Yugoslav tragedy, are well taken.
However, you fail to come to grips with the religious dimension of "ethnic cleansing," which reflects the position of the Western powers in general.


Old Posters For Lovers Of Design
STRONG, crisp graphic designs are catching the eye of poster collectors in New York these days, said Jack Banning, who runs Poster America at 138 West 18th Street.
Designs like the 1928 "Fetes de Paris," by Jean Carlu, and works by Russian constructivists, along with more than 5,000 others, will be on sale this weekend at the International Vintage Poster Fair at the St.
Moritz Hotel.
Mr.
Banning and his partner, Louis Bixenman, who are coordinating the fair, said they expected about 20 dealers from France, Switzerland, Germany, England, Italy and the United States.
They will offer everything from circus and political posters to works by A. M. Cassandre and Toulouse-Lautrec.


Currents; Wall to Wall, the Inspiration of Africa
IN 1987, Cheryle W. Dent made a bedspread for her sister, Celeste.
Little did Ms.
Dent know that her creation would help push her from a career on Wall Street to one in interior design and home furnishings.
Today, the ex-stockbroker and her partner, Kim Bressant-Kibwe, produce a line of African-inspired wallpaper.
Their company, African Home Inc., offers four styles of wallpaper: "Benin," "Crest of Africa," "African Paradise" and "Flora." The subtle designs, created by Alton Butterfield, are custom-made in any color combination.


A New House District Could Make History
The new 13th Congressional District here may very well enter the history books on Tuesday as the first in New Jersey to send a Hispanic-American representative to Washington.
The Democrat on the ticket, in a district where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by as much as six to one, is already the subject of talk about the influence that he would carry as one of the few Hispanic-Americans in the national political arena at a time when they represent the nation's fastest-growing ethnic group.


11-Year-Old in Custody Battle Wants to Trade In His Lawyer
In an unusual case involving the legal rights of children, an 11-year-old boy sought court permission yesterday to hire his own lawyer to represent him in the custody battle that his parents are waging as part of their divorce.
The youngster wants to dismiss a court-appointed law guardian, Goldah Magill, with whom he is said to not get along.
Instead, he wants to be represented by Martin Guggenheim, a professor at the New York University School of Law.


Democrats: Alarming Words for the Elderly
The Democratic National Committee yesterday began broadcasting two 30-second commercials, one on Medicare and one on "tough times" for middle-class families.
Because they are paid for by the Democratic Party, these advertisements do not mention any candidates by name.
ON THE SCREEN: Opens with these words in white on black background: "Before you vote, remember the record," in white on black background, followed by a series of black and white photographs of elderly people.
There have been Republican efforts to cut payments to doctors and hospitals, though not beneficiaries.
It is true that the economy has grown more slowly during Bush's Presidency than in any other four-year term since Herbert Hoover's.
But the recession in the early 1980's was much more severe than the one during the Bush years.
SCORECARD: This ad features a familiar scare tactic of the Democrats: playing up to senior citizens' fears that their Social Security will be cut.
It has long been a sure-fire issue for the Democrats, though it is doubtful that Congress would ever approve a cut in entitlements.


Perot Plan Prescribes an Economic Disaster; Roads to the Future
To the Editor:
It is a grave mistake to view Federal spending on public works as merely a means of generating temporary work in times of economic distress.
Rebuilding the nation's infrastructure should not simply be motivated by "activist risk-taking," as one economist characterizes it in "Old Idea Gains New Respect: Spending Way Out of Slump" (front page, Oct. 8).


Deadline For G.M.'s New Chief
As the General Motors Corporation's board prepares to promote John F. Smith Jr. to chief executive on Monday, directors are signaling that he will have six months to a year to prove he can perform radical surgery on the auto maker.
People close to the board said directors had decided for now to exclude non-G.M. candidates from consideration to run the company, though at least one group of former Chrysler executives has discussed its interest in running G.M. with representatives of the G.M. board.


Randolph Journal; Uniting to Rebuild After 3 Big Fires
A giant pod-shaped structure sheathed in white vinyl, spanning 8,000 square feet, stands at the gateway of this central Vermont town, notably incongruous with the 19th-century buildings along the street.
While the odd-shaped edifice would be considered an eyesore in most communities, it is being hailed as a sign of hope here, where three fires devastated the downtown in seven months.


Gartner by Himself Seems Like a Youth Movement
Mike Gartner turned 33 this morning.
It is not a young age for the National Hockey League.
Eric Lindros, the new league superstar, is 19 years old -- "only a kid" -- as Lindros himself likes to say.
For the Rangers, the new face to watch is 19-year-old Aleksei Kovalev, the rookie who looks barely old enough to shave.
Watch Gartner play hockey, though, and it is hard to consider him an old man in a youngster's league.
Mark Messier can remember when Gartner was the 19-year-old, back in the 1978-79 season, when they both played for the Cincinnati Stingers of the now-defunct World Hockey Association.
He doesn't see a difference in the way Gartner plays the game today.


Coach Must Take a Seat
KIM JORDAN, Cornell's women's basketball coach, has been suspended for five practices by the university for holding practice before the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Nov. 1 starting date.
Under N.C.A.A. rules, players are allowed to practice on their own before Nov. 1, but coaches are not allowed to attend the sessions or require mandatory attendance.


Early Test for Rabin: A Rise in Attacks on Israelis
A few months ago, when Israel had a right-wing Government, there was a surge of armed attacks against Israelis.
The opposition blamed those in charge for taking a hard line in the Middle East peace talks, which it said had frustrated Arabs and driven them to violence.
Now Israel has a left-leaning Government, and there is another surge of armed attacks against Israelis.
The opposition blames those in charge for offering concessions in the peace talks, which it says appeases Arabs and makes them think they can get away with violence.


If You're Done In By Do-It-Yourself Decorating
ON a busy weekday afternoon at the Home Depot in Fairfield, Conn., the huge warehouse space is filled with a cacophonous symphony, mixing the bass of a blaring loudspeaker, the whine of saws biting into lumber, the beep-beep of carts carrying merchandise up the aisles and the murmur of couples debating the merits of porcelain versus brass doorknobs.
This do-it-yourself emporium has the ambiance of an out-of-control neighborhood hardware store.
Yet, tucked in a booth between kitchen sinks and mosquito-control kits, Home Depot has taken the unusual step of installing four decorators, who are available both for free on-the-spot advice and for orchestrating big renovation projects.


Venezuela Stable, but Fragile, Since Coup Attempt
Nine months after an army coup attempt nearly toppled civilian democracy here, Venezuela's paradox endures: Latin America's most muscular economic growth in a country suffering from political jitters.
On the economic side, Venezuela, rich with oil, is still the star of the Americas.


CHRONICLE
Across the Atlantic, another group assembled in the Savoy Hotel in London to celebrate the appearance of the new Everyman edition of Shakespeare, part of another publishing revival.
The Everyman Library is being reissued in England by Random Century and in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf.
Ninety volumes have come out in the last year.


Essay; The Voting Trigger
Perhaps you, too, have had a rough time this year deciding which candidate you are less against.
Here is how one Undecided Voter reached a decision: I searched for my key trigger.
Each voter has an array of triggers inside his mind: these range from taxes (higher under Clinton) to concern for human rights (lower under Bush); from government domination of the economy (worse with Clinton) to government intrusion into private lives (worse with Bush).


GOVERNORS REPORT GRIM FISCAL STATUS
Despite three years of budget cuts and tax increases, states' finances are still in turmoil as a result of the nation's weak economy, the National Governors' Association said today.
"States are under phenomenal fiscal pressure," said Raymond C. Scheppach, executive director of the association.


Carrying Sushi to Osaka Proves an Unpopular Plan
A widely publicized plan by a Japanese restaurant chain to import frozen sushi from the United States again faces an uncertain future -- not because of opposition by Japan's Government to rice imports but because of a fight within the company.
Fujio Matsumoto, the president of the Sushi Boy chain, has quit the company, as has Haruhiko Saito, another executive behind the plan to import the sushi.
Sushi Boy's remaining management is reviewing whether importing American sushi makes economic sense, said Jun Nakamura, a spokesman for the company.


Foreign Affairs; Going Bananas
The U.S. of A.: winner of the cold war, model to the world, heir to global leadership and greatness, incipient banana republic.
Banana republic?
Banana-republichood is attained when political, business and community leaders do things that are plainly stupid and self-destructive, and when they cannot pull themselves together to fix obvious wrongs and advance the plain national interest.


Britain and China Publish Secret Hong Kong Files
Britain and China today made public the texts of secret diplomatic exchanges between them on the subject of Hong Kong elections, each side trying to prove it was in the right in a bitter dispute over political changes in this British colony before it reverts to China in 1997.
Beijing asserted that the documents exchanged between the countries' foreign ministers and other diplomats showed that a confidential deal had been reached on key elements in the next legislative election here in 1995.
But Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, who has proposed a series of changes to broaden the voter base of the 1995 elections, said the 50-page exchange proved just the opposite -- that no deal had been made.


Executive Changes
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., named W. James McNerney Jr. senior vice president and president of GE South Asia.
SEAGRAM CO., Montreal, named Arthur Shapiro senior vice president for marketing of its Asia-Pacific/global duty-free division.


E. Stanley Crawford, Top Heart Surgeon, Dies in Texas at 70
Dr.
E.
Stanley Crawford, who helped develop new techniques in cardiovascular surgery, died Tuesday at the Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 70 years old and lived in Houston.
Dr.
Crawford died of respiratory failure from the effects of a stroke suffered in 1990, a son, Bruce G. Crawford of Houston, said yesterday.


Bill Cosby Trying to Buy NBC From G.E.
Bill Cosby, NBC's biggest star of the 80's, is trying to buy the television network from its current owner, the General Electric Company.
Norman Brokaw, the chief executive of the William Morris Agency and Mr.
Cosby's personal agent for 30 years, confirmed yesterday that he had discussed Mr.
Cosby's intention to make an offer for NBC with Robert C. Wright, the network's president.


Utility Issue Yields 9.06%
A $451 million debenture offering by the Long Island Lighting Company was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
Lilco's issue, which is due in 2022, is being offered with a 9 percent coupon at a price of 99.382 to yield 9.06 percent, or about 145 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Seoul Journal; Wealthy Like Croesus And Running a la Perot
The founder of the giant Hyundai industrial group and now this country's most outspoken presidential candidate, Chung Ju Yung, is tired of hearing himself described as the Ross Perot of South Korea.
"For one thing, I was successful in many, many industries," he said the other day, waving his hand in seeming disgust when Mr.
Perot's name came up.
"And he was lucky to make a little money in just one."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Def Leppard  Brendan Byrne Arena East Rutherford, N.J.
The hardest balance the English rock group Def Leppard has to maintain is between the standard bad boys image -- destructive rebellious rock stars -- and that of the good guys next door.
One slip either way, and whoops, there go the demographics.


A German Author Faces Charge of Informing
He was one of the rarest birds in the odd aviary that was the German Democratic Republic, an increasingly prominent member of the ruling Communist party and at the same time a best-selling writer in East and West Germany, and beyond.
Now, nearly three years after the fall of the Berlin Wall and two years after the formal dissolution of his country, Hermann Kant stands accused of having performed a third function, of spying for the Stasi, the dreaded East German intelligence agency.


Giants Not Hollering For Help From Fans
The Giants are jumping out of a frying pan into another hot skillet.
The football team that more and more is being booed at home will play Sunday night against the Redskins in Washington, where loyal fans drown out opponents' play calling, snap counts and peace of mind.
The Giants' players, struggling through a 3-4 season, are disturbed by the fickle support at home games.
Today, Coach Joe Gibbs of the Redskins acknowledged that the supportive fans at RFK Stadium had played a role in the team's almost annual success.
In a conference call, he said winning teams had four needs: owners willing to spend money, a stable coaching staff, good players and fan support.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about the heavy sale of books on the programs of Presidential candidates and on public-policy issues referred incorrectly to a political biography published this year by Birch Lane Press.
The subject is Al Gore, not Ross Perot.


CAMPAIGN SPENDING IN CONGRESS RACES SOARS TO NEW HIGH
Congressional campaign spending has soared to record levels this year as far more lawmakers than usual face tough fights to hold on to their seats, Federal Election Commission records show.
The trend is apparent in races for both chambers but is especially obvious in campaigns for the House.
In past years incumbency has almost guaranteed re-election for House members, but in 1992, voter hostility, aroused in part by some lawmakers' abuse of checking-account privileges at the House Bank, has frequently made it an obstacle.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the sexual assault trial in Glen Ridge, N.J., referred incorrectly to a comment from a defense lawyer, Alan Zegas, that members of women's groups were attending the trial in the hope of influencing the judge.
At the trial, Mr.
Zegas said he had received that information in a phone call from a reporter who had spoken with members of women's groups.
Mr.
Zegas did not receive it from a representative of the National Organization for Women.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Michigan Thinks, Rethinks and Thinks Again
As if flicking channels on the TV set, voters here have been switching from Presidential candidate to candidate to candidate, hoping to find true love but instead finding the political equivalent of one-night stands.
To be sure, in this western Michigan city that gave the world Gerald R. Ford, there are plenty of die-hard Republicans who started out as fans of George Bush and who will stay with him to the end, though even many of them have flirted with Ross Perot.
But more voters than not have been loyal to no one.


Clinton Poll Lead Narrows
Four new nationwide polls show Gov.
Bill Clinton's lead over President Bush narrowing, ranging from 2 to 10 percentage points, and Ross Perot with 16 and 20 percent of the vote.
When these polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton leads with 42 percent, followed by Mr.
Bush at 36 percent and Mr.
Perot at 17 percent.


Primed for Pinehurst And a Little Time Off
The PGA Tour sometimes seems like a monotonous merry-go-round of million-dollar tournaments, but this week's Tour Championship, besides being worth $2 million, actually provides a meaningful denouement to the American golf season.
The final official tournament, which begins Thursday at historic Pinehurst No. 2, is playing its intended climactic role better than any other time in its six years of existence.
Never in the history of the PGA Tour have so many players had a final chance to put their signature on a season.


D'Amato Town Named in Suit
Months before a handful of coveted Federally subsidized houses in Island Park, L.I., were to be awarded, a cousin of Sen.
Alfonse M. D'Amato said that the Senator was arranging for him to get one of the houses, a sworn court statement signed by an acquaintance says.
The acquaintance, a former Island Park public works employee named Michael DeLessio, said Mr.
D'Amato's cousin, Anthony Ciccimarro, made the statement to him in late 1979, months before the homes were supposed to be awarded impartially.


Is N.H.L. Ready for Stein?
How goes Gil Stein's quixotic quest for the National Hockey League commissionership?
After a Board of Governors meeting on Tuesday in New York, Bruce McNall, the chairman, was asked about owner reaction to the aggressive, public persona of the interim president.
Stein's progressive agenda includes Olympic participation in 1994 and high personal visibility.
Unlike John Ziegler, whom he replaced, Stein is often seen at games and is frequently interviewed on air and in print.
"Sure, there's people who don't like his personality," McNall, the owner of the Los Angeles Kings, told reporters.
"He talks to you guys. Some people don't like that. Sure, his aggressiveness offends some people. It's openly discussed at times." Asked if he personally supported Stein's candidacy, McNall said: "I can't express myself one way or the other. I personally get along with Gil."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST MORE CASES UNDER A WIDER AIDS UMBRELLA
Under the Federal Centers for Disease Control's definition, the number of new AIDS cases reported each year is expected to nearly double, bringing with it a two-edged sword to hard-stricken states like New York.
A1.
AMONG THE VOTERS, PERVASIVE DISCONTENT
With less than a week to go before New Yorkers elect a senator, voters seem unhappy and uncertain.
And nowhere is the discontent with both candidates more obvious than in New York City's suburbs, which many analysts describe as the race's crucial battleground.
B6.
Clinton's prospects unite Democrats.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY  AGENCY ASSAILED FOR UNDERSPENDING
The agency that oversees the rebuilding of New York City's water mains, sewers, water tunnels and sewage-treatment plants -- which was criticized a year ago for failing to let more than $600 million in contracts for construction and repairs -- is again under attack for underspending.
B3 THE POLICE FEUD AND CROWN HEIGHTS
As a tense Crown Heights braces for a verdict in a murder trial stemming from last year's racially charged violence, the Brooklyn community has moved to the center of the feud between the police union and Mayor Dinkins.
B3.
CHILD WANTS HIS OWN LAWYER
In an unusual case involving the legal rights of children, an 11-year-old boy sought court permission yesterday to hire his own lawyer to represent him in the custody battle that his parents are waging as part of their divorce.
B3.
JUST ENOUGH ROPE TO SAVE HIMSELF WITH
A Brooklyn man whose car was hijacked in the Bronx yesterday was forced from the vehicle at gunpoint, taken to the roof of a housing project, robbed of his wallet and left dangling from a rope 19 stories above the ground, the housing police said.
But he escaped without serious injury, the police said.
B3.
REGION  ROADBLOCKS TO DRUG DEALING
Bridgeport officials think they have found a way to halt the drug dealing and violence that have plagued the city's East End.
They plan to place concrete barriers at more than 30 intersections, creating a maze of dead-end streets and making it much harder for suburbanites to hop off Interstate 95, buy drugs and swiftly return to the highway.
A1.
A POSSIBLE FIRST FOR NEW JERSEY
The new 13th Congressional District in New Jersey may well enter the history books on Tuesday as the first in the state to send a Hispanic-American representative to Washington.
B7.
PSYCHOLOGIST'S VIEW OF GLEN RIDGE CASE
The mildly retarded woman central to the Glen Ridge sex-assault case engaged in sexual activities with four former schoolmates out of fear, friendship and her perception that the episode was a movie, a psychologist testified.
B8.
A SALESMAN ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL
Brook Johnson, the Republican candidate for Senate in Connecticut, has been portrayed as a millionaire carpetbagger by his opponent, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, but he campaigns like the salesman he once was.
B8.
Seneca Journal B8  Chronicle B10


Pop and Jazz in Review
James McMurtry
Maxwell's  Hoboken, N.J.
It was cranks' night out at Maxwell's on Sunday night.
When James McMurtry came onstage, everything seemed fine.
A singer and songwriter with a gift of narrative and a dusty, wry voice, Mr.
McMurtry, performing solo, ran through a number or two that seemed literally to fly from his fingers.
He strummed a beautiful rose-hued acoustic guitar, not with the complacent reverie of a folkie but with the bristling agitation of a troubadour on the run.
His rhythms had bristling movement; his stories told of small towns and distant destinations perhaps better unreached.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Florida Movers
Q.
I'm moving to Florida and would like some information on gardening there. -- E. Flinn, Greenwich, Conn.
A.
You are wise to look for specialized information, since the Florida climates contrast markedly with your present area and much of the soil is sandy, quick to dry and virtually devoid of nutrients.


Accord's Defeat Heartens Quebec Separatists
They celebrated with passion on Monday night as "no" ballots cast in a referendum overwhelmed an agreement intended to cement ties between Quebec and the rest of Canada.
But now at 7370 rue St.-Hubert, above the Rossy Le Familial discount store, it's back to work at Parti Quebecois headquarters as it gears up a campaign to make this province an independent nation.
"We are delighted with the Charlottetown results, but we have a party congress to get ready for in June, and soon afterwards must begin drafting a preliminary constitution," said Francoise Lalonde, a member of the committee in charge of the platform.
She was referring to the accord by the name of the city where it was drafted.


Ivy League Passer With Pro-Style Accuracy
The Ivy League would very likely be the last place that a National Football League scout would go in search of a premier quarterback prospect.
Yes, there have been a few Ivy passers who made their mark in pro football.
Columbia's Sid Luckman, a star more than half a century ago, is in the Hall of Fame.
Jeff Kemp, a Dartmouth quarterback in 1979 and 1980, had an 11-year career in the N.F.L.


Sovereignty And Casino Beckon To a Tribe
AT one entrance to the Cattaraugus Indian Reservation, someone has covered the green highway sign with a banner proclaiming: "Aboriginal Seneka Territory."
At the opposite end, outside the Seneca Hawk truck stop, another sign advertises "Goulash" and urges "Vote for Barry Nov. 3."
The balance between cultural and economic survival can be an awkward one on this Seneca Indian reservation, particularly at election time.
Members of the legally sovereign Seneca Nation will vote on Tuesday to fill 37 offices, including president, clerk and half the 16-member Tribal Council.


Albania Is Less Violent; Still, Its Economy Festers
Albania, racked by violent public disorders both before and after democratic elections in March, appears to have halted what was widely perceived as a gradual descent toward anarchy, a senior official of the Tirana Government and American diplomats say.
While bands of robbers still roam the countryside, the recently reorganized police forces have managed to isolate them, using vehicles and communications equipment acquired from Italy, said Bashkim Kopliku, the Minister of the Interior, who is visiting the United States.
In an interview, Mr.
Kopliku said "public order is not quite good, but it is better."


Gloved Ones in Japan
Touring major league stars realize it will take a better effort than they gave two years ago to keep from losing a series to their counterparts from the Japanese league.
The major league stars, who suffered their first series loss to Japan on the last goodwill tour in 1990 (3-4-1), take the field in Tokyo tomorrow night with Boston's ROGER CLEMENS on the mound to start an eight-game series against the Japanese stars.


For 2,007, It Isn't So Unlike the French
When the cannon sounds on Sunday, 2,007 French runners will become a five-borough foreign legion in the New York City Marathon.
"Running is not in our national character," said Muriel Verrier, an actress in children's theater in Paris who will run in her seventh New York Marathon.
"But more people are now running to overcome stress, not just in Paris, but in the country. We need movement, just like the Americans."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advertisements; Volleys of Data Replace Blatant Attacks of 1988
In a striking and unnoticed departure from the more blatant attack commercials that ruled in 1988, the Presidential campaigns this year are loading their advertisements with statistics and attribution in more subtle efforts to stretch the truth.
The advertising this year is just as tough, but it seeks to appear more credible by giving the impression that it depends on documentation and third-party sources.
Instead of having the candidate or the announcer launch a direct assault, many ads are no nonsense and even dull, quoting newspapers and ordinary-looking citizens.


No Headline
David K. Eckert, a decorated Air Force pilot who became a minister and an advocate for gay and lesbian military veterans, died Sunday at the David Grant Medical Center at Travis Air Force Base near Sacramento, Calif.
He was 47 years old and lived in Sacramento.
He died of non-Hodgkins lymphoma, said Beverly Eckert, his former wife.
In his 20-year Air Force career, Mr.
Eckert won medals flying medical planes in the Vietnam War.
Later, he was the commander of a WC-135 jet, a version of the Boeing 707, monitoring atmospheric radioactivity as part of enforcing a nuclear weapons ban.
At his death he was a retired lieutenant colonel.
After retiring with an honorable discharge in 1989, Mr.
Eckert acknowledged his homosexuality.
He was a founder of the Twin Spirit Veterans Association for gay and lesbian veterans and gave Congressional testimony on veterans with AIDS.
He then completed seminary school and became the interim pastor of the Delta Harvest Metropolitan Community Church in Stockton, Calif., and was active in the River City Metropolitan Community Church in Sacramento.
Both are nondenominational churches, many of whose members are homosexuals and lesbians.
Mr. Eckert was born in Texas City, Tex.
His marriage of 22 years to the former Beverly Bishop ended in divorce, but she said they remained close during the changes in his life.
He is survived by his companion, Bill Weaver of Sacramento, and two daughters, Elisa Anne and Angela Christine, both of Orangevale, Calif.


Review/Pop; Erasure's 'Phantasmagoria' With Frills
Andy Bell wore a cowboy outfit for the "electro-country-and-western" segment of Erasure's concert, "A Phantasmagorical Entertainment," at the Beacon Theater (Broadway at 74th Street) on Tuesday night.
But his hat, shirt and bell-bottomed chaps were all turquoise and covered with sequins; the chaps exposed his posterior, and he happened to be singing "Stand by Your Man." Erasure's other member, Vince Clarke, had just preened across the stage as an outsize Mae West, in hot-pink gown with exaggerated chest and bustle.
It was just one of the campy vignettes in Erasure's enjoyable, cheerfully subversive show, an ambitious production with dancers, scenery and a Bingo game at intermission.
The concert was the first of eight performances through Nov. 7.
On albums, Erasure plays electropop songs about love, with the unfettered, unironic emotionality of pure pop.
The lyrics are about hedonism, longing and romantic ups and downs; the opening "Siren Song" urged, "Wrap yourself up in every facet of emotion." Mr.
Clarke sends counterpoint ricocheting around Mr.
Bell's fervent crooning; individual notes -- never chords -- ping and hum and tweet, often bouncing up and down octaves, over a drumbeat that harks back to the disco era.
Exploiting the clarity that came from having most of the music canned, Erasure's show used a fully stereo setup that sent notes ping-ponging across the theater.


A Rising Cuban-American Leader: Statesman to Some, Bully to Others
Jorge Mas Canosa and his bodyguards travel around town in a bulletproof Mercedes-Benz because he fears Fidel Castro may try to assassinate him.
President Bush singles him out for praise when he speaks of how "the Cuban community has energized Miami," while Bill Clinton courts his support in hopes of winning Cuban-American votes.
And world leaders like Boris Yeltsin have been his guests here.
By just about any standard, no Cuban-American is more influential than Mr.
Mas.
Through the Cuban American National Foundation, the group he helped to found 11 years ago as a source of political support for the Reagan Administration, Mr.
Mas has become the most visible member of the Cuban-American community and one of the most effective power brokers in Washington for his cause, the fall of the Castro regime.


General Dynamics Gets Foreign F-16 Upgrades
The Bush Administration approved a $1.85 billion plan today for the General Dynamics Corporation to upgrade 399 F-16 fighter jets owned by the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark and Norway.
The plan, which has been under discussion for months, will give the countries advanced technology for their F-16 planes, which are reaching maturity.
New cockpits, advanced avionics and radar, a digital terrain system, enhanced night flying and a microwave landing system are among the improvements.


The Other Halves of the Democratic Ticket Work for Next Tuesday


Ford Registers a Loss for the Third Quarter
The Ford Motor Company, hurt by weak automotive volume in North America and Britain, reported today that it lost $158.9 million in the third quarter, narrowing from a loss of $574.4 million in same 1991 period.
Harold A. Poling, chairman and chief executive, singled out "instability in European currency markets" that "has led to lower sales in most of Ford's European markets, and will continue to affect the operating environment for the near term."


Tax-Exempt Funds Are Up But Taxable Yields Decline
Money market fund yields were mixed in the seven-day period ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report survey of more than 862 tax-exempt and taxable funds.
The rise in tax-exempt yields this week, a contrast to last week's drop, came as no surprise to IBC/Donoghue's analysts.
They noted that the municipal bond market was stabilizing, since the heavy issuance of debt had abated, allowing investor demand to catch up to supply.
The oversupply had exerted upward pressure on yields.


DELTA AIR PLANS TO CLOSE 8 OF 19 RESERVATIONS SITES
Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it would close 8 of its 19 reservations centers between June 1993 and fall 1994.
The closings, expected to save more than $24 million annually, will occur in Detroit; Houston; Jacksonville, Fla.;Knoxville, Tenn.; Memphis, New Orleans, San Francisco and Seattle.
Delta will guarantee the 1,500 permanent workers affected by the action positions in other Delta reservations centers and will pay the costs of relocating them.
Temporary workers -- a Delta spokesman could not specify how many are involved -- will be given priority if job openings occur at those centers, which include Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Miami, Los Angeles and Washington.
The spokesman also said Delta might consolidate its reservations centers in New York and Boston.


Perot Plan Prescribes an Economic Disaster
To the Editor:
In "Mr. Perot Presents Some Beef" (editorial, Oct. 19), you let Ross Perot off much too easy.
Mr.
Perot's "beef" is spoiled and lacking in nutritional content.
His television tables and charts, along with his book, are full of more obfuscations, inconsistencies and inaccuracies than you mention and, more fundamentally, lack understanding of how a modern economy functions.


U.S. WILL SPONSOR AIDS-DRUG TRIALS
Federal health officials said today that they would design and sponsor clinical trials involving a controversial drug that proponents say relieves some of the symptoms of AIDS.
Government scientists said they have agreed to work with several groups in designing trials to test the safety and effectiveness of using low doses of alpha interferon as a therapy for people infected with human immunodeficiency virus, the cause of AIDS.


Calendar: A Cemetery, An Aqueduct and More
Story of a Cemetery
Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street at Clinton Street; (718) 624-0890.
"Rediscovering Green-Wood Cemetery," an exhibition of prints, photographs, plans and artifacts, starts today and runs through Jan. 31.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $2.50; children 12 years old and younger, $1; members, free; no charge on Wednesdays.
From Noah's Ark
Steuben Glass, Fifth Avenue at 56th Street; (212) 752-1441.
More than 75 glass animals will be on display through Nov. 14.
Open Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
No charge.
Early Waterworks
Hudson River Museum of Westchester, 511 Warburton Avenue at Arthur Street, Yonkers; (914) 963-4550
.
An exhibition of drawings, photographs, maps and the like to mark the 150th anniversary of the Croton Aqueduct continues through Feb. 7.
A reception Sunday from 1 to 3 P.M. will note the structure's designation as a National Historic Landmark.
The 41-mile aqueduct was considered an engineering landmark when it was finished in 1842.
Dr.
F.
Daniel Larkin, consulting scholar for the exhibition, will speak about the aqueduct's design and construction on Sunday at 3 P.M. (Free with museum admission.)
Open Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Friday until 9 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3; those 11 and younger or 62 and older, $1.50; no charge from 5 to 9 P.M. on Fridays.
Cabinets and Clothing
Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street at Central Avenue, Newark; (201) 596-6550.
An exhibition of furniture by John Hein runs through Jan. 3.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.
A three-day workshop on Chinese influence on contemporary clothing design will be held tomorrow through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Fee, $145.
Reservations are suggested: (201) 596-6607.


CHRONICLE
It will be FRED FRIENDLY'S 77th birthday Friday, and toasts tonight at the Lincoln Center Campus of Fordham University will be delivered by some familiar voices, including those of WALTER CRONKITE, BILL MOYERS and ANDY ROONEY.
A program of videotapes of some of Mr.
Friendly's most memorable documentaries will be shown as a tribute.
"The light bulb went on and I first thought of the idea for this party after he had a stroke in January," said JOSEPH T. DEMBO, a former vice president of CBS News who is a professor of media studies at Fordham.
"I thought how nice it would be to get lots of his friends and former colleagues together to show him how fond we are of him."


Aide of Fugitive Colombian Cocaine Lord Is Killed
Striking a blow against Pablo Escobar, the fugitive Colombian cocaine lord, a combined police and army unit today shot to death a man identified as the Medellin cartel's military commander.
In a firefight, security officials in Medellin killed the man, Brance Munoz Mosquera, a 33-year-old escaped criminal charged with carrying out car bombings and assassinations of policemen for the Medellin cartel since 1989.


Events: Arts, Crafts, Exotic Clothes
An American Style
Fashion Institute of Technology, Katie Murphy Amphitheatre, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 760-7464.
Lectures on the American Arts and Crafts movement will be given on Wednesday and on Nov. 5, from 7 to 9  P.M.
The two talks on Wednesday will cover the cultural context of the movement and Frank Lloyd Wright's furniture for private clients.
On Nov. 5, the topics will be the work of Arts and Crafts designers and architects in California and the marketing of Arts and Crafts furnishings.
Tickets, available at the door, are $18 for both evenings, $12 for a single evening.
Students free.
Castles and Cities
Grolier Club, 47 East 60th Street; (212) 966-6565.
The Royal Oak Foundation's fall lecture series includes illustrated talks on castles in Britain (Wednesday), urban design in England (Nov. 9) and a two-part survey of English decorative arts in New York collections (Nov. 11 and 18).
Programs start at 6 P.M. and are followed by a reception.
Fee for each lecture is $17; members, $12.
Traditional Asian Dress
St. Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street; (212) 535-7496.
Theresa Reilly, a professor in the fashion design department of the Fashion Institute of Technology, will give three talks on traditional clothing and accessories of China, Japan and India.
The series, which is sponsored by the Institute for Asian Studies, starts on Monday, 6 to 7:30 P.M., and continues on Nov. 9 and Nov. 16.
Reservations are suggested.
Fee for the series is $30; individual lecture is $10.
Around Your Waist
School of Visual Arts, 214 East 21st Street; (212) 989-5057.
The New York Guild of Handweavers is sponsoring a workshop on making woven belts, on Saturday from 1 to 4 P.M.
Participants should bring a tape measure, yarn and embellishments like beads, buttons and feathers.
Fee is $5.
Brooklyn Renewal
Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment; (718) 788-8549.
Two walking tours will highlight restoration in Brooklyn neighborhoods.
The first, on Sunday, is of the waterfront area around the Fulton Ferry Landing.
It meets at 1 P.M. at Old Fulton Street and the East River.
On Nov. 7 there will be a tour of the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood.
This walk will include the former Sheffield Milk processing plant, which now houses the Billie Holiday Theater, and renovated storefronts, tenements and plazas.
It meets at 1 P.M. in the Sheffield building, on Fulton Street between Nostrand and Marcy avenues.
Fee for each tour is $6; $3 for children 12 years old and younger and those 65 and older.
Craft Workshops
Brookfield Craft Center, junction of Route
25 and Route 7, Brookfield, Conn.; (203) 775-4526.
Crafts courses will be offered on two weekends in November.
Classes on Nov. 7 and 8 include glass painting, silk painting and vine basketry; on Nov. 14 and 15, making plywood furniture, rag rugs and decorative border designs, among other topics.
Tuition is $190; members, $175; materials are extra.
Classes are held either in Norwalk, Conn., or in Brookfield.
Reservations are required.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Goes on the Attack As 5,000 Supporters Rally
Trying to put his populist campaign back on track, Ross Perot used a Rocky Mountain stemwinder tonight to rally his troops, to assert that President Bush is the candidate who cannot win and to declare that he and his supporters had revolutionized American politics.
The hour-long speech to a wildly enthusiastic crowd of about 5,000 supporters here had a sharper edge than previous ones by Mr.
Perot, whose campaign has been notable for its efforts to stay on the issues and away from attacks on his rivals.
Mr.
Perot repeatedly portrayed Mr.
Bush as a washed-up candidate and ridiculed Gov.
Bill Clinton's experience as a small-state governor.


St. Peter's Coach Ailing
The St.
Peter's football coach, ROY MILLER, has been hospitalized with colon cancer and is unlikely to return this season, school officials said yesterday in Jersey City.
The reoccurrence of the cancer was detected when the 47-year-old Miller went for a checkup.
The cancer was originally diagnosed in April, and Miller underwent surgery.


Currents; Recalling the Reading of Childhood
ARNOLD SCAASI'S love for reading grew out of the Sunday mornings he spent as a young child sitting on his father's lap and listening to tales of L'il Abner, the Katzenjammer Kids and Dick Tracy.
"I was fascinated by the written word -- that these letters made up words that made up sentences that made up thoughts," Mr.
Scaasi said.
Now, he has created a fantasy room that pays homage to Batman and reading.


Bridge
Players who fancy their analytical ability can rarely resist the old challenge: "Would you rather play or defend?" A good example of this genre is the diagramed deal played in July at the Grand Bridge Club in Franklin Square, L.I.
Sitting South was Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., who ventured three no-trump at his second turn after East had bid the red suits.
He gambled that East would not be able to run diamonds, and North's ten proved to be crucial in this respect.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; And What of the Also-Rans? Most Act Like Good Sports
Before the 1992 campaign finally ends, here's a catch-up on what's doing with the candidates who got left in the dust of the spring primaries and caucuses:
Most are being good political sports and working for their party's nominee.
But not all.


U.S. Politics Playing a Role In Deadlocked Trade Talks
Talks aimed at reducing trade barriers around the world are paralyzed because of a series of missteps by American and European negotiators, officials on both sides of the Atlantic say.
In the White House, the frustration and the estimation of the lost political opportunity are such that Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan today accused the Clinton campaign of sabotaging the talks.


Blue Jays Get Jump on Pursuing Cone
David Cone was in New York for an auction last night.
No, not that auction.
Cone's talents will be open for bids soon enough, though, and the Toronto Blue Jays will evidently have the first shot.
Cone, the marquee right-hander who was traded by the Mets to Toronto on Aug. 27, earned a World Series ring last weekend with the Blue Jays.
He said Toronto officials had approached him on Tuesday and asked to begin initial negotiations on a contract.
Cone said he would afford the Blue Jays the courtesy and not officially file for free agency until he had heard their starting proposal.


Edward L. Devlin, Publicity Executive, 38
Edward L. Devlin, the manager of entertainment publicity for CBS television, died Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Home Video
The release of Disney's "Beauty and the Beast" on tape tomorrow can be seen two ways by fans of laser disks.
To help prevent pirating abroad, release of the movie on disk, which doesn't have the copying safeguards of tape, is being delayed.
On the other hand, in its place Disney will release the disk of a film about the film called "Beauty and the Beast: The Work in Progress."


Durable-Goods Orders Fall As Personal Incomes Climb
Issuing the latest in a series of inconclusive economic reports, the Commerce Department said today that new orders for durable manufactured goods eased four-tenths of 1 percent in September, while personal incomes climbed seven-tenths of 1 percent.
Economists cautioned against taking either report at face value, saying the orders were stronger than they appeared, while the income figures were weaker.
The reports followed Tuesday's report that the economy expanded at a 2.7 percent annual pace in the summer quarter, compared with 1.5 percent in the spring, a pace analysts considered unsustainable.


An Honor for Howell
JACK HOWELL, who played seven seasons in the major leagues with California and San Diego, was named the most valuable player yesterday in Japan's Central League after leading Yakult to its first pennant in 14 years.


Meet the New Jets, Same As Old Jets
The Jets today downgraded starting quarterback Browning Nagle (sprained foot) and starting running back Blair Thomas (strained groin muscle) from questionable to doubtful, which makes it highly unlikely either will play in Sunday's game against Miami at Giants Stadium.
In most situations, when both the starting quarterback and running back are scheduled to be replaced for a game, there would be cause for alarm on offense.


D'Amato Presses Appealto Black Voters
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has crafted an appeal to blacks, which, even if it does not win him many new votes, is intended to keep Robert Abrams off balance among black voters, one of his core constituencies.
In today's issue, Mr.
D'Amato won the endorsement of New York's largest black-owned newspaper, The Amsterdam News.
He also announced he would meet this morning on the steps at City Hall with black ministers who support him -- one hour before his Democratic rival, Mr.
Abrams, had said he would go there and receive the blessing of Mayor David N. Dinkins and other prominent black elected officials and city leaders.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTOPHER CERF didn't want to consider the fact that most of the authors whose books he was celebrating at a party on Tuesday were unable to attend because they are dead.
"Don't say that," he suggested.
"We prefer to say that they are terminally inconvenienced." But the festivities went on in Mr.
Cerf's Upper East Side town house, with the usual cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and publishing-world gossip.
The occasion was the revival of the Modern Library series, with redesigned typography and jackets.
The first list contains 27 titles, with more to come at the rate of three a month.


Witness in Abuse Trial Calls Accuser Vulnerable
The mildly retarded woman central to the Glen Ridge sex-assault case engaged in sexual activities with four former schoolmates out of fear, friendship, and her perception that the episode was a movie, a psychologist testified today.
The witness, Dr.
Susan Esquilin, described the young woman as compliant and vulnerable, and said she engaged in sexual activities not for personal enjoyment but out of a sense of obligation to those she considered friends.


Silicon Valley Takes a Partisan Leap of Faith
Two months ago, a roomful of the nation's top high-technology executives met for dinner at the ranch of Apple Computer's chairman, John Sculley, to discuss something most of these lifelong Republicans never thought they would: supporting a Democrat, Gov.
Bill Clinton, in the Presidential election.
Over poached salmon at Mr.
Sculley's 15-acre spread in Woodside, Calif., the executives expressed a general frustration with the economic policies of President Bush and ultimately agreed to endorse Mr.
Clinton.
Though perhaps somewhat skeptical that any politician would make good on campaign promises, many were impressed that Mr.
Clinton had held private meetings with them to help formulate a national technology policy.
Many of them also believed his pledge to promote the resulting plan: form a partnership between business and the Federal Government to revive the economy and make critical industries, particularly in high technology, more competitive.


New Jersey's Poor Find That Blind Justice Is Broke
A monthlong argument between state and county officials over who should pay lawyers representing some indigent criminal defendants has produced one result: defendants like William Searight of North Brunswick are being left in jail for days or weeks because there is no money to pay for defense attorneys.
Mr.
Searight, who is 22 years old, was arrested July 1 with two friends on assorted assault and weapons charges after a street brawl.
Because a judge finally ordered a local lawyer to take his case last Friday, Mr.
Searight saw the criminal charges against him reduced to a single misdemeanor today, and he left the court free.


Critic's Notebook; In Music, Dead Men Have More Sales
Death has become a formidable marketing tool in the music business.
When Glenn Gould had that unexpected stroke in Toronto 10 years ago, his reputation had somewhat receded.
The glow of celebrity -- the lovingly publicized, relentlessly marketed image of spacey genius -- had given way to newer, more up-to-date eccentrics.
Gould's sudden death at the age of 50 gave sudden life to others.
Record executives awoke from their indifference with a start; Gould recordings were remembered and reissued.
In books, magazine articles and lectures, the musical establishment created a cottage industry of remembrance, offering the now-dead master's inner revelations, relayed telephonically over the years from his reclusive quarters in Toronto.


Race for Senate Presses On


Pop and Jazz in Review
Marcus Belgrave
Bradley's 70 University Place
Greenwich Village Through Saturday
In a room like Bradley's -- small, and without much amplification -- jazz musicians can wither away.
Every mistake is underscored, every leaden phrase sinks and every excess doubles in garishness.
The trumpeter Marcus Belgrave is leading a group there, and on Monday night, for his first set, he produced a series of improvisations that never slipped, staying graceful the whole time.


Plan for Incinerator In Brooklyn Backed
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation yesterday approved the hotly contested plan backed by Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council to dispose of New York City's garbage and build a new incinerator in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
The plan also calls for expanded recycling.
While the Conservation Department approved of the concept of a new incinerator, specific approval for the Brooklyn operation must still go through a separate state permit process.


No Term Limits When It Comes to Redskins' System
In the world of the Washington Redskins, a Super Bowl victory is an obstacle to overcome.
Winning the thing messes up their consistency, the word that Coach Joe Gibbs and his team lives by.
Still, Gibbs manages quite nicely.


Forstmann Resignation
John A. Sprague, one of the top four partners at Forstmann Little &amp; Company, said yesterday that he would leave the investment firm at the end of the year.
"I've been at the firm for 10 great years and have reached a point personally where I feel ready to see if I can do something on my own," said Mr.
Sprague, who is 40 and participated in many large takeover deals in the 1980's.
Mr.
Sprague, who is married and has two children, would not detail his plans, but associates noted that had acquired a 300-acre dairy farm in Rhinebeck, N.Y.


Milwaukee Signs Day To Five-Year Contract
TODD DAY, the guard-forward from Arkansas who was the eighth player taken in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a five-year contract with the Milwaukee Bucks last night.


Valenzuela Awaits Chance at Redemption
Pat Valenzuela took some slings and arrows after he rode Arazi to eighth place in the Kentucky Derby in May.
But the 30-year-old jockey from California got a vote of confidence and a pledge today from Allen Paulson, the co-owner of the colt who handles his racing in North America, including the choice of riders.
Valenzuela will ride four of Paulson's horses in the Breeders' Cup series on Saturday, and the owner said that he would reward the jockey with a new Rolls-Royce if he rode all four to victory.
He will go for it aboard the favored Eliza in the Juvenile Fillies, Fowda in the Distaff, Fraise in the Turf and the storied Arazi in the Mile.
He could do all right even without the Rolls-Royce.
The jockey's cut for winning four $1 million races would be in the neighborhood of $200,000.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 20 about a financial services company's decision to remain in New York City rendered the company's full name incorrectly in some copies.
It is the Morgan Stanley Group.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Steps Up Attacks on Democrat's Character
After a brief attempt to turn his campaign to his own vision for the country, President Bush crisscrossed Ohio today, buoyed by a belief that the Republican attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton's character is working, and campaigning on a single theme: trust.
Waving his arms in triumph at new public opinion polls and trumpeting the recent signs of economic growth, Mr.
Bush campaigned through a crescendo of rallies in Lima, Toledo, Strongsville and Columbus that ended with a blizzard of red, white and blue confetti and balloons here this evening.


Gay Irish Win Right to a Parade That Might Die
The Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, which has fought for two years to participate in the annual St.
Patrick's Day parade, finally won that right this week, only to learn that the organizers of the parade had decided several months ago to end its sponsorship.
On Tuesday the New York City Human Rights Commission reversed a ruling of its own chief law judge and ordered the Ancient Order of Hibernians, which has sponsored the march up Fifth Avenue for 151 years, to allow the gay and lesbian group to march in next year's parade.


Fischer's Attack Overwhelms Spassky
Bobby Fischer efficiently and powerfully smashed his way to victory over Boris Spassky yesterday in Game 25 of their exhibition match in Belgrade and now needs just one more victory.
The score stands at Fischer 9, Spassky 4.
Under the special, Fischer-constructed rules for this contest, he can no longer lose.
If Spassky should produce a miraculous comeback and bring the score to 9-9, the match would end as a tie and the $5 million purse would be divided equally.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about the non-employee directors of General Motors Corporation misidentified Edmund T. Pratt Jr.
He is chairman emeritus of Pfizer Inc.; he retired as chairman on March 1.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  AFRICAN DUST SPREADS WESTWARD  The hot October winds scoop the thin topsoil up from Africa, swirl the dust high into the sky and drive it west for thousands of miles.
Scientists tracking the dust say it is a boon for the Atlantic food chain and for soil and vegetation in the Americas.
A1  Somalian parents greet aid workers with rare show of friendliness.
A16  CONTRAST IN VENEZUELA  Nine months after a coup attempt nearly toppled democracy in Venezuela, a contrast endures: Latin America's strongest economic growth is pitted against political jitters.
Economically, Venezuela, an oil producer, is still a star of the Americas, growing 8.5 percent in the first half of this year.
A3  A fugitive Colombian drug lord's aide is killed.
A7  THE FRUSTRATIONS IN ISRAEL  News analysis: A few months ago, hard-liners governing Israel were blamed for frustrating Arab aspirations, which, it was said, led to a surge of armed attacks.
Now the country has a left-leaning Government, and there is another surge of attacks.
The opposition blames those in charge for offering concessions in the Mideast peace talks.
A8  YUGOSLAV BLOCKADE HITS HARD  The truncated Yugoslavia is reeling under the effects of a five-month economic blockade that has sent prices soaring, brought industries to a halt and left a dispirited population facing the hard Balkan winter with little heat or hope.
A8  YELTSIN DISBANDS RIVAL GUARD  President Yeltsin ordered the disbanding of a 5,000-member armed guard formed by his rival, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, chairman of the Russian Parliament, and moved to outlaw the National Salvation Front, a new group formed by nationalists and hard-liners.
A10  Disorder appears to be abating in Albania.
A11  Eastern German acknowledges his Communism and spy contacts.
A12  The last Russian combat troops withdraw from Poland.
A15  Rebels move within three miles of Liberian capital's center.
A5  Canada's no vote on constitutional changes heartens Quebec.
A9  Foreign films are killing off the Indonesian movie industry.
A17  Seoul Journal: A Korean businessman is seeking the presidency.
A4  National A18-25, B11-14  CAMPAIGN SPENDING SOARS  With far more incumbents than usual engaged in tough fights for re-election, spending on Congressional races is at record levels.
A1  Carol Braun, hurt by ethics accusations, still leads in Illinois.
A25  Four other female Senate candidates in the Midwest trail badly.
A25  Once again, Gingrich is engaged in a tight and bitter race.
A25  BUSH STUMPS ON ONE THEME: TRUST  As two new polls suggested that the race for the White House had tightened dramatically, the President crisscrossed Ohio, buoyed by a belief that the attack on Governor Clinton's character was working.
A1  CLINTON COUNTERATTACKS  Governor Clinton accused the President of running a campaign characterized by repeated lies.
A1  Clinton's chief strategist: master of political instinct.
A23  FICKLE FLIRTATIONS  Conversations with voters in Grand Rapids, Mich., suggest that they have been switching from one Presidential candidate to another as quickly as they switch TV channels.
And that appears to mean a decline in support for Ross Perot.
A1  Perot went on the offensive in a visit to Colorado.
A22  News analysis: The limits of Perot the tactician.
A22  This year's ads use statistics and attribution to stretch the truth.
A24  The West Coast is again debating TV's election-night forecasts.
A24  On the Trail: Update on the primaries' also-rans.
A23  ARMY OPENS HARASSMENT INQUIRY  After complaints from scores of its female civilian employees, the Army has undertaken an investigation into sexual harassment at two military centers in St.
Louis.
A1  HISS WAS NOT A SPY, RUSSIAN SAYS  Nearly half a century after Alger Hiss was convicted of espionage-related perjury, a review of newly opened archives in Moscow has cleared him of the accusation that he spied for the Soviet Union, a high-ranking Russian official says.
B14  Randolph Journal: A Vermont town's drive toward renewal.
A18  Jorge Mas Canosa, the "man with a capital M." A18  A study found more damning evidence of lead's effects.
A20  Researchers found only a modest effect by an Alzheimer's drug.
A20  The Government will sponsor a clinical trial of an AIDS drug.
B12  The nation's governors reported financial turmoil.
A19  The C.I.A. chief acknowledged poor handling of the B.N.L. case.
B11  Metro Digest B1  THE GROWING SCOPE OF AIDS  Under the new definition, the number of new AIDS cases reported each year is expected to nearly double, bringing with it a two-edged sword.
States will be eligible for more Federal funds than are now distributed on the basis of reported cases.
But agencies and clinics will face higher costs and heavier workloads.
A1  DEAD ENDS FOR DRUG SALES  In a plan that city officials said had never been tried on such a wide scale anywhere in the country, Bridgeport, Conn., announced that it would put concrete barriers at more than 30 intersections, creating a maze of dead-end streets to make it harder to hop off Interstate 95, buy drugs and return to the highway.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-16  If you're done in by do-it-yourself decorating.
C1  At home with Mr.
Fish: Who is that clown in the trailer?
C1  Giving elevators welcome mats.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Director's return to Vietnam.
C19  Death and album sales.
C19  Fischer wins Game 25.
C22  Sports B17-23  Obituaries B16  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Medical madness on Capitol Hill.
The Oregon Trail of hate.
Gross national letdown.
For Congress from the suburbs.
Letters  William Safire: The voting trigger.
Leslie H. Gelb: Going bananas.
Daniel H. Pink: Year of the factoid.
Landon Parvin: Ask Mr.
Blather.


'Sisters Rosensweig' Is to Move to Broadway
"The Sisters Rosensweig," Wendy Wasserstein's play about a Brooklyn family's reunion in London, will move from the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center to Broadway on March 2, Bernard Gersten, the executive producer of the Lincoln Center Theater, said yesterday.
The play, which opened last Thursday and which has sold out its current run, will close on Feb. 28 and reopen at the Barrymore Theater.
Tickets will go on sale tomorrow.


After 40 Years, a Postscript on Hiss: Russian Official Calls Him Innocent
In the latest chapter of a case that catapulted Richard M. Nixon to national prominence and has divided Americans for more than 40 years, a high-ranking Russian official says a review of newly opened archives clears Alger Hiss of accusations that he ever spied for the Soviet Union.
"Not a single document, and a great amount of materials has been studied, substantiates the allegation that Mr. A. Hiss collaborated with the intelligence services of the Soviet Union," the official, Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov, chairman of the Russian Government's military intelligence archives, declared.
He called the espionage accusations against Mr.
Hiss "completely groundless."


Economic Scene; Water, Water Everywhere . . .
A GLANCE at the big water projects bill on President Bush's desk might leave the impression of pork as usual: choice morsels include everything from $20 million to clean up an abandoned mine in Leadville, Colo., to an $85 million write-off for aqueducts to green the lawns of Phoenix.
But this is no ordinary exercise in pre-election benevolence.
For the centerpiece of the legislation is a radical change in the way subsidized Federal water would be distributed to Californians -- one that would put the environment's interests ahead of agriculture, while creating a free market for water that would almost inevitably mean a lot more for parched cities and a little less for irrigation.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
2.91
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.93
4.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.18
4.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.28
6.31
7.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.61
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.67
8.65
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.71
6.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dismissal of Libel Suit Against Times Upheld
The state's highest court today upheld the dismissal of a libel suit in which a former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City, Dr.
Elliot M. Gross, accused The New York Times of defaming him in a series of articles published in 1985 and 1986.
The Court of Appeals declined to hear Dr.
Gross's appeal of two lower-court decisions.
The court issued no written opinion today, ruling only that it would not hear the case "upon the ground that no substantial constitutional question is directly involved."


Frank A. Weg, 64, An Insurance Lawyer
Frank A. Weg, a lawyer who was an expert on insurance cases, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Bristol-Myers Squibb to Cut 4% of Its Global Workforce
Acknowledging difficult times in its core drug and infant-formula businesses, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company announced yesterday that it would eliminate some 2,200 jobs in the next five months.
The big New York-based health-care company said it would cut the jobs in its worldwide pharmaceutical and nutritional groups.
Jerry Parrott, a company spokesman, said the reductions would hit "all levels, departments and operations" of the drug and nutrition units around the world in roughly the same proportions.


Top Yield of 6.95% On O'Hare Bonds
A $174.6 million bond offering for Chicago-O'Hare International Airport was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company with a maximum yield of 6.95 percent for an issue due in 2018.
Underwriters said the offering of the international terminal special revenue bonds was insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Brazos Higher Education Authority Inc., Texas, is offering $55.5 million of tax-exempt student loan revenue refunding bonds tentatively priced to yield from 3.75 percent in 1993 to 6.60 percent in 2004 through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
The financing also includes a subordinated series that is priced to yield 6.25 percent for an issue due 1998 and 7 percent for a bond due 2004.
For some investors the bonds are subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, with Moody's Investor Service Inc. rating the senior debt double-A and the subordinated debt single-A.
*
Hillhaven Corp., Tacoma, Wash., an operator of nursing centers, pharmacies and retirement housing communities in 37 states, is offering $65 million of 7 3/4 percent convertible subordinated debentures due in 2002 through Merrill Lynch.
The debentures are convertible into Hillhaven common stock at $3.359 a share.


Rare Bird Indeed Carries Poison in Bright Feathers
Toppling traditional notions of how birds defend themselves, scientists have discovered the first known poisonous bird, a brilliant orange and black creature whose feathers and skin are laced with a potent toxin that is thought to deter predators.
Researchers were astonished by the discovery because they had never before found an example of a bird using a chemical defense against its enemies.
Many insects, fish, amphibians and reptiles are equipped with noxious compounds that make them distasteful, but birds were thought to rely on quick flight to escape being eaten.


Quebec (Quebec?) Halts Rangers' Streak at Garden
No one recognized these Rangers last night.
Not Coach Roger Neilson.
Not goaltender Mike Richter.
Not the guys on the ice or the fans in Madison Square Garden.
Who could have predicted that their home-winning streak would be killed by a visit from the Quebec Nordiques, a team that won but two games on the road all of last season?
Who could have predicted that the Rangers, a team loaded with so much talent, would play as dismally as they did last night?
But these aren't last year's Nordiques.
And last night, these weren't the Rangers that Neilson -- or anyone else for that matter -- would recognize.


William Cole; Writer, 80
William Cole, a freelance writer whose articles appeared in many popular magazines, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and had lived in Manhattan for 60 years.
Mr. Cole died of heart failure, said Maxine J. Lewis, a friend.


RU486 May Also Help Alleviate Endometriosis
To the Editor:
As you state in "New Use Is Found for Abortion Pill" (front page, Oct. 8), RU486 has demonstrated its abilities as both an abortion and contraceptive agent.
But for some 10 million to 12 million women of childbearing age in the United States who are affected by endometriosis, it has another application that could prevent the pain, infertility and even loss of organs that can occur with this disease.


Times and Union in Accord on New Plant
An agreement has been reached between The New York Times and the New York Stereotypers Union No. 1 in connection with the opening of the newspaper's $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J., late last month, a spokeswoman for The Times, Nancy Nielsen, announced yesterday.
The agreement, which also covers operations at the headquarters of the paper in Manhattan, faces a ratification vote by the union members.
Stereotypers make the page plates for the presses.


Let's Get to the Bottom of Iraq Loan Cover-Up
To the Editor:
Re "Justice Dept. Role Cited in Deception in Iraq Loan Case: Officials Say C.I.A. Was Asked to Conceal Findings From Court" (front page, Oct. 10): The stunning disclosure that the Central Intelligence Agency and the Justice Department knowingly submitted false documents to a Federal judge is compelling evidence that those agencies engaged in a last-ditch pre-election conspiracy to keep the lid on the scandal.
These developments reinforce the urgency to appoint an independent counsel to investigate and prosecute as appropriate.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 613 retail money market mutual funds increased $815.5 million, to $390.68 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 382 taxable retail money market funds rose $217.8 million, to $312.59 billion.
Assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $597.7 million, to $78.09 billion.


Tartikoff Resigns at Paramount
Brandon Tartikoff, who joined the movie business only 15 months ago after an extraordinary reign at NBC, unexpectedly resigned today as chairman of Paramount Pictures.
Mr.
Tartikoff, 43 years old, announced his decision to senior Paramount executives, citing his obligations to his 9-year-old daughter, who is slowly recovering from severe head injuries she received in a jeep accident on Jan. 1, 1991.


Corrections
The Sports of The Times column yesterday, about the images projected by college football teams, misstated the religion of Raghib Ismail, a former star at Notre Dame.
Although born into a Muslim family, he practices Christianity.


Resignation Hits a Nerve in Detroit
With General Motors in turmoil from the assembly line to the executive suite, the tightly knit relationship between "the General" and the Motor City is unraveling in a broad spectrum of emotions.
Perhaps nobody knows this better than Robert C. Stempel.


Review/Art; Works, Some Masterly, From Lille
If you have not lost hope before the last two galleries of "Masterworks From the Musee des Beaux-Arts, Lille," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, you will arrive at rooms that truly live up to the exhibition's hyperbolic title.
By then, assuming your approach to the selection of Old Master paintings and drawings from this French provincial museum has been conscientious, you have sifted through a load of mediocrity to experience a handful of genius.
You have stood in awe before a group of drawings by Raphael and two altarpieces by Rubens.
You have been dazzled by a pair of Jacopo Pontormo drawings, charmed by a pair of Joris Hoefnagel watercolors, and impressed by a marble relief by Donatello.


Time Bombs on the Supreme Court
Of all the time bombs that Presidents leave behind, none are more potentially explosive than their appointments to the Supreme Court.
Considering the age of the present justices, the President elected next Tuesday is likely to make several appointments, and thus determine the character of the Court for a generation.
The candidates haven't much mentioned their views of the Court, but these are a crucial standard for thoughtful voters.
If re-elected, George Bush says he would try to finish packing the Court against Roe v.
Wade, the decision validating abortion rights, which four members say they want to strike down.
Bill Clinton, by finding candidates he thinks will support a woman's choice, would halt that drive and turn it back.


Roger Wood Bayldon; U.N. Official, 77
Roger Wood Bayldon, a member of the United Nations Secretariat for 30 years, died on Oct. 23 at the Burke Rehabilitation Center-New York Hospital in White Plains.
He was 77 years old.
He died of emphysema, his wife said.
He joined the newly formed United Nations in its early days at Hunter College in the spring of 1946 in the Department of Public Information.
He retired in 1976 as Deputy Chief of the United Nations Radio Services and was then North American correspondent for The Cork Examiner of Ireland for two years.


U.N. Envoy to Somalia Says His Ouster Is Official
The United Nations representative to Somalia, who was frequently critical of the United Nations response to the famine in that country, said today that his forced resignation had been accepted and that his offer to stay on as a special envoy in a lesser role had been rejected.
The representative, Mohammed Sahnoun, 60 years old, said he learned on the radio tonight that his resignation had been accepted by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
He was apparently forced out because of his frequent criticisms of what he had termed the lethargy of the United Nations in dealing with the famine.


For Children
Halloween Parade Party
Museum of the City of New York  Fifth Avenue, at 103d Street  (212) 534-1672  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
So many toddlers turned up last year for the museum's annual Halloween parade and party that this year a "Scary Baby Contest" for children under 3 will be part of the event.
So conjure up a witch or warlock baby outfit and dab on some waterproof makeup.
Not that there should be any tears: the museum has conceded that every baby is likely to win.


On My Mind; It's the Economy, Stupid
Now that the campaign is almost over, the country owes the candidates gratitude for what Americans want so much -- a vacation from the realities of national life.
That might seem a crabby thought -- after all those months when the candidates kept lecturing the country about the economy.


By Sunday, Cleaner Gas, And Costlier
The region is shifting to a gasoline formulated to reduce air pollution.
As a result, by Sunday, motorists in New York City and its suburbs, all New Jersey and southern Connecticut may be paying slightly more for gasoline that may not perform quite as well as usual.
Under the 1990 Clean Air Act, Nov. 1 is the deadline for the mandatory introduction of "oxygenated" gasoline, which includes additives derived from natural gas or grain alcohol that increase the oxygen content of the fuel.
That causes more complete combustion in the engine and reduces the carbon monoxide released through the tailpipe.
For months, all gasoline legally sold will have to have these ingredients.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. posted a third-quarter loss of $752.9 million, reflecting lower car and truck production in the U.S. and strikes by the U.A.W. at plants at Lordstown, Ohio, and Lansing, Mich.
In the third quarter of last year, G.M. lost $1.1 billion.  [ D1. ]  The tightly knit relationship between "the General" and the Motor City is unraveling in a broad spectrum of emotions.  [ D2. ]
Brandon Tartikoff unexpectedly resigned as chairman of Paramount Pictures, only 15 months after he joined the studio following a successful reign at NBC.
Mr.
Tartikoff said he needed to help his wife care for their 9-year-old daughter, who is slowly recovering from head injuries suffered in a car accident.  [ D1. ]


Review/Theater; Tribute to Grandmothers
"Bubbe Meises, Bubbe Stories" is Ellen Gould's loving tribute to her immigrant grandmothers.
A highly personalized one-woman musical play, written and performed by Ms.
Gould, it is suffused with homely wisdom and movingly honors formative family influences.
Approaching the end of the 20th century, she looks back to the last turn of the century when her grandmothers, or bubbes, crossed a bridge that was emotional as well as geographic and made their homes in America.
Onstage at the Cherry Lane Theater, the actress stands before two striking portraits of her grandmothers and parallels and contrasts their biographies while interweaving reflections about her own life.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; A BITTER RIVALRY IN SOUTH CAROLINA
When Senator Ernest (Fritz) Hollings voted against the use of military force in the Persian Gulf, Republicans labeled him one of the most vulnerable Democratic incumbents in 1992.
But two years later the issue has faded, and his Republican opponent, former Representative Tommy Hartnett, rarely mentions the war vote.


In a 'Dear Bud' Letter, CBS Opposes Lockout
The club owners' two-pronged labor strategy -- reopening of the labor contract followed by a lockout next spring -- that once seemed like a foregone conclusion no longer is.
Not only have an increasing number of owners expressed opposition to a lockout, but CBS has advised Bud Selig, the acting chief of the major leagues, that it would not be as accommodating to baseball after a lockout next year as it was after the spring training lockout in 1990.


Baby Isn't Growing Fast Enough? Just Wait, a Research Team Says
In a discovery that may surprise scientists more than parents, researchers report that babies grow in fits and starts, with such long intervals between growth spikes that about 90 percent of the time they are not growing at all.
Growth charts in doctors' offices show smooth continuous curves, based on averages, and it has long been assumed that growth is slow and steady.
In fact, the American Academy of Pediatrics advises parents to see a doctor if their baby goes for a long time without growing.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
YANKEES -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Mel Hall, outfielder, and Pascual Perez, pitcher.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Storm Davis and Craig Lefferts, pitchers.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Brook Jacoby, third baseman; Junior Ortiz, catcher, and Ted Power, pitcher.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Offered salary arbitration to Tony Phillips, infielder-outfielder.
Declined to offer salary arbitration to Frank Tanana and Walt Terrell, pitchers, and Dave Bergman, first baseman.
Announced Les Lancaster, pitcher, refused an outright assignment and elected to become a free agent.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Dennis Rasmussen, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Announced a working agreement with the Wilmington Blue Rocks of the Carolina League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Scott Fletcher and Jim Gantner, infielders, and Jesse Orosco, pitcher.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Mike Pagliarulo, third baseman.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Mike Moore, pitcher.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Bryn Smith, pitcher.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Declined to offer salary arbitration to Jeff Reardon, pitcher.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Named Larry Bearnarth pitching coach.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Offered salary arbitration to Jim Gott, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Walt Williams, guard, to a multiyear contract.
Continental Basketball Association
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Reggie Jordan, forward.
LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Myron Brown, guard.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Acquired the rights to Bob McCann, forward, from the Rochester Renegade for Anthony Houston, guard, and the rights to David Butler, center, and Andrew Valhov, forward.
Global Basketball Association
CEDAR RAPIDS SHARPSHOOTERS -- Named Rick Barry coach.
Signed Aubry Boyd, forward; Tony Karasek, center, and Ramses Kelly and Bernard McGuire, guards.
FAYETTEVILLE FLYERS -- Signed Darren Sanderlin, guard.
LOUISVILLE SHOOTERS -- Signed Reggie Isaac, guard.
MISSISSIPPI COAST SHARKS -- Signed Miles Clark and Derrick Turner, guards, and Eric Strothers and Vincent Smalls, forwards.
Football  National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Activated Ashley Ambrose, defensive back, from injured reserve.
Signed Murray Garrett, defensive end, to the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Activated Darrell Malone, cornerback, from the practice squad.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Placed Hassan Jones, wide receiver, and James Harris, defensive end, on injured reserve.
Activated Bernard Dafney, guard, from the practice squad.
Signed David Wilson, safety, to the practice squad.
World League
WLAF -- Announced the resignation of Joe Bailey, chief operating officer.
Hockey  International Hockey League
PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Recalled Darren Colbourne and Peter Kasowski, forwards, from Dayton of the East Coast Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League
FLINT BULLDOGS -- Signed Kord Cernich, defenseman.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
DETROIT ROCKERS -- Acquired Tim Ernst, forward, from the Baltimore Spirit for cash.
Signed Andy Chapman, forward, and Bryan Finnerty, goaltender, to contract extensions through the 1993-94 season.
College
MID-ATLANTIC CONFERENCE -- Named Michael Altman interim commissioner.
SOUTH FLORIDA -- Named Don Barr men's interim tennis coach.
TEXAS-ARLINGTON -- Announced the resignation of Mark Nixon, men's basketball coach.
Named Eddie McCarter men's interim basketball coach.


Shirley Journal; Where Bush's Remarks Hit Too Close to Home
Linda Burgess at the Hair Fashion Beauty Shop said she didn't "give a rip because it's just politics." Watson I. Smith, a 79-year-old retired teacher, said it struck him as a "tad too mean-spirited."
And Everett Henderson, a farmer who warmed himself with his back to the pot-bellied stove in Privitt's Hardware store, said it reminded him of the "hillbilly put-downs" he and other Arkansans used to hear in the Army.


TV Weekend; 2 Familiar Faces Return, but the Star Is Murder
With the new season failing to tickle the ratings so far, two networks are falling back on familiar faces this weekend.
NBC is once again wheeling out Raymond Burr as Perry Mason for a two-hour movie: "The Case of the Heartbroken Bride" can be seen at 8 tonight.
On Sunday at 9 P.M., CBS is offering the return of Meredith Baxter as Elisabeth Broderick, convicted murderer of her former husband and his new bride.
"Her Final Fury: Betty Broderick, the Last Chapter" is a sequel to "A Woman Scorned: The Betty Broderick Story" in March, one of the highest-rated television movies of the year.
The heartbroken bride, actually a would-be bride, in this "Perry Mason" is Kaitlynn Parrish (Heather McAdam), a superstar pop singer who from a distance might be momentarily mistaken for Madonna.
She is marrying Gary Hawkes (Adam Storke), a popular soap-opera star.
Security at the home wedding is tight, but one ardent fan manages to sneak in and hide in a closet.
She will, of course, prove a crucial witness when Kaitlynn ends up being the prime suspect in the killing of her intended's uninvited drunken uncle, who is found dead shortly after he threatens Kaitlynn's father.


Prosecutors Introduce Secret Tapes at Sex-Assault Trial
In a surprise move, prosecutors in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault trial today placed into evidence three tape recordings that defense lawyers had said would clear their clients.
The tapes, made secretly at the request of defense investigators, record conversations between a former girlfriend of one of the defendants and the mildly retarded woman he and three classmates are charged with assaulting.


Books of The Times; Selling What America Should Keep
Selling Our Security The Erosion of America's Assets By Martin and Susan J. Tolchin 427 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
This is an important and an intensely disturbing book.
The authors are Martin Tolchin, a longtime Washington correspondent for The New York Times, and Susan J. Tolchin, a public administration professor at George Washington University.
The Tolchins have set out to show how the United States, in the name of global free enterprise, neo-classical laissez-faire economics and a mythical level playing field, has bartered its economic future for the temporary lure of foreign investments and the illusion that strategic industries or investment in technology don't really matter, as long as you can buy what you need somewhere in the world, at the moment.


At the Bar; The subject is lawyers' fees, and what's fair, when clients are awarded only $1.
Nearly a decade ago, when he was an inmate in a Massachusetts prison, Dennis Domegan was placed on an "alternate feeding program" after throwing a tray of prison food and some of his own excrement against his cell wall.
The next 20-odd mealtimes, he was given only cheese sandwiches on white bread.
By denying him a hearing beforehand, a jury subsequently ruled, prison officials had violated his right to due process.
But beyond that, they balked.
Mr.
Domegan sought $85,000 in damages; he was awarded $1.


Review/Film; A Friendship in Mongolia
Nikita Mikhalkov's "Close to Eden," opening today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, is a fiction film that looks very much like anthropology.
Shot in Inner Mongolia, the movie centers on the friendship of Sergei, a boisterous, outgoing Russian truck driver, and Gombo, the Mongolian farmer who saves Sergei after he falls asleep and drives into a lake.
The film is equally divided between its fictional story, which is about Gombo's wish to have another child, though the Chinese Government forbids Mongols to have more than three, and its documentary concern, which is to show the world what life in Mongolia is like today.
Mr.
Mikhalkov's fear is that the unspoiled beauty of the Mongolian steppes is about to be swept away by the civilization that men like Sergei are bringing to one of the last vast underpopulated regions of the world.


Omnicom Reports 35% Gain in Net
Omnicom Group Inc. reported yesterday that third-quarter net income climbed 35 percent as its foreign business improved and its domestic revenues finally fared better.
Net income increased to $10.4 million, or 37 cents a share, from $7.7 million, or 28 cents a share, in the year-earlier period.
Revenue grew 19 percent, to $327.8 million from $275.4 million.


The Founding Fathers: George, Ben and . . . Jim?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats -- Candidates Aim at Crucial States, and Each Other; Clinton Is Abandoning His Emphasis on Issues For the Attack Strategy of an Underdog
Responding to a tightened Presidential race, Gov.
Bill Clinton today essentially scrapped plans to spend the final days of his campaign concentrating on substantive issues and instead hop-scotched to three states directing his firepower at President Bush.
Even as he sought to strike a sober tone for speeches on the economy and AIDS research, Mr.
Clinton cast his policy discussion in terms of what Mr.
Bush lacked.
And although he still led in most polls, Mr.
Clinton said for the first time in weeks that he considered himself an "underdog" in the race for President.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Youth Vote; DEMOCRATS COURT YOUNGEST VOTERS
Al Gore did not do much to draw wild applause.
All he said was: "George Bush is out of time. Bill Clinton and Al Gore will be automatic for the people."
Michael Stipe, lead singer of the rock group R.E.M., had just given the Democratic ticket a passionate endorsement before a crowd of several thousand young people on the University of Georgia campus in Athens, and Mr.
Gore's response was a wordplay on the title songs of the band's two hit albums.


Silver Spoons and Others
Here are the addresses and lunch hours for restaurants near the Museum of Modern Art.
DARBAR, 44 West 56th Street, (212) 432-7227.
Prix fixe lunch $19.95; noon to 2:30 P.M Mondays through Fridays; buffet lunch Saturdays and Sundays, same hours ($12.95).
Reservations recommended.


Let's Get to the Bottom of Iraq Loan Cover-Up; Law That Didn't Work
To the Editor:
"Shameful Death of a Worthy Reform" (editorial, Oct. 2), which bemoans the demise of the independent counsel-special prosecutor law, is based on a faulty prescription: it recommends a failed palliative, rather than a basic institutional remedy.


Giant Oilfield in Colombia Is Too Small for Wall Street
The British Petroleum Company provided estimates today indicating that the huge Colombian oilfield it had been exploring was definitely one of the largest ever discovered in South America.
But even with at least 1.5 billion barrels of potential oil reserves, the Cusiana oilfield was not large enough for Wall Street.
Many investors had been betting on a field as big as 10 billion barrels, or equal to the 1968 discovery in Alaska's Prudhoe Bay.


Kings Sign Williams
WALT WILLIAMS, the Sacramento Kings' No. 1 draft choice and the seventh pick over all, reached agreement with the Kings yesterday on a multiyear contract reportedly worth $13.5 million.


Iraqis Had U.S. Arms Blueprints, British Say
In 1987, Iraqi engineers building two arms factories obtained American blueprints for 1,000-pound bombs, according to a British intelligence report made public today in a London courtroom.
The report, based on interviews with British businessmen who visited Iraq, does not make clear how the Iraqis illegally obtained the drawings.


Haunts of the Brave
Here is a sampling of Halloween events scheduled in the New York metropolitan area this
weekend:  Today
"CARNEVALE OF SOULS," Dynamic Theater Company, 44 Walker Street, lower Manhattan.
Performance art with exotic dancers, contortionists, fire-eaters, magicians. 9 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 799-3753.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL: At Elizabeth High School; Band Nurtures Its Own Playoff Aspirations
For both the football team and the marching band, the time has come to suck it up and bear down.
"If we can win our next three games," said Jerry Moore, the football coach, "we can still make the playoffs."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans -- Candidate Aim at Crucial States, and Each Other; Bush, Buoyed by Polls, Scrambles to Rebuild Winning Coalition
With some new polls providing encouragement, President Bush and his strategists have begun scrambling, hoping in the five days left them to rebuild the shattered bloc of Republicans and disaffected Democrats that won the White House in 1988.
That is why they came to Michigan today.
Mr.
Bush returned to an old wellspring of Democratic support, suburban Macomb County, to sound alarms about high taxes and low character that he hopes will drive voters away from Bill Clinton and into his camp.


Beijing Journal; At Work Where the Cold War's Ice Still Lingers
A fault line rarely makes a cozy nesting spot, but for more than a year J. Stapleton Roy has occupied precisely the spot where the American and Chinese tectonic plates come grinding together.
As Ambassador to China, Mr.
Roy is periodically scolded by the Foreign Ministry here because of disputes related to human rights, arms sales and other concerns.
Chinese police guard the embassy, intimidating some Chinese from approaching, and security agents still sometimes follow American diplomats.


Politics of the Trade Pact: A Lawmaker Who Is Torn
In the neighborhoods of Maryland's Third Congressional District, where Barry Levinson's movies and Anne Tyler's novels are set, people talk about lacrosse games and crab cakes and crime and health care and, especially this week, whether Baltimore is getting a raw deal from the National Football League.
But in the Washington office of Representative Benjamin L. Cardin, the Congressman from the Third District, the talk is of little else but the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Labor leaders business executives, professional lobbyists, Cabinet members and even other members of Congress, all wanting to make the case for or against the trade measure, line up daily in his waiting room like ants at a sugar bowl.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; A Narrow Lead
Gov.
Bill Clinton continues to lead President Bush, while the increased support Ross Perot received after the final debate appears to have faded slightly, according to four new polls.
When the polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton has 43 percent of the support, Mr.
Bush 36 percent and Mr.
Perot 16 percent.


Rumormongers in Calais Mirror a Demonic Time
In a Europe of the returning demons of racism, ultranationalism and ethnic violence, this depressed port has been gripped by mass hysteria.
It was ignited by rumors that blond children have been raped and killed here, and it rapidly touched off a vendetta against a young man of French and Tunisian descent.
With its unemployment averaging 13 percent, and ranging over 40 percent in some poorer districts, its declining port and lace industries, and its general air of moroseness, Calais is representative of a Europe in which close to 17 million people are now without work.
The irrationality of what happened here in recent weeks has struck some as a warning.


Europe's Best Can Cross Atlantic, but Can They Fly on Dirt?
By the dawn's early light, they were out on the dirt track learning how to race on American soil instead of European grass, how to turn left instead of right, how to bust out of the gate and shoot for speed instead of distance.
And, on this clear and balmy morning only two days before the $10 million Breeders' Cup, some of them were running faster than anybody else.
They were the 21 horses from Europe -- the largest group from across the ocean since the Breeders' Cup was inaugurated eight years ago -- and they were rapidly adjusting to the American way of life at the race track.
In fact, even racing under strange conditions thousands of miles from home, they were already favored to finish in the money in five of Saturday's seven races and to possibly dominate the Turf race, the mile and a half on grass that comes closest to their racing life back home.
No Name Tags Needed
They included Subotica, winner of the Arc de Triomphe three weeks ago; Dr Devious, winner of the English Derby in June, and seven other winners of Group 1 stakes in Europe.
Also working out was the storied Arazi, whose first race in the United States was a startling victory in the Juvenile in last year's Breeders' Cup.


G.M. Had Big Deficit In Quarter
The General Motors Corporation, laboring with excess car-manufacturing capacity and unable to trim costs fast enough, posted a third-quarter loss of $752.9 million, reflecting lower car and truck production in the United States and strikes by the United Automobile Workers union at G.M. plants at Lordstown, Ohio, and Lansing, Mich.
G.M.'s poor financial results come as the board of the No. 1 auto maker has ousted its chairman and chief executive, Robert C. Stempel, contending that he did not move quickly enough to turn the company around.
Still, the financial results represented an improvement over a $1.1 billion loss in the third quarter of last year.


Restaurants; Seeing Matisse? How About a Matching Lunch?
When blockbuster exhibitions come to the Museum of Modern Art, crowds at the restaurants and snack stands there can make the painting galleries look underattended.
To help accommodate the crush during the current Matisse retrospective, the museum has opened a 240-seat French-style cafe serving sandwiches and salads.
Called Le Cafe Francais, it is scheduled to operate during museum hours for the duration of the exhibition.
For those who seek more substantial lunch fare outside the museum, or just want to escape from the masses, there is good news: the blocks around the museum probably have more quality restaurants per square foot than any other place in New York City.
And while prices are generally high in midtown Manhattan, many spots offer prix fixe lunches that are relative bargains considering the food and the settings.


Meanwhile, Russia Rumbles
While America focuses on choosing a President, Russia slides toward disaster.
A misguided policy of pumping rubles into state-owned factories has sent prices skyrocketing, threatening to shatter the economy and reform.
The political situation is equally alarming.
While demagogues exploit ethnic conflicts in the former Soviet republics, President Boris Yeltsin and the Russian Parliament are locked in a constitutional power struggle.


For the New York Legislature
Reapportionment has brought more strongly contested races than usual for New York State Senate and Assembly seats.
Here are our recommendations in several, starting with the Senate.
Fifth District (Nassau and Suffolk):
This race has attracted statewide interest because the majority leader of the State Senate, Ralph Marino, faces a strong challenge from a Suffolk County legislator, James Gaughran.
Mr.
Gaughran has the support of right-wing, anti-tax Republican groups seeking to control the Senate.
They cynically back opponents of Republicans they deem too moderate.


Suffolk Lawyer Seized in Theft From County
A former Suffolk County Attorney was arrested in Hauppauge today on charges of stealing $50,000 from the county in 1987.
The former official, Martin Bradley Ashare, 57 years old, resigned in 1988 and has since been in private practice.
He was named in the indictment by the Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon, who had been named a special prosecutor in the case.
Outgrowth of Corruption Case
Mr.
Dillon said the charges were an outgrowth of the Southwest Sewer District corruption case, which embroiled several Suffolk County officials in charges of payoffs and corruption during the 1980's.
Although Mr.
Ashare was not a defendant in that case, he was responsible as County Attorney for collecting checks that were paid to Suffolk as restitution in civil lawsuits.


Corrections
A sports article on Oct. 21 about a lawsuit that seeks to bar the Florida Marlins from baseball's expansion draft, on Nov. 17, misstated the date on which each of the 26 established teams must submit its list of 15 players who cannot be chosen.
It is Nov. 9, not the day after the World Series.


Police Board Hurdles; Supporters Say They Are Just Starting On the Effort to Set Up a Fair Panel
The agreement to establish an independent civilian board to review complaints about the police is in many ways remarkable, considering how divisive this issue has been in New York City and how determined the opposition of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association has been.
But in the view of some of the agreement's staunchest and most persistent advocates, if civilian control is to be fair and meaningful, many other hurdles have to be overcome.


It's Time for Taylor and Marshall to Rise Up
If the Giants are to beat the Redskins Sunday night in Washington, and the Redskins are 10 1/2-point favorites, one key for the Giants will probably be the pass rush.
And the keys to that pass rush are Lawrence Taylor, the 33-year-old outside linebacker in his 12th pro season, and Leonard Marshall, the 31-year-old defensive end in his ninth season.
In other words, nothing is new.
For a football generation, Marshall has lined up on the right side and has shown why he is one of the National Football League's quickest pass-rushing ends.
And Taylor has lined up beside him and has shown how a prototype outside linebacker who combines strength, speed and quickness can destroy an offense.


Teen-Ager Charged in Abduction of Baby
A 9-month-old baby who had been missing from his Bronx home since Saturday was returned to his mother yesterday by a teen-age girl who the police said had taken the child.
The baby, Julio DeJon Williams Sostre, was in good condition when he was returned to 725 Fox Street in the Morrisania section where he lived with his mother, Benita Williams, 20, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James.


Penguins on the Riviera? No, Great Auks
To the Editor:
In "Stone Age Art Shows Penguins at Mediterranean" (Science Times, Oct. 20), you report on the discovery of prehistoric cave paintings in the south of France that seem to show penguins, a group of birds that occur only in the Southern Hemisphere, except for the Galapagos penguin in the Pacific.
It is highly unlikely that these drawings were of penguins.


Debate Rages on Executing Inmate in Wheelchair
In a debate that has dominated public discussion and disrupted a ceremony at the Capitol last week, the state is considering whether to execute a convict who uses a wheelchair.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder halted the execution of the convict, Charles S. Stamper, last week as advocacy groups for the disabled invoked the "grotesque spectacle" of making death rows accessible to wheelchairs.
Relatives of three people Mr.
Stamper was convicted of killing, meanwhile, were angrily arguing that disability should not be a ground for special consideration, even confronting the Governor at an open house in the Capitol.


2 in Race Disagree On Defense And Trade
With a troublesome economy and social issues as focal points of their rancorous race for the United States Senate, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Attorney General Robert Abrams have virtually ignored any discussion of foreign policy issues.
Even on those rare occasions a foreign policy issue has been raised, like military budgets and the future of Russia, their answers have been framed in domestic concerns, like the impact on jobs and trade possibilities.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.06
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.92
4.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.16
4.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.24
6.28
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.60
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.67
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.71
6.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Egon H. Ottinger; Insurer, 93
Egon H. Ottinger, a former chairman of Frank B. Hall &amp; Company, a leading marine insurance company, died on Monday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mr.
Ottinger died of complications from a recent fall, said Carolyn B. Handler, a family spokeswoman.


Game Plan For Visiting Matisse Show
THE large, immensely popular Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art is drawing near-capacity crowds.
In the process, it is creating one of those classic New York scenes, the kind that can be a field day for people-watchers and urban eavesdroppers, if not for art-lovers.
Inside, the museum is filled top to bottom with people who are discussing everything from the French modernist and his beautiful, challenging works to their aching feet and what's for dinner.
Outside, there are sporadic skirmishes for taxis and different lines of people waiting to do such things as buy advance tickets, pick up reserved tickets or simply see the show.
All that's missing are sidewalk vendors selling T-shirts that say "I Survived Matisse."


Past Haunts 'New' F.B.I. Effort to Rebuild Image Shaken in Recent Days
In the two decades since the death of J. Edgar Hoover, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been trying to reinterpret itself to America, attempting to live down the legacy of back alley operations, break-ins and harassment of political enemies.
The rebuilding of the bureau, a central priority of each of the four directors since Mr.
Hoover, has led to stricter operational standards and a deepening sense that the F.B.I. was slowly but steadily improving its reputation.


Xoma's Plan for Refocusing Includes Eliminating 85 Jobs
The Xoma Corporation said today that it would refocus its strategy and revamp its operations to emphasize new drugs to fight bacteria and autoimmune diseases.
As a result, Xoma will pare 85 of its 325 workers, eliminating 26 percent of its work force, and it expects to report a third-quarter charge of about $10 million.
Xoma said that it would continue to develop E5, its long-delayed drug to treat septic shock, but that its marketing partner, Pfizer Inc., would manage the drug's third clinical trial.
The Food and Drug Administration has twice declined to clear E5 because of a lack of clinical data showing that it significantly reduced deaths among shock patients.
Company Sees Potential
The new trial will include patients who have not yet entered shock but who appear to have been infected by the bacteria that cause it.
Xoma will also continue to develop CD5 Plus, a drug meant to be used in bone-marrow transplants.


No Headline
"Radio is a great medium for delivering hard-hitting attacks. It's a risk-free type of advertising. You can be incredibly obnoxious without being blamed for it." -- DARRELL WEST of Brown University, on campaign advertising.  [ A19:1. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
Buoyed by several new polls, President Bush made a foray into an old source of Democratic support, suburban Macomb County in Michigan, to sound the alarms about high taxes and low character that he hopes will drive voters away from Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Stripping his message to its essence, Mr.
Bush told a crowd of 10,000 people that Mr.
Clinton had "given up on reducing the deficit." Arms flailing, he denounced Mr.
Clinton's running mate, Senator Al Gore, as an environmental extremist who is "crazy, way out, far out, man." He said of the Democrats, "They feel it slipping away from them."  BILL CLINTON
Governor Clinton dropped his plans to stick to a lofty message about the issues and leveled harsh words at President Bush in three toss-up states, Ohio, Michigan and New Jersey.
While he sought to strike a sober tone in speeches on the economy and on AIDS research, Mr.
Clinton cast his policy discussion in terms of what Mr.
Bush lacks.
And although he still leads in most polls, Mr.
Clinton said for the first time in weeks that he considered himself an "underdog" in the race.
"The American people are going to have to think a long time before they want four more years of this," Mr.
Clinton said of the Bush Administration.
ROSS PEROT
Mr.
Perot's aides tried to defuse two issues that they fear have slowed his momentum: the accusation that he is trying to buy the election and his unsubstantiated assertions that the Bush campaign planned to disrupt his daughter's wedding.
Aides are confronting the first issue by saying that his two rivals have actually outspent him.
They are confronting the second issue with silence.
In an interview with David Frost, Mr.
Perot testily rejected criticism leveled by a Bush spokesman.
"I'm not paranoid," Mr.
Perot said.
He also said he would hate being a Cabinet member, a possibility held out by the Clinton campaign.


Market Place; Long-Term Funds Hold Less Allure
A GROWING number of mutual fund investors are moving away from long-term bond funds, evidently fearing lower bond prices that could be brought on by higher interest rates, some mutual fund companies said yesterday.
The investors seem to be shifting into stock mutual funds and money market funds.
The drift from longer-term bond funds is by no means a rout, and some fund groups said their bond funds continued to pull in investor money.
But it nonetheless signaled investor caution, which no doubt was brought about by rising interest rates and falling bond prices earlier this month.
If the drift continues, it could help to push interest rates even higher.


CHRONICLE
What's a party without the right kind of symmetry?
NICOLE MILLER, the designer, who is giving a Halloween Eve party tonight at the debut of Oggi Domani, a new Italian restaurant in Greenwich Village, asked the 350 people on her invitation list to come dressed as angels or devils.
When she discovered that an overwhelming majority intended to be devils, she cajoled a few into forgoing horns for halos in the name of balance.


The Art Market
A Big Seller
The fall auction season's most important painting and sculpture catalogues have arrived, and the game of "Name That Seller" begins.
So far, the most revealing catalogue is the one for Sotheby's sale of contemporary art on Nov. 17 in Manhattan.
Art experts say three works, together worth about $3.5 million, are being sold by A. Alfred Taubman, Sotheby's chairman.
The works include Clyfford Still's "1947-K," which is estimated to bring $1.5 million to $2 million; Franz Kline's "Elizabeth," from 1958, which is expected to fetch $1.75 million to $2 million, and "Eta," painted by Morris Louis in 1961, which is estimated to bring $250,000 to $300,000.
Another work, Robert Rauschenberg's "Press," from 1964, once belonged to Mr.
Taubman.
It was included in the Whitney Museum of American Art's 1990 catalogue for the exhibition called "Robert Rauschenberg: The Silk-Screen Paintings."


DINKINS ANNOUNCES ACCORD FOR BOARD ON POLICE CONDUCT
Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council leaders reached agreement yesterday on a proposal that would create an independent agency to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
The compromise involves one of New York City's most divisive and racially charged issues, one that has been fought over in the ballot box and in the streets: who should judge the actions of police officers -- Police Department employees or outsiders.
Instead of a 12-member Civilian Complaint Review Board, with 6 civilian police employees, the new board would consist of 13 members, none employed by the department.


Judge Voids a Law on Beer Labeling
WHEN beer is sold, does strength matter? Brewers will soon find out.
In the beer industry, strength refers to alcohol content.
On Wednesday, a Federal judge in Denver struck down a 57-year-old Federal law that prevented brewers from printing the alcohol content on their labels.
But the judge upheld a statute that bans advertising a brand's potency.


Sir Kenneth McMillan, 62, Dies; Choreographer of the Royal Ballet
Sir Kenneth MacMillan, the resident choreographer and former director of the Royal Ballet in London, died last night backstage at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, the Royal Ballet said.


U.S. Approves Injectable Drug As Birth Control
American women gained another option for birth control today as the Food and Drug Administration approved Depo-Provera, an injectable drug that prevents pregnancy for three months.
The contraceptive, which is available in more than 90 countries, has been the focus of a two-decade battle for acceptance in the United States because of disagreements over its cancer-causing potential and because of suggestions that it could be used coercively.


Democrats in Baltimore Rally Around Gore


On Stage, and Off
Sex Battle, No Codes
Landing in the wake of the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings and in the midst of the Barbara Wood-Randy Daniels tumult, "Oleanna," David Mamet's stringent battle of the sexes at the Orpheum, has an obviously polarizing potential.
During one performance, when the college professor (William H. Macy) who is accused of harassment finally lashes back at his accuser (Rebecca Pidgeon), there was scattered applause in the audience, leading one woman, when the lights came up, to mutter angrily: "Let's find those guys who clapped."
In an interview this week, Mr.
Mamet, who has, fairly or not, been accused in the past of misogyny, would not be drawn into a discussion of his intentions.
"The play is not a code for some deeper feelings of mine," he said.
"It's not an elaborate attempt to say anything other than what it says."


The Yankees Take an Intentional Pass on Hall
With the prospect of salary arbitration more frightening to them than the lack of left-handed power at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees decided yesterday to let Mel Hall leave as a free agent.
Because Hall was a potential repeat free agent, the Yankees had to offer him salary arbitration by yesterday or face losing him.
Hall still has to declare himself free, but he will waste no time doing that.
The Yankees could still sign him, but that is unlikely.


CHRONICLE
MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH, the cellist and director of the National Symphony, and LAMBERT ORKIS, the orchestra's pianist, have performed numerous benefit recitals together for Maestro Rostropovich's favorite causes.
Still, Mr.
Orkis said he was surprised when during a benefit in Washington in February to raise funds for a children's hospital in Moscow, Mr.
Rostropovich "turned to me and said, 'Through all these years, you've done all these concerts with me gratis and I would like to play a concert for you.' "


Prison Term Completes Political Fall From Grace
His testimony seemed to threaten Mayor David N. Dinkins, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
But in the end, the only career Arnold I. Biegen destroyed was his own.
After prosecutors concluded that he had no solid evidence to support his allegations against the politicians whom he had befriended, the 59-year-old former treasurer for the 1989 Dinkins mayoral campaign was sentenced in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday to 35 months in prison for tax evasion.
His lawyer described him as "dispirited." Prosecutors characterized him as "greedy" and willing to sacrifice others to save himself.


Weighing Changes After Drackett Deal
Following the disclosure Tuesday that the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company would sell its household-products unit, the Drackett Company in Cincinnati, to S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Inc.,executives said it was too soon to discuss possible agency changes.
An S. C. Johnson spokeswoman in Racine, Wis., said that agency lineups would be examined by a transition team of employees from Johnson and Drackett.
She added that Johnson, which markets products including Pledge, Glade and Raid, planned to sell Drackett's furniture-care and air-freshener brands, including Renuzit, Endust and Behold, to avoid antitrust problems.


A Little Halloween Treat Imported From Russia


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  WHERE CROATS EXPEL MUSLIMS  Of at least 5,000 Muslims who lived quietly in a Bosnian town until last week, the only ones remaining were on a hill a few hundred yards from the main street, apparently under arrest by Croatian forces.
A1  The Yugoslav federal Premier tried to head off new fighting.
A11  HYSTERIA GRIPS A FRENCH CITY  A port city in northern France has been gripped by a mass hysteria over rumors that blond children have been raped and brutally murdered and a vendetta against a young man of French and Tunisian descent.
A3  OPTIMISM AT MIDEAST TALKS  American, Israeli and Jordanian officials gave unusually upbeat assessments of the latest Middle East peace talks, which have recessed and will reconvene in Washington after the U.S. elections, on Nov. 9.
A6  TRIAL OPENS WINDOW ON IRAQ  Iraqi engineers building arms factories obtained American blueprints for huge bombs in 1987, according to a British intelligence report made public in a London courtroom, providing more evidence of Iraq's ability to acquire Western technology.
A6  U.N.'S SOMALIA ENVOY IS OUT  The U.N. representative to Somalia said that his forced resignation had been accepted and that his offer to stay on as a special envoy in a lesser role had been rejected.
A7  BALTIC TROOP PULLOUT HALTED  President Yeltsin suspended the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, asserting a "profound concern" over the treatment of Russians there.
A9  NEW AID PLAN FOR EX-SOVIETS  The nations providing emergency aid to the former Soviet republics agreed to continue offering large amounts of assistance in a new system that would apply more pressure on the countries to reform their stagnating economies.
A9  U.N.
WANTS TROOP COMMITMENT  The U.N.
Security Council recommended that members of the organization express their willingness to contribute troops on short notice to its peacekeeping missions.
It also asked them to lend specialists to the U.N. to help it create a long-term peacekeeping plan.
A11  Beijing Journal: A cold war endures for the U.S.
Embassy.
A4  National A12-21  BUSH SCRAMBLES FOR OLD BACKERS  The President returned to Michigan, searching there for the coalition of Republicans and disaffected Democrats that handed him the White House four years ago.
A1  Quayle stumped in Georgia, a must-win state for the G.O.P.
A17  New Bush ads on radio are skewering Clinton.
A19  Among Republicans in the capital, a sense of tension.
A21  Shirley Journal: An Arkansas town responds angrily to Bush.
A12  CLINTON ALTERS COURSE  Responding to a tighter race, Governor Clinton scrapped plans to spend the campaign's final days concentrating on his own approach to substantive issues and instead attacked the President while hopscotching to three states.
A1  The new, third incarnation of Hillary Clinton.
A18  The Democratic ticket has been wooing the campus vote.
A18  Perot's aides grappled with his loss of momentum.
A19  Campaign Trail: Perot and "Monday Night Football." A20  Senator Hollings's re-election effort has become a brawl.
A20  NEW CONTRACEPTIVE FOR WOMEN  After a two-decade battle centering on side effects, the F.D.A. approved Depo-Provera, an injectable contraceptive that prevents pregnancy for three months.
A1  THE FIRST POISONOUS BIRD  Astonished researchers discovered that a bird indigenous to New Guinea has feathers and skin laced with a potent toxin, which is thought to deter predators.
A1  U.S.
AIDE UNDER INVESTIGATION  Federal agents searched for evidence that the Treasurer of the United States had received payments from a former employer while in office.
A1  SHAKEN CONFIDENCE AT THE F.B.I.
News analysis: Halfway through his 10-year term, William S. Sessions's stewardship of the F.B.I. is under increasing attack, and some officials blame his managerial style.
A16  RENEWED FIGHT ON ENVIRONMENT  A House committee struck another blow in an increasingly bitter dispute between Congress and the Administration over the Justice Department's record in prosecuting environmental crimes.
A16  A judge took control of the project that will burn dioxin.
A16  WHAT PARENTS HAVE LONG KNOWN  A study found that babies grow in fits and starts, and at such long intervals that about 90 percent of the time they do not grow at all.
A12  BISHOPS ASSAIL WIFE-BATTERING  In their first official statement on spouse abuse, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops declared that there was nothing in the Bible requiring women to submit to abusive husbands or to remain in abusive relationships.
A12  A new lawsuit seeks to block a Congressional pay raise.
A16  Law Page B16  A Virginia man in a wheelchair faces execution, and a debate rages.
Metro Digest B1  AGREEMENT ON POLICE OVERSIGHT  Mayor Dinkins and City Council leaders reached agreement on a proposal that would create an independent agency to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
A1  ACQUITTAL IN CROWN HEIGHTS CASE  A black teen-ager portrayed by his lawyer as "a sacrificial lamb" in a city afflicted with racial hatreds was acquitted of all charges in the killing of a Hasidic scholar from Australia during three nights of violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-31  Art: A Matisse game plan.
C1  Spassky beats Fischer.
C30  Sports B8-14  Baseball: Yankees don't offer arbitration to Hall and Perez.
B9  Hockey: Quebec defeats the Rangers.B9  Obituaries A23  Sir Kenneth MacMillan, choreographer of the Royal Ballet.
Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials  Meanwhile, Russia rumbles.
Time bombs on the Court.
For the New York Legislature.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: It's the economy, stupid.
Anthony Lewis: Living with lies.
Clive Barker: Hermione and the moon.


Shien-Ming Wu, 68, a Professor Who Modernized Industries, Dies
Shien-Ming Wu, who helped to modernize automobile factories and other industries around the world, died on Wednesday at the St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 68 years old and lived in Ann Arbor.
He died of complications from heart surgery, his family said.


Clinton: Issuing a Quick Response
Less than a day after the Bush campaign began broadcasting its commercial attacking Arkansas, the Clinton campaign produced this 30-second response, for broadcast in select markets beginning yesterday.
ON THE SCREEN Phrases appear that underscore the narration, like "Bush ads are misleading and wrong" and "Arkansas leads the nation in job growth." Beneath the words, in smaller type, appear sources for the phrases, like "CBS," "Bureau of Labor Statistics." Interspersed with the words are photographs of Gov.
Bill Clinton at work in the Governor's office.
TELEVISION SCRIPT Announcer: "CBS, CNN and newspapers across the country call George Bush's ads misleading and wrong. The fact is, under Bill Clinton's leadership Arkansas leads the nation in job growth, has the second-lowest tax burden and the lowest Government spending in the country.


Review/Film; Telling van Gogh's Story, The Revised Version
After Maurice Pialat's "Van Gogh" was shown at the Cannes International Film Festival in 1991, some members of the audience emerged feeling vaguely cheated and disoriented.
"What happened to his ear?" one woman asked her friend.
She might have more properly wondered, "What didn't happen to his ear?" All sensational reports to the contrary, Vincent van Gogh did not cut his ear entirely off.
He took some nasty swipes at it.
As if to wipe away the myths, Mr.
Pialat, the French director who was himself a painter for a number of years, has made "Van Gogh," opening today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema.
Forget all of the hysterical melodrama of "Lust for Life." This "Van Gogh" is an almost serene consideration of the remarkably productive final two months in the artist's life, ending on the day of his death, July 29, 1890, two days after he suffered a self-inflicted gunshot wound.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Perot, Thrown for Loss, May Alter Game Plan
O. K. Here's the deal:
Ross Perot is talking to a crowd of partisans in Denver about a television station that has declined to pre-empt "Monday Night Football" for one of his 30-minute paid political programs.
"Make 'em show it! Make 'em show it!" the partisans chant.
Mr. Perot comes up with a solution.


Turning From Kelly, Jets Have to Focus on Marino
The Jets are in the midst of facing a triumvirate of superb National Football League quarterbacks in succession, and so far they are 0-1.
On Monday night, Jim Kelly of the Buffalo Bills gave the Jets an early look at what John Elway of Denver does best.
Kelly guided the Bills to a game-winning touchdown in the last two minutes, to beat the Jets, 24-20.
The Jets will face Elway and Denver on Nov. 8.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Holm Upsets Courier  Henrik Holm staged a big upset in his hometown yesterday, beating top-ranked Jim Courier, 6-4, 6-3, in the third round of the Stockholm Open.
Holm's victory follows his reaching the semifinals at Sydney, Australia, and the final at Tokyo earlier this month, which improved his ranking to a career-high 23d.
The 24-year-old Holm was behind by a break early in both sets but rallied.
In the second set, Holm scored his decisive service break to lead by 5-3 as Courier netted a tame forehand after a long rally.
Second-seeded Stefan Edberg, a finalist the last two years, advanced to the quarterfinals with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Karel Novacek.
Also winning: No. 3 Pete Sampras; No. 4 Goran Ivanisevic; No. 5 Petr Korda, who was a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Michael Stich, and No. 6 Boris Becker, the two-time defending champion. (AP) GOLF  Two Tie For Volvo Lead  Gordon Brand Jr. of Scotland birdied the last two holes yesterday to match Jamie Spence's one-under-par 70 and tie the Englishman for the first-round lead in the Volvo Masters at Sotogrande, Spain.
Steven Richardson of England was third with a 71, while Sandy Lyle of Scotland and Bernhard Langer of Germany both shot 72's.
Nick Faldo, the pretournament favorite, opened with a 73 as nine players in the select field of 54 shot 79's, and seven more shot 80 or higher in winds that gusted up to 35 miles an hour.
Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain finished with a 75, while Ian Woosnam of Wales shot 76.
Vijay Singh of Fiji, a two-time winner this year and No. 8 on the European Tour money list, soared to an 82. (AP)


MIDEAST TALKS GET PROMISING REVIEWS
American, Israeli and Jordanian officials gave unusually upbeat assessments today of the latest Middle East peace talks.
In the seventh round of talks, which recessed on Wednesday and will reconvene here on Nov. 9, Israelis have been meeting separately with Syrians, Lebanese, Jordanians and Palestinians.
The talks with Jordan were apparently the most fruitful.


Art in Review
Richard Tuttle
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow Lawrence Markey Inc.  55 Vandam Street
SoHo  Through today
Two dozen new works by Richard Tuttle are on view at Mary Boone, though they are practically invisible to anyone entering the gallery.
The walls are bare except for single straight vertical pencil lines, spaced several feet apart and running down from the ceiling.
At the bottom of each line, all just fractions of an inch from the floor, are hung the tiny sculptures, collages and paintings of the series Mr.
Tuttle has titled "Fiction Fish I."


Bush: Denouncing Clinton's Record
The Bush campaign began broadcasting this 30-second commercial Wednesday in unidentified markets around the country.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with gloomy black and white images of a rainy day, a deserted road, weeds rustling in the wind.
Key phrases from the narration, and sources for the statistics, are superimposed over similar depressing images.
Closes with a tree and a buzzard in the desert and these words: "America Can't Take That Risk." PRODUCER The November Company TELEVISION SCRIPT Announcer: "In his 12 years as Governor, Bill Clinton has doubled his state's debt. Doubled Government spending and signed the largest tax increase in his state's history. Yet his state remains the 45th worst in which to work. The 45th worst for children. It has the worst environmental policy.


Nets Are Ready to Pop Question to Mahorn
The Nets are preparing to make a multiyear contract offer to free agent Rick Mahorn, and the Knicks have also contacted Mahorn's lawyer to express interest in the bruising forward-center.
But several other teams are also pursuing Mahorn, who will not sign with any club until he returns from Italy next week.
Mahorn, 34 years old, is a 10-year National Basketball Association veteran who played on the Detroit Pistons' 1988-89 championship team.
The 6-foot-10-inch, 255-pound player spent last season with Il Messagero of the Italian League.


In a 'Cleansed' Bosnian Town, Croats, Not Serbs, Aim Guns
In the year of "ethnic cleansing," there is little in this mountain town that is not chillingly familiar.
Stores and restaurants still burn on the main street, three days after notices were posted on lampposts and shattered storefronts ordering the pillaging halted.
Along forest roads leading from the town, terrified Muslim refugees hasten away with pitiful bundles of belongings.


Teen-Ager Acquitted in Slaying During '91 Crown Heights Melee
A black teen-ager portrayed by his lawyer as "a sacrificial lamb" in a city afflicted with racial hatreds was acquitted of all charges yesterday in the killing of a Hasidic scholar from Australia during three nights of violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in the summer of 1991.
The verdict spawned anger and dismay in the Hasidic Jewish community, and there were scattered clashes between blacks and Jews in Crown Heights last night, with rocks, bottles and some punches thrown.
But the police intervened swiftly to separate the combatants and fears of widespread violence were not borne out.


Mild American Hope? Try Eyestone of Utah
The mustache bristles. What more can a United States marathoner do?
"It's the American mentality," Ed Eyestone said.
"If you don't win, if you're second, you're a loser."


Ted Thomas, 88, Dies; A Broadway Producer
Ted Thomas, a Broadway and Hollywood producer, died on Wednesday at his home in Van Nuys, Calif.
He was 88 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his son, Michael Tilson Thomas, the conductor.


Justice Dept. Is Criticized Over Environmental Cases
Congressional Democrats and the Bush Administration are locked in a bitter dispute over the Justice Department's record in prosecuting environmental crimes.
In the latest salvo, a Congressional committee today made public a study asserting that Federal prosecutors have been blocked from bringing criminal charges against environmental offenders even when the evidence in the case seemed ironclad.


Groups Fear No March On March 17
With the Ancient Order of Hibernians relinquishing its historic role as sponsor of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, leaders of New York's Irish-American community expressed consternation yesterday that no one had stepped into the breach and that next year's parade might be in real jeopardy.
"Nobody knows what to do," said Jerry Sullivan, president of the Grand Council of Emerald Societies, which sends 25 contingents of police officers, firefighters and postal workers to the annual parade.


Cansecos Seek Divorce
Texas Rangers outfielder JOSE CANSECO and his wife, ESTHER, are again seeking a divorce after a stormy marriage and several attempts at reconciliation.


Thorpe's Streak to End
The reign of forward OTIS THORPE as the current iron man of the National Basketball Association will come to an end because of a kidney injury the Houston Rockets player suffered in an exhibition game last week in Detroit.
Thorpe has played in 542 consecutive games and has started the last 493 of them, both streaks the longest among active N.B.A. players.


Love Gets The Early Edge at Pinehurst
While his four rivals for PGA Tour Player of the Year began shakily, Davis Love 3d got a healthy headstart on them today by grabbing a share of the first-round lead at the Tour Championship.
Love, who is second on the tour's 1992 money list and has three tournament victories, shot a three-under-par 68 over a perplexing Pinehurst No. 2 course to tie Keith Clearwater.
Craig Stadler, the defending champion, and David Frost had 69's and seven players were tied at 70.


Spassky, Bouncing Back, Beats a Listless Fischer
After being crushed in the preceding game, Boris Spassky got revenge yesterday by using an enormous advantage in space to squeeze Bobby Fischer to the wall in Game 26 of their match in Belgrade.
Fischer is on the point of winning the exhibition series with 9 victories to Spassky's 5, but Spassky is still battling.
Fischer was once again outmaneuvered in a King's Indian Defense, practically backed off the table by several links of white pawns that hampered the movement of his pieces.
It didn't help that Spassky also had two powerful bishops to rake the Fischer camp.


Cuomo Pulls for Jobs Bond Act as Regan Pushes Objections
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been traveling feverishly around New York State for the last few days, urging people to vote for his proposed $800 million jobs bond act.
And practically wherever he goes, there also goes State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, nipping at his heels.
Mr.
Regan, a Republican, is working just as hard to defeat the bond act as Mr.
Cuomo, a Democrat, is to get it passed, saying that he would support it only if the Legislature passed measures giving voters more authority over borrowing, as well.
"It is unaffordable in the current environment in which we finance ourselves," he said in Manhattan yesterday.


Accounts
*
Sally Beauty Co., Denton, Tex., to Levenson &amp; Hill, Irving, Tex., as the beauty-supply chain store's first agency.
Levenson was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $1 million, in a review that included the Richards Group of Dallas.


Ralph Ettlinger, 75, Health-Care Innovator
Ralph Ettlinger, an inventor and co-developer of a long-term health-care program that serves the elderly in their homes, died on Wednesday at the Anne Arundel Medical Center in Annapolis, Md.
He was 75 years old and lived in Annapolis.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


California Offers the Terminally Ill Mercy; For Living Will Law
To the Editor:
Medicare and Medicaid spend $1 billion a day to maintain the comatose in a semblance of life and extend for days or weeks the lives of the dying.
In the absence of a living will with contrary provisions, our medical establishment feels bound to use every means for this, regardless of cost.


Abrams Has Edge in Polls
Three recent polls show Attorney General Robert Abrams leading Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in the race for United States Senate in New York by margins ranging from 3 to 11 percentage points.
When the polls are averaged, Mr.
Abrams leads with 43 percent to Mr.
D'Amato's 37 percent.
A New York Times poll of 1,213 registered voters gave Mr.
Abrams a 3-point edge.
The poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.


Black Voters Are Wooed In Tight Senate Campaign
Taking to the steps of City Hall in back-to-back attempts to woo minority voters in a tight race for the United States Senate, Alfonse M. D'Amato and Robert Abrams yesterday each surrounded himself with prominent black supporters and tried to claim the mantle of protector of the poor, the oppressed and the working class.
Those almost homey appeals, made against the backdrop of a new poll showing the two candidates in a very tight race, marked the start of a last, bitter drive for thousands of undecided voters with less than one week remaining before the general election.
They also came on the same day as a report by the consumer interest group, Common Cause, which showed Senator D'Amato spending more than any senatorial candidate in the nation.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In a speech yesterday at a rally in Warren, Mich.
"Change. Governor Clinton and Ozone. They just keep talking about change, change, change. That's all you will have left in your pocket if Governor Clinton becomes President of the United States. That's it.
No, the last time we had that kind of inflation rate that Gore and Clinton would take us to, it was up there, as I said, inflation 15 percent, interest 20.
How would you like that.
If we'd stayed at their rate of inflation, milk, which costs $2.70 would be $8.23.
That's what would happen.
Bread, 84 cents, be up about $2.50.
We cannot go back to that Clinton-Gore inflation by raising taxes and raising spending.


Critic's Notebook; New Look at a Fellini Chef d'Oeuvre
Dim the lights.
Let the overture begin.
It's show time.
Federico Fellini's chef d'oeuvre, "8 1/2," his elegant, busy, rambunctious circus of a movie, is reopening today at the Film Forum in a new black-and-white print of silvery splendor.
This most grandly self-centered of movie extravaganzas hasn't aged a minute since its initial release here in the summer of 1963.
Though its kaleidoscopic form now seems far less mysterious than it once did, "8 1/2" remains magical: a mid-20th-century equivalent to the glorious Mozart-Da Ponte "Don Giovanni," about an unrepentant roue who, like Fellini at the time, just happens to be 43 years old and a hugely successful Italian film director.
Guido Anselmi (Marcello Mastroianni) is a clown, a juggler, a magician and a tamer of wild beasts.


Death-Penalty Question on the New Jersey Ballot
Four years after the New Jersey Supreme Court said that it was unconstitutional to execute a defendant who did not intend to kill his victim, New Jersey voters will decide whether to amend the constitution to permit executions in some of those cases.
That matter, two other constitutional questions and a $345 million bond issue to preserve farmland and recreational areas will appear on next Tuesday's ballot.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers
Big East officials have been congratulating themselves about the quick acceptance of the new conference as exemplified by strong attendance at many sites.
Rutgers, however, remains an enigma and a test will come tomorrow at the homecoming game, against Virginia Tech.
Although the contest has the badge of a Big East encounter, the Hokies are unfamiliar in New Jersey having last played the Scarlet Knights 39 years ago.
Both are fifth-place teams in the standing although each has some talented players.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are scheuled to close.
Closing This Weekend
FRANK SINATRA AND SHIRLEY MACLAINE, Radio City Music Hall, Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35, $55 and $75.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
FAIRFIELD PORTER, Hirschl &amp; Adler, 21 East 70th Street.
About 50 paintings and watercolors.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 535-8810.
"CAMERA AS WEAPON: WORKER PHOTOGRAPHY BETWEEN THE WARS," Grey Art Gallery, New York University, 33 Washington Place, off Washington Square East.
Photographs of the German workers' movements of the 1920's and 30's.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 11 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2.50.
Information: (212) 998-6780.
"THE COLUMBUS LETTER," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
Three copies of a letter, dated 1493, from Columbus to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0610.
Closing Next Weekend
"ALI," Sheridan Square Playhouse, 99 Seventh Avenue South, at Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village.
A drama about the former heavyweight champion by Graydon Royce and Geoffrey C. Ewing; Mr.
Ewing also plays the title role.
Through Nov. 8.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
No performances tomorrow night or Election Night.
Tickets: $22.50 and $25.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"THE ROADS TO HOME," Lamb's Little Theater, 130 West 44th Street.
A drama about three Texas women during the 1920's, written and directed by Horton Foote; starring Jean Stapleton, Hallie Foote and Rochelle Oliver.
Through Nov. 8.
Performances: Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 997-1780.
"THE DUANE MICHALS SHOW," and "BREAKING BOUNDS: THE PHOTOGRAPHY OF LOIS GREENFIELD," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street.
Photography exhibitions.
Through Nov. 8.
Hours: Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. and Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 860-1777.
"THE MAGIC FLUTE," and "DIE FLEDERMAUS," New York City Opera, Lincoln Center.
The final "Magic Flute" is Nov. 7; performances tomorrow at 1:30 P.M. and Nov. 7 at 8 P.M..
The final "Fledermaus" is Nov. 8; performances Sunday at 1:30 P.M., Tuesday at 8 P.M. and Nov. 8 at 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Sciacca Is Basking in the Spotlight
He was born in Brooklyn 32 years ago and was raised in Elmont on Long Island about a block from Belmont Park, where his father stirred the embers by taking him to the races when he was a small boy.
Now, after some years in the obscurity of the backstretch, Gary Sciacca is standing in the spotlight of the Breeders' Cup as the trainer of a star horse, Saratoga Dew, and he reports that his horse has changed his life.
"I've never gotten fan letters before," he said this morning outside the filly's barn at Gulfstream Park.
"People are sending me photographs of her. I'm getting phone calls. She's been on TV. I've been on the race track all my life, and I'd see other people get a horse like this and I'd say: 'One day, it would be nice to have one.'


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  AN AGREEMENT ON REVIEW BOARD
Mayor Dinkins and City Council leaders reached agreement on a proposal that would create an independent agency to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
The compromise involves one of New York City's most divisive and racially charged issues, one that has been fought over in the ballot box and in the streets: who should judge the actions of police officers -- police employees or outsiders?
A1.
ASSESSING THE BOARD COMPROMISE
The agreement to establish the independent civilian board is in many ways remarkable, considering how divisive the issue has been in New York City.
News analysis, B3.
NOT GUILTY IN CROWN HEIGHTS CASE
A black teen-ager portrayed by his lawyer as "a sacrificial lamb" in a city afflicted with racial hatreds was acquitted of all charges in the killing of a Hasidic scholar from Australia during three nights of racial violence in Brooklyn's troubled Crown Heights section in the summer of 1991.
A1.
Two families react.
B2.
SUBPOENAS ISSUED IN LIBEL SUIT
Five members of the staff of City Council President Andrew J. Stein have been subpoenaed to appear at depositions today in the libel suit filed by Randy Daniels, who stepped down as a Deputy Mayor of New York City this week following a charge of sexual harassment.
B3.
NO ST.
PATRICK'S DAY PARADE?
With the Ancient Order of Hibernians relinquishing its historical role as sponsor of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, next year's parade might be in real jeopardy.
B3.
REGION  BLACKS WOOED IN SENATE RACE
Taking to the steps of City Hall in back-to-back attempts to woo minority voters in a tight race for the United States Senate, Alfonse M. D'Amato and Robert Abrams yesterday each surrounded himself with prominent black supporters and tried to claim the mantle of protector of the poor, the oppressed and the working class.
B5.
TAPES PLAYED AT GLEN RIDGE TRIAL
In a surprise move, prosecutors in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault trial placed into evidence three tape recordings that defense lawyers had said would clear their clients.
B6.
TURNABOUT IN CAR INSURANCE
In a surprise vote today to override a gubernatorial veto, the Republican-controlled Legislature repealed a section of the state's automobile insurance law that would have prevented insurers from setting rates according to age, sex, marital status and residency.
B6.
A VOTE ON THE DEATH PENALTY
Four years after the New Jersey Supreme Court said that it was unconstitutional to execute a defendant who did not intend to kill his victim, New Jersey voters will decide whether to amend the constitution to permit executions in such cases.
B4.
CUOMO AND HIS SHADOW
Governor Cuomo is urging people to vote for his proposed $800 million jobs bond act.
And practically wherever he goes, there also goes State Comptroller Edward V. Regan.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B6  Chronicle B7


This Time, Sanders May Be Out by a Foot
DEION SANDERS has missed practice with the Atlanta Falcons in Suwanee, Ga., while undergoing tests on his sprained left foot.
"It's on the top of the foot, in the area where you'd lace your shoes," said a team spokesman, CHARLIE TAYLOR.
The team listed Sanders's status as questionable for Sunday's game against the Los Angeles Rams.


Yeltsin Suspends Baltic Troop Pullout
President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree today suspending the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic states, asserting a "profound concern" over the treatment of Russians there.
The decree was certain to provoke a storm in Estonian, Latvia and Lithuania, whose governments view the continuing presence of Russian troops on their territories as the greatest single threat to their security and independence.


Nations Helping Ex-Soviet Lands Switch Systems
The nations providing emergency aid to the former Soviet republics have agreed at a conference here to dismantle the year-old system for funneling billions of dollars to those newly independent countries and replace it with a process that would still offer large amounts of aid but would apply more pressure on the countries to open and reform their stagnating economies.
While the decision is intended to transform what had been an ad hoc process into a more permanent and efficient one, it also sends a strong message to political leaders in Moscow and the other capitals that the assistance they receive from the West could be jeopardized if they do not move faster to build market economies, officials here said.


Game Plan For Visiting Matisse Show
THE large, immensely popular Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art is drawing near-capacity crowds.
In the process, it is creating one of those classic New York scenes, the kind that can be a field day for people-watchers and urban eavesdroppers, if not for art-lovers.
Inside, the museum is filled top to bottom with people who are discussing everything from the French modernist and his beautiful, challenging works to their aching feet and what's for dinner.
Outside, there are sporadic skirmishes for taxis and different lines of people waiting to do such things as buy advance tickets, pick up reserved tickets or simply see the show.
All that's missing are sidewalk vendors selling T-shirts that say "I Survived Matisse."


Daniels Subpoenas 5 Members Of Stein's Staff in Libel Lawsuit
Five members of the staff of City Council President Andrew J. Stein have been subpoenaed to appear at depositions today in the libel suit filed by Randy Daniels, who withdrew as a Deputy Mayor of New York City this week following a charge of sexual harassment.
Mr.
Daniels's lawyer, Regina Darby, said that she also planned to subpoena Mr.
Stein; his chief of staff, Victoria Streitfeld, and other aides.


Review/Film; Random Murder Spree In a Friedkin Thriller
William Friedkin's chillingly effective "Rampage" begins with the sight of a killer preparing to commit his crimes.
Charles Reece (Alex McArthur), a handsome, wide-eyed man with a disarming smile, buys a gun at a store and answers jovially when the seller asks an obligatory question about whether Charles has been in a mental hospital ("Let me think. No").
He stakes out a safe-looking suburb.
He selects a house at random, surprises the white-haired woman who answers the door, then shoots three people, going on to carve up two of them with a kitchen knife.
These events are left largely implicit, with the bloodshed offscreen, but the full scope of their grisliness is allowed to sink in.
In presenting this murderous spree, which goes on to include a mother and young son from another household, Mr.
Friedkin's method is as systematic as Reece's.
He works briskly and efficiently to lay out the details of a case based on a real story.
And he does so without the shroud of moral ambiguity that is sometimes made to surround crime stories as extreme as this.
"Rampage," while offering discreet exposition about the murders and their aftermath, also becomes a tirade against a judicial system that would spare someone like Reece by deeming him criminally insane.


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about a song recital by Dawn Upshaw and Richard Goode at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan included conflicting references to the day of the concert.
It was on Sunday, not Saturday.


Argentina Adopts Tax Plan to Spur Exports
In an effort to stem an alarming trade deficit, the Argentine Government has announced a series of tax measures intended to stimulate exports of Argentine goods and reduce the flow of imports into the country.
The plan, introduced on Wednesday night in a nationwide television address by Economy Minister Domingo F. Cavallo, amounts to a devaluation for exporters of the Argentine peso, which many have argued is overvalued.
It was also a partial reversal of Mr.
Cavallo's free-market deregulation plan that he introduced in March 1991.


Not a Sentimental Journey
Yes, Lawrence Taylor reiterated today, this is his last season in pro football.
But no, the Giants' 33-year-old outside linebacker said, he did not want to encourage swan-song sentimentality, especially for Sunday night's game against the Redskins in Washington.
"If you're looking for something to get sentimental, that's not me," he said.
"I'm here strictly to play football. I just want to leave in peace. I want to retire. If I could without playing this game, I would. I'm not going to try harder than I did yesterday and two years ago."


Soldiers in Tajikistan Guard the Capital


Art in Review
Joan Snyder
Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Joan Snyder's vibrant Expressionist work is as much collaged as it is painted.
The ground in "Nocturne" is an expanse of black silk laid down over canvas, and has patches of purple velvet applied here and there.
Its center is filled with a nebula-shaped oval of gesso, papier-mache and a gel medium mixed together.
Bits of wood glued around its edges seem to dance in its orbital pull.


Bush Remains the Favorite Among Executives
President Bush might have been trailing Gov.
Bill Clinton in the opinion polls since midsummer, but like most Republicans in past campaigns for the White House, the President seems to have held a commanding lead among American business executives.
A Fortune magazine poll of 184 chief executives taken in July after Ross Perot withdrew from the race showed President Bush favored by 85 percent, with just 9 percent for Governor Clinton.
Such samplings have limited statistical validity, but a fax poll conducted last week of 219 small-business owners by Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting concern, showed that 51 percent favored President Bush, with 18 percent for Mr.
Perot and 15 percent for Governor Clinton.


Brett Elliot Langstaff; Antiquary, 59
Brett Elliot Langstaff, an authority and consultant on rare books, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.
He was 59 years old and lived in Morristown, N.J.
His wife, the former Linda Miller, said the cause of death was non-Hodgkins lymphoma.


Abroad at Home; Living With Lies
At the end of what has seemed an interminable campaign, we are left with a question of character: How does George Bush live with the knowledge of his disregard for truth in politics?
Even to ask the question may seem naive, so cynical have we become about politicians.
They all lie, many would say, so why should we expect President Bush's conscience to be troubled?


Guilty Plea in Fraud of Delivery Company
In a plea bargain, a man described by prosecutors as a major organized-crime figure admitted yesterday to running a scheme that extracted $1 million in unearned wages from a newspaper delivery company in the New York metropolitan area.
The defendant, James Carmine Galante, was sentenced in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to 4 to 12 years in prison.
The 56-year-old Mr.
Galante had been indicted in July on charges that he was the head of a Bonanno crime family unit that placed nonexistent employees on the payroll of the Metropolitan News Company and collected their wages from 1986 to 1991.


T.W.A. IS ALLOWED TO BORROW $100 MILLION
Trans World Airlines yesterday won a Federal bankruptcy court judge's approval to borrow another $100 million as the carrier tries to keep flying through its reorganization.
Judge Helen Balick in Wilmington, Del., granted the request in an emergency hearing sought on Wednesday by the airline and its creditors.


HUGHES AIRCRAFT IS FINED $3.5 MILLION
A Federal judge in Los Angeles yesterday imposed one of the largest penalties ever on a military contractor: $3.5 million against the Hughes Aircraft Company for falsifying tests on microelectronics circuits used in military and space systems.


COMPANY NEWS: Wrong Numbers; When Sales Figures Just Don't Add Up
Few doubt the talents of corporate number-crunchers, whose calculations rove the mathematical landscape from revenue analysis to depreciation costs.
Just don't quiz them on arithmetic.
That lesson was learned this week -- bitterly -- by investors in Buffets Inc., a developer and operator of an all-you-can-eat restaurant chain based in Eden Prairie, Minn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; For the Most Negative Ads, Turn On the Nearest Radio
It's the Great Invisible Attack campaign.
Heading into the final days of the Presidential race, the Bush campaign is running a series of highly critical, carefully aimed radio advertisements aimed at undermining Gov.
Bill Clinton's support in crucial states.
Over the weekend, when it will be almost impossible for the Clinton campaign to respond, the Bush campaign is planning to put more attack advertisements on the radio.


Stocks Down in Tokyo
Stocks were lower here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 170.31 points, or 1.01 percent, to 16,767.40.
On Thursday, the Nikkei lost 130.70 points.
For the week, the index was off 350.25 points.


UAL's 3d-Quarter Earnings Fell 14%
The UAL Corporation, parent company of United Airlines, reported that third-quarter earnings fell 14 percent, a better-than-expected performance in the face of industrywide fare cuts initiated largely by its rival American Airlines.
UAL's profits fell to $21.5 million, or 89 cents a share, from $25 million, or $1.05 a share, in the year-earlier period.
Revenue grew 11 percent, to $3.58 billion from $3.24 billion, because of the heavier traffic the low fares generated.
Revenue per passenger mile fell, however, to 11.26 cents from 12.02 cents.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; Clinton Urges New Jersey to 'Turn Out the Lights' on Bush
Gov.
Bill Clinton came to Hudson County tonight looking for the campaign-ending spark that could put New Jersey in the Democratic column for the first time in a Presidential race since Lyndon B. Johnson's victory in 1964.
Standing on the steps of the old Hudson County Courthouse with Gov.
Jim Floria at his side, Mr.
Clinton told a crowd of about 5,000 people that New Jersey was pivotal in his plans for defeating President Bush on Tuesday.
"New Jersey can turn out the lights," Mr.
Clinton said before leaving for a television appearance in Secaucus.


INSIDE
Optimism on Mideast Talks
American, Israeli and Jordanian officials gave unusually upbeat assessments of the Middle East peace talks, which will restart on Nov. 9.
Page A6.
G.M.
Loses $752.9 Million
General Motors had a third-quarter loss of $752.9 million, but the bleak results were actually an improvement over a year earlier.
Page D1.
Sir Kenneth MacMillan Dies
The resident choreographer and former director of the Royal Ballet in London, died backstate at the Royal Opera House in London.
Page A23.
Cleaner Gasoline, at a Price
The New York region is switching to a gasoline formulated to reduce air pollution, so starting on Sunday, motorists will pay a bit more.
Page B1.


Howard H. Goodkin; Publishing Executive, 40
Howard H. Goodkin, an educator and publishing executive, died on Tuesday at Cabrini Hospice of Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.
A cause of death was not immediately available.


Grading The Gothic In Gotham
THE night of the living pumpkins approaches, and New York, although no stranger to dark, disruptive forces, prepares to shiver and shake.
Some might argue that the city does not really require a special holiday to introduce the element of fear, that it already is a yearlong, round-the-clock festival of dread, punctuated by flashes of undiluted terror.
Who needs Halloween?
And can brash, bustling New York serve up the right kind of murky atmosphere?
Anne Rice has a few thoughts on the matter.
And New Yorkers will be glad to know that the author of "The Vampire Chronicles," "The Witching Hour" and "The Mummy" gives the city high marks in horror.
"It has its own gothic charm," she says, looking down Second Avenue from the 50's.
"I think it's spooky as hell."


COMPANY NEWS;
A Federal district judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered a New York lawyer to pay $88,100 in penalties, interest and forfeiture of profits to settle accusations of insider trading in Wearever-Proctor-Silex shares during negotiations to sell the company in 1987.
Henry A. Singer, 54 years old, a partner with Morrison, Cohen, Singer &amp; Weinstein, a 50-member New York law firm, agreed to settle a two-year-old complaint by the Securities and Exchange Commission without admitting or denying the accusations.


Tour de France '93 Map Points Toward Indurain
A rigorous and mountainous 1993 Tour de France was unveiled today and the man with the big smile at the end of the presentation was Miguel Indurain, the defending champion in the world's best bicycle race.
Indurain smiles readily anyway, but he had special reasons to be pleased.
The 80th edition of the Tour will play to the Spaniard's strengths: the long time trial and the high mountains.
His formula for winning the last two Tours and this year's Giro d'Italia has been to stay with the best riders on climbs and then crush the field in time trials, or races against the clock.


Head of Big Japan Retailer Quits Over Payments
The president of Ito-Yokado, one of Japan's most successful retailing companies, resigned today to take responsibility for large payoffs the company made to gangsters.
It was the latest demonstration of the growing reach of organized-crime groups into the highest levels of Japanese society.
The executive, Masatoshi Ito, would not discuss the payoffs directly, saying they were under investigation.
But his resignation and offer of an apology at a news conference today were taken as a tacit acknowledgement that the company had, as charged by the police, broken the law by paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to a group of professional extortionists, known here as sokaiya.


Judge to Oversee Burning in Arkansas
A Federal district judge in Arkansas today assumed control of the largest project ever undertaken in the United States to incinerate chemical wastes contaminated with dioxin.
The judge's order, responding to a lawsuit brought by Arkansas community groups and a Washington-based public interest law group, came as the incineration of the chemical wastes began today at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company pesticide plant in Jacksonville, Ark., a city of 29,000 people 15 miles northeast of Little Rock.
Closely Watched Project
The old plant, which manufactured insecticides and defoliants from 1948 until it was closed in 1986, is one of the most contaminated toxic waste sites in the country, according to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
Since 1979, when Federal and state investigators found dioxin in the soil and water in Jacksonville, Vertac's toxic wastes and what to do about them have been a source of considerable strife in the community and have dominated the attention of Gov.
Bill Clinton and his environmental advisers.


Review/Dance; Movement Set to Words By the Trisler Company
The talking was as good as the dancing when the Trisler Danscompany opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night.
That's saying a lot, for the dancing was blessed with zest.
Two of the evening's attractions were set to texts, and the talk ranged from poignant poetry to a silly tale with a serious moral.
The Trisler company was founded in 1974 by the teacher and choreographer Joyce Trisler.
She died five years later, but her company has lived on and appears to be thriving under its present directors, Regina Larkin and Harry Rubenstein.


Blackman Still Hurts, And So Does Anthony
Injuries continued to nag the Knicks' backcourt as the team prepared for its preseason finale, Friday against the 76ers.
Rolando Blackman, who has missed the entire preseason schedule with back spasms, did not practice today and is not expected to play against Philadelphia at Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I.


U.N. SEEKS SIGNAL ON TROOP NOTICE
The Security Council recommended today that members of the United Nations express their willingness to contribute troops on short notice to its peacekeeping missions.
The Council also asked member nations to loan military and civilian specialists to the United Nations to help it create a long-term peacekeeping plan.
The number of United Nations peacekeepers has expanded from 11,000 to more than 50,000 in the last year, chiefly because of expanded responsibilities in Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia.
Even so, the United Nations has been criticized for responding too slowly to political and military crises.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; In the Final Push, Quayle Rallies Turn Into a Blur
Vice President Dan Quayle was heading into the home stretch of his standard speech at a Bush-Quayle rally here when he threw in his usual charge that Gov.
Bill Clinton "waffles" on issues.
To the dismay of Secret Service agents, a dozen frozen waffles flew up from the audience.
Mr.
Quayle caught one and the friendly crowd roared its approval.
The waffles were a rare unscripted moment for the Vice President in his campaign for re-election, although they have now become a signature part of an event when he mentions waffling by the opposition.


Sports of The Times; Giants Fans Should Take Chill Pill
WE are now smack in the middle of the professional football season.
I deduced that the other night because I stayed awake past 9 P.M., 10 P.M., 11 P.M., midnight, and I couldn't find a World Series game on CBS.
So I went to bed.
Did I miss something later?
It can't be hockey season yet because my official National Hockey League guide, which I requested six weeks ago from the league offices, cleverly tracked down in Toronto, still hasn't arrived.
Will we look back upon the efficiency of the John Ziegler era and say, "Those were the good old days?"


COMPANY BRIEFS
W.
R.
GRACE &amp; CO., New York, and its partners Johnson Controls Inc. and Saft America Inc. were awarded contracts totaling $42 million to develop high-energy batteries for electric vehicles.
PHILIPS ELECTRONICS N.V., Eindhoven, the Netherlands, said it had acquired GTE International Inc.'s 70 percent stake in the Japanese lighting company Kondo Sylvania. .


One Fan's Dream Date With Joyce!
DURING 25 years in journalism you interview some famous and infamous -- people.
Then, finally, you meet Joyce Logan,
the
Joyce Logan.
She opens her own front door just a fan's-scream away from Interstate 95. (You understand, we can't publish the address.) Joyce Logan seems shorter in person.
She remembers my name.
In a minute, we're at her dining-room table -- just the two of us, can you believe it? -- eating take-out pizza without cheese (that lactose intolerance thing again).


Kordic and Drugs
In the last few months of his life, John Kordic, a journeyman intimidator, was taking three to five grams of cocaine a day, sometimes for a week at a time, his fiancee said at a coroner's inquest in Quebec yesterday.
NANCY MASSE said Kordic took cocaine with several other N.H.L. players.
She was not asked to identify them or their team.


Pre-Election Mood in Washington Is, Polls Notwithstanding, Post-Bush
One of President Bush's top appointees, a man known more for competence than political zeal, recently got a telephone call dangling the prospect of new employment in January.
Nothing odd about that; with Mr.
Bush's re-election uncertain, many Republicans are furtively fielding job offers.
But this call stood out for its source: Bill Clinton's campaign staff.
Already it was plucking at the carcass of the Bush regime more than a month before Election Day.


Barry to Coach
RICK BARRY has accepted an offer to coach the Cedar Rapids (Iowa) Sharpshooters of the Global Basketball Association, the team said yesterday.
Barry will be paid $150,000 for the 1992-93 season. (AP)


U.S. Treasurer Being Investigated On Payments From Ex-Employer
Federal agents are looking into accusations that the United States Treasurer received payments from a former employer while in office, Administration officials said tonight.
Treasury Department officials said the Treasurer, Catalina V. Villalpando, whose name appears on United States currency, was placed on an indefinite leave today.


Critic's Choice/Film; Godard's Video Works
Mention Jean-Luc Godard and the response is likely to be idle curiosity or jaded boredom.
With the exception of "Hail Mary," the 1985 film that annoyed the Vatican with its modern retelling of the Virgin birth, the New Wave master hasn't created a stir in two decades.
But there is new evidence that the steep decline of Mr.
Godard's career may be a myth.
"Jean-Luc Godard: Son et Image, 1974-1991" is a monthlong series of 30 films and videos beginning today at the Museum of Modern Art (information: 212-708-9480).
The series title comes from "Sonimage," the production company Mr.
Godard founded in 1974 when he began to work seriously in video, and it is the perfect name for work that gives equal weight to sound, image, words on the screen, overlapping photographs and the forceful presence of the director, who hovers over each project whether he is on screen or not.


Some Alternative Boundaries Fall
Back in 1970, Iggy Pop and his band the Stooges couldn't have been more of an alternative to mainstream pop music.
As the trippy meanderings of psychedelia were giving way to the smooth, mellow sounds of folk-rock, the Stooges were playing brutally loud, primitive three-chord grunge; at a time when singer-songwriters like James Taylor were oozing sensitivity across AM radio waves, Mr.
Pop was earning a reputation for gouging himself onstage with broken glass.
From Mr.
Pop's vantage point, the mainstream was a kind of fortress with walls he found impossible to climb, and he developed a healthy resentment toward those on the inside.
"When me and my friends would hear something we didn't like on the radio, the standard phrase was, 'That guy should be killed,' " Mr.
Pop said in a recent interview.
"You'd really want to kill this person that was singing this phony song. 'I've seen fire and I've seen rain' -- give me a break! You've seen the bedroom in your mom's house! It was a very extreme point of view."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Hillary Clinton; From Lawyer to Mother; Now, Both of the Above
In the waning days of the campaign, Hillary Clinton, who has emphasized two distinct aspects of her personality, is putting everything together for the stretch run: highlighting her command of policy, her confident assertiveness and her husband, the Presidential candidate.
It is as if she has had three incarnations during the campaign.
There was Hillary I, the accomplished lawyer who spoke of herself as part of a "Blue Light special," saying "people call us two-for-one."


Palmer Gets Probation
A judge in Tuscaloosa, Ala., sentenced DAVID PALMER, a University of Alabama wide receiver, to two years probation in a drunken driving case yesterday and told him he would go to jail if arrested for driving under the influence during his probation.
The Sept. 6 drunken-driving arrest was Palmer's second in less than three months.


Review/Film; A French Girl, a Chinese Lover And Colonial Days in Old Vietnam
"The Lover" ("L'Amant"), Marguerite Duras's best-selling French novel, would not seem to be the ideal subject for a film, especially not for an English-language French film, directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud ("The Name of the Rose," "The Bear") and shot on a very big budget on location in Vietnam.
"The Lover" isn't exactly "Apocalypse Now." It's Miss Duras's slim self-searching memoir about a love affair she had when she was 15 1/2 years old, a French schoolgirl in Saigon in 1929, with a rich Chinese man of 27.
The novel is an interior monologue so sparely written that the characters aren't even named.
The girl is the Girl, the man the Man, her mother the Mother and her two brothers the Older Brother and the Younger Brother.


Max Miller, 74, Dies; TV and Film Director
Max Miller, an award-winning director of network television programs and documentary films, died on Saturday at the North Hollywood Medical Center in Studio City, Calif.
He was 74 years old and lived in Studio City.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


People
*
Paul Isacsson, 48 years old, and Beth Rockwood, 38, executive vice presidents at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, were respectively named to the additional new positions of director and associate director of the communications services department.


Charles Murphy, 82; Manhattan Lawyer Counseled 2 Mayors
Charles F. Murphy, a Manhattan lawyer whose years of public service in New York City and State date to the time of Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia, died on Wednesday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His law firm, Murphy &amp; Maviglia, said he died after a long illness.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN MAIZE-PRODUCTS, Stamford, Conn., which makes corn sweetener, corn starch and tobacco products, named Patric J. McLaughlin president and chief operating officer.
CONQUEST AIRLINES CORP., Austin, Tex., which serves Texas and Louisiana, named John R. Walters president and chief operating officer.


Jobless Claims Up Slightly
The number of Americans seeking unemployment benefits rose slightly in mid-October after falling for three straight weeks, the Government said today.
The Labor Department said 375,000 workers lined up at state unemployment offices to file claims for jobless benefits during the week ended Oct. 17.
That compared with 367,000 applications filed the week before.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the aftermath of the Alger Hiss case misstated Richard M. Nixon's electoral history in some editions.
He was elected Vice President in 1952; his successful campaign for the Senate was in 1950.


Ruth M. Vande Kieft; Professor, 67
Ruth Marguerite Vande Kieft, a professor emeritus of English at Queens College and an expert on Southern literature, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 67 years old.
She died of cancer, a spokesman for the college said.


Debs and Perot
To the Editor:
President Bush says that a vote for Ross Perot will be wasted.


Bond Traders Focus on Jobs Data
With just three trading days before the election results are in, some bond traders and dealers are turning their focus to an event that already seems much more important to them: the employment report for October, which the Labor Department will release next Friday.
Some traders contend that the market has already pretty well discounted a victory by Gov.
Bill Clinton given the selloff of the last four weeks.
So that news is in the market.


Yugoslav and Mediators Visit Balkan Hot Spots to Head Off Unrest
Yugoslavia's federal Prime Minister and two international mediators made a lightning tour of the southern Balkans today in a bid to head off a new conflagration in this tense and divided region.
The Prime Minister, Milan Panic, together with Cyrus R. Vance, representing the United Nations, and the European Community's mediator, Lord Owen, flew first to Pristina, capital of Kosovo, a province of the Yugoslav republic of Serbia where 80 percent of the population are Albanian Muslims, in an effort to ease tensions there.
Their second stop was in Skopje, the capital of the Macedonian republic.


Editors' Note
An article yesterday about Spike Lee, the director, described his relations with magazines, newspapers and television stations seeking to interview him about his coming film, "Malcolm X." The article reported that Mr.
Lee said he preferred to be interviewed by black journalists.


Roe Retires and District Sees an Abrasive Contest
For nearly a quarter-century, Representative Robert A. Roe's iron grip on the Eighth Congressional District not only assured Democratic control of the seat but was also the linchpin to the Democrats' majority in the New Jersey Congressional delegation.
But Mr.
Roe's decision not to seek a 13th term, together with a redrawn map that apparently favored the Republicans, produced a district that is untried and unpredictable.
The result has been one of the fiercest and most abrasive campaigns in the state.


Contributions to Abrams Are a False Issue
To the Editor:
I am writing because of my concern for the reputation of the New York attorney general's office, where I spent more than 20 years as an assistant attorney general in charge of securities, real estate and theatrical registration and enforcement, working under two great men, Jacob Javits and Louis J. Lefkowitz.
Such articles as your Oct. 21 report on campaign fund solicitation by Attorney General Robert Abrams give a warped impression of that office.


J. Van Ness Philip; Editor, 70
J.
Van Ness Philip, a Hudson Valley fruit grower and editor of a manufacturing newsletter, died on Tuesday at his home in Claverack, N.Y.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Philip, who had emphysema, died of a heart attack, said a daughter, Leila S. Philip of Cambridge, Mass.


California Offers the Terminally Ill Mercy
To the Editor:
"California to Decide if Doctors Can Aid in Suicide" (front page, Oct. 9) omits a key point about Proposition 161, which would make it legal for a physician to help a patient die.
This is not only about death with dignity.
It's about peace of mind.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Campaign Stalled, Perot Team Tries to Fix It, Fast
Acknowledging that the Ross Perot's rise in the polls has stalled, his aides tried today to defuse two issues that they fear have slowed his momentum: the charge that he is trying to buy the election, and his unsubstantiated assertions that the Bush campaign planned to disrupt his daughter's wedding and to wiretap his business telephones.
The Perot campaign has developed different strategies for dealing with the two issues.
Aides are confronting the first with claims that President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton have actually outspent Mr.
Perot.
They are confronting the second with silence.


Art in Review
Jennifer Bartlett
Paula Cooper Gallery  155 Wooster Street
SoHo  Through tomorrow
Even at her most persuasive, Jennifer Bartlett is a hard artist to figure out.
There's a lot to admire: her work is carefully thought through and ambitious in scope.
Blending a grid format and representational imagery, she manages to sustain and vary a single idea over a large, multi-part series.
Yet for all its intricacy, the work rarely keeps the promises it makes.


Officer Faults One Suspect For Violence
The Brooklyn police officer whose arrest of two college students earlier this week led to allegations of police brutality and yet more strain between the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and Mayor David N. Dinkins, said yesterday that the incident turned violent only after one of the students "just went crazy and started swinging."
The episode provoked a protest from about 150 students from Medgar Evers College outside the 71st Precinct station house just hours after the arrests.
But it also unleashed resentment by officers who were angered by the release of the two men on misdemeanor charges, after Deputy Mayor Fritz W. Alexander 2d and two Brooklyn City Councilwomen visited the precinct.
It even raised the specter that some officers in the 71st and other precincts would draw back from aggressively making arrests.


Bush to Break With Tradition
Breaking with tradition, President Bush ahs decided not tro broadcast an election eve appeal on any of the three major networks.
Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot, in contrast, will uphold election eve appeals on all three networks.


Override of Veto Repeals Auto-Insurance Provision
In a surprise vote today to override a gubernatorial veto, the Republican-controlled Legislature repealed a section of the state's automobile insurance law that would have prevented insurers from setting rates according to age, sex, marital status and residency.
The vote, which caught angry Democratic legislators off guard, is likely to be only the first assault by the Republicans against Gov.
Jim Florio's two-year-old revision of the automobile insurance law.
Partisan fighting over automobile insurance is likely to be a major issue in next year's gubernatorial race.
Praise and Criticism
Today's vote was praised by insurance companies and bitterly criticized by Mr.
Florio's office.
The two sides differed widely on what effect the provision, known as Section 40, would have had. .


Review/Film; Wry Tale of Bored Wife and Her Gun
Debbie Bender (Diane Lane) looks perplexed.
Something about her marriage to an indifferent radiologist named Gerald (Stephen Collins) and her life in a featureless New Jersey town house isn't quite working out.
Debbie isn't the type to dwell on this, but she can't help noticing that life may be passing her by.
It is at this point that a miracle appears, in the form of the small, dainty handgun, which Gerald wants Debbie to keep in her night table drawer.
Across the street, in an identical dwelling, lives one of the world's great liars.
Skippy (James Le Gros) is also something of a romantic, having become so smitten with Debbie that he can hear her cry out in alarm (when she dreams that the gun fires accidentally) in the middle of the night.
Skippy, who will eventually be pronounced "a fishy guy" for doing things like paying for a magazine with a $100 bill, doesn't say much, and never truly gets around to explaining himself.
But he understands Debbie better than she understands herself, and he is ready to become the instrument of her salvation.


Pay Toilets a Success, but They're Still Closing
The six tall elegant sidewalk pay toilets -- praised as a clean, inexpensive and long overdue solution to one of New York City's most vexing and enduring irritants -- are to be closed today, then dismantled and shipped back to France, where they came from.
"Everybody needs it," said the owner of sports memorabilia shop in midtown, Azam Khan, as he waited for his turn at one of the toilets on the bustling sidewalk along West 34th Street in Manhattan.
"I need it right now. They have to put more, instead of taking them away."


South African Runners Show They Are Comrades
For someone who has won the grueling Comrades ultramarathon in South Africa a record nine times, setting a succession of records on the undulating 55-mile course between Durban and Pietermaritzburg, Bruce Fordyce seems to be taking a cavalier attitude about Sunday's New York City Marathon.
Fordyce, who generally regards traditional marathons as light training runs, will be thrilled if he finishes the five-borough course under 3 hours 15 minutes.
Never mind that the time is more than 30 minutes slower than his usual 26.2-mile pace, if Fordyce breaks 3:15, it will be a personal record of sorts.


Bitterness for One Family and Relief for the Other
They had lived in limbo for more than a year, two families whose lives had been changed by the racial violence that ripped through Crown Heights in August 1991.
Norman Rosenbaum, an Australian tax lawyer, flew back and forth from Melbourne, urging the authorities to arrest and convict the black youths who set upon his younger brother Yankel, fatally beating and stabbing him.
The attack was apparently in retaliation after a car driven by a Hasidic Jew killed a black child.


Review/Film; Memories Of Madness And Love
"Waterland" is a ghost story told by the ghost himself, a gaunt, ravaged Englishman whose wounds go almost unimaginably deep.
Tom Crick (Jeremy Irons) has the haunted look of a man desperate to escape the past, and the paradoxical occupation (as high school history teacher) of someone who never can.
Day after day, Tom stands before his students and ignores the usual syllabus to tell tales of love, madness and murder, stories about his own life and the lives of his ancestors.
He must try to stare down these memories in order to escape their overwhelming weight, a hopeless yet supremely poignant endeavor.
And not a terribly cinematic one, at least not under ordinary circumstances.
Graham Swift's idiosyncratic 1983 novel, set in the Fen country in East Anglia and swooping erratically through 200 years of personal and regional history, is about as elusive and unfilmable as a book can be.
Yet Stephen Gyllenhaal, who directed this imaginative adaptation, and Peter Prince, who wrote the screenplay, have seen beyond the unwieldiness of their material and sought to preserve only its essential episodes, weaving them together into a fearlessly eccentric film of haunting depth.
With its dark sexual secrets and peculiar symmetries, its obsessive and unrelenting pull toward the past, "Waterland" is more likely to remind the viewer of Faulkner's prose than of anything on film.


Corrections
An obituary headline in some copies yesterday about the resident choreographer and former director of the Royal Ballet in London rendered his last name incorrectly.
He is Sir Kenneth MacMillan.
The obituary is reprinted today on page 11.


U.S. Closes First City Bancorp
Federal banking authorities announced tonight that they had closed the First City Bancorporation of Houston, one of the largest banks in Texas, after finding that its two largest subsidiaries were insolvent.
Officials of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said the Government's bank insurance fund would put up about $500 million to protect depositors in First City and its 20 bank subsidiaries, which had total assets of $8.8 billion, and prepare the bank for sale to private interests.


Trouble, but No Time Bomb, at Banks
The savings and loan mess was swept under the rug during the 1988 Presidential campaign only to explode immediately afterward.
Whether the nation's commercial banks are a similar time bomb has emerged as an issue in this year's campaign.
Ross Perot says both Republicans and Democrats are trying to hide a crisis in which commercial banks may require a huge taxpayer bailout.
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton say the system is fundamentally sound, despite some problem banks.


Religious Right Intensifies Campaign for Bush
Little noticed since the Republican Convention in Houston, the religious right is mounting a sophisticated, high-intensity battle on behalf of President Bush that it claims can provide a margin of victory if the race continues to tighten.
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition, by far the most powerful force, says it is planning to send out 40 million voter guides, which compare the three Presidential candidates' positions on issues like abortion, prayer in school, and homosexual rights.
The group plans to distribute them in 246,000 churches by Election Day.
On Sunday alone, 30 million voter guides will be put in churches ranging from evangelical to mainline Protestant to Catholic.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Foreign Press; Comparative Politics: Explaining Clinton to People Overseas
Rupert Cornwell watched dolefully from the sidelines as Bill Clinton and Al Gore tossed and fumbled the pigskin one recent afternoon, huffing and puffing in shirtsleeves around the tarmac at the Chicago airport.
"It's painful to watch," said Mr.
Cornwell, the United States bureau chief for The Independent, a British newspaper.
"Why does this country impose this awful macho culture on politics?"


CHRONICLE
It's not a run-of-the-mill instrument, so what was MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS to do when he noticed that the score for the Charles Ives Fourth Symphony calls for a theremin?
Mr.
Thomas will conduct the work as part of a New World Symphony concert tomorrow in Avery Fisher Hall.
"There are not a lot of theremins in the world, let alone theremin players," Mr.
Thomas said the other day.
"It is an exotic and primitive early electronic instrument, a forerunner of the electronic synthesizers now used. It looks like an old-fashioned radio with large antennae sticking out, and the musician moves his hands back and forth in front of it."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
POLICE CHIEF ADDRESSES LOST TRUST
Faced with what he considers to be an alarming loss of credibility for the New York City Police Department, Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly lashed out at a general climate of "police bashing" in the city and at public officials "whose knee-jerk response is to criticize the police at every turn." In an effort to deal with problem of lost trust, the city agreed to Mr.
Mr.
Kelly's request to postpone the next police entry examination by six months to give recruiters the time to lure more minority applicants to the force.
Page 1.
OLD FOES JOIN TO FIGHT FOR CHANGE
Mayor Dinkins has found a surprising ally in his drive to remake the Board of Education.
Robert F. Wagner Jr., a former president of the Board of Education, is putting together a panel of prominent New Yorkers to press for the abolition of the current board.
Page 25.
REGION
BUDGET CHANGES FOR SUFFOLK?
If county legislators have their way, Suffolk homeowners will get a 2.3 percent cut in their property taxes next year, instead of the 20 percent increase proposed by County Executive Robert J. Gaffney.
But Mr.
Gaffney, after reviewing a package of amendments that the legislators say will balance the 1993 budget, said that "it was not real" and that more than half the proposed changes were illegal.
Page 26.
A RETARDED WOMAN'S REPUTATION
The defense in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial began cross-examination of a state psychologist, trying to reinforce its portrayal of a mildly retarded woman as an aggressor who craved sex.
In the psychologist's view, the woman was compliant, easily victimized and mentally incapable of refusing.
Page 26.
FIGURING UP WHAT MATTERS
It meant something to be in a support group at last, talking openly with others who understand what it means to have a passion for polygonal curves, to be intimate with inverse functions.
But ultimately the 4,000 people at a convention in Hartford seemed to return to one theme: that they, the math teachers of America, are perceived as misfits in a world that just does not know how to have fun with numbers.
Page 26.
A REPRIEVE FOR AMY FISHER
Two days after she was released from a psychiatric ward, Amy Fisher appeared in court and received good news: She will remain free on bail until her sentencing on Dec. 1 for the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco.
Page 26.
LAST LAP IN CONNECTICUT SENATE RACE
In the final weekend of campaigning before the election, Senator Christopher J. Dodd offered handshakes and small talk through small towns today, while his opponent, Brook Johnson, met business leaders with an urgent message about turning the state's economy around.
Page 28.
TRENDS COLLIDE IN DISTRICT REMATCH
For the second time in two years, voters along Connecticut's middle coastline face the same choice for Congress: Rosa DeLauro, a Democrat who scraped her way to a 7,000-vote victory in 1990, or Tom Scott, a Republican and a former State Senator best known as the archfoe of the state income tax.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25 Traffic Alert 24


Presidential Politics by the (Phone) Book
TO call it a major crossroads in American politics is perhaps an exaggeration, but the fact remains that Bush Street runs into Clinton in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn.
Though even less meaningful than three-day-old tracking polls, this happenstance is being noted here along with other quantifiable facts to help fill gaps should punditry lag in the final days of the Presidential campaign.
The findings may be insignificant but at least they are not ambiguous.


The Ackeifis Cut Their Budget Deeply to Survive a Job Loss
In March 1992, Charles Ackeifi of East Granby, Conn. lost his $51,000-a-year job as a vice president of a high-tech company.
He was paid for two weeks of unused vacation, but got no severence pay and was ineligible for unemployment insurance.


Amy Fisher Allowed to Remain Free on Bail
Two days after she was released from the psychiatric ward of Huntington Hospital, Amy Fisher appeared in court today and received good news: She will remain free on bail until her sentencing on Dec. 1 for the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco.
"Although your conduct has been irresponsible, it has not reached the threshold for me to revoke your bail," Judge Marvin Goodman of Nassau County Court told the 18-year-old.


New York Presses for State Trial of Clifford
A Manhattan prosecutor asked a New York State Supreme Court justice yesterday to reject Clark M. Clifford's request to have state fraud and bribery charges dismissed on the ground he is too ill to stand trial.
Mr.
Clifford, the 85-year-old former Defense Secretary and Democratic White House adviser, has been indicted in Federal and state courts on charges that he and his law partner, Robert A. Altman, made millions of dollars in illegal profits when they misled bank regulators about a Washington bank they headed.


New-Home Sales Drop 1%; Consumer Confidence Is Off
Ending a pre-election week in which a stream of economic indicators continued to point to stunted recovery, the Commerce Department said today that new-home sales fell slightly in September.
In addition, nongovernment bodies found consumer confidence and Chicago-area industrial activity eroding in October.
The findings, said Edward F. McKelvey, a senior economist at Goldman, Sachs, are "consistent with a very sluggish economy."


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony 92d Street Y


Behind the Arab Veil, a Human Face
One of the sadder aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the tendency of each side to see the other as a cardboard figure, barely more than a caricature.
In this corner, we have the military occupier and oppressor.
In that corner, we have the knife-wielding terrorist and predator.
Efforts to cut through stereotypes to find the human core are rare.
But there have been attempts, and one of the more successful of late is a documentary, "Through the Veil of Exile," which looks at the lives, hopes and disillusionments of three uncommonly strong Palestinian women living in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza.


After 350 Years, Vatican Says Galileo Was Right: It Moves
More than 350 years after the Roman Catholic Church condemned Galileo, Pope John Paul II is poised to rectify one of the Church's most infamous wrongs -- the persecution of the Italian astronomer and physicist for proving the Earth moves around the Sun.
With a formal statement at the Pontifical Academy of Sciences on Saturday, Vatican officials said the Pope will formally close a 13-year investigation into the Church's condemnation of Galileo in 1633.
The condemnation, which forced the astronomer and physicist to recant his discoveries, led to Galileo's house arrest for eight years before his death in 1642 at the age of 77.


KELLY LASHES OUT AT 'POLICE BASHING' IN NEW YORK CITY
Faced with what he considers to be an alarming loss of credibility for the New York City Police Department, Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday lashed out at a general climate of "police bashing" in the city and at public officials "whose knee-jerk response is to criticize the police at every turn."
In an effort to deal with the problem of lost trust, the city agreed to Mr.
Kelly's request to postpone the next police entry examination by six months to give recruiters the time to attract more minority applicants to the force.


And Will the Horse Of the Year Please Clomp Forward?
Somewhere on the backstretch of Gulfstream Park today, the Horse of the Year was being primed for the race of the year.
It will be run here Saturday as one of the seven races in the ninth Breeders' Cup championship series.
Racing's biggest day will feature 91 horses from 6 countries racing for world renown and $10 million in prize money before an expected crowd of 50,000 and a national television audience.


Outlook on Simms a Bit Gloomier
Coach Ray Handley said today that Phil Simms's right elbow was not responding to treatment as quickly as the Giants had expected, but that he expected the starting quarterback to return this year.
Four weeks ago, Simms strained a ligament in his passing elbow when he was tackled during the Giants' 13-10 loss to the Los Angeles Raiders.
Bone chips that had been in the elbow for some time also became loose, and he underwent arthroscopic surgery Oct. 14 to remove the chips.
At the time, Handley said he expected Simms to miss no more than four or five weeks.
Now it appears the player will be sidelined longer.


Anger, on Both Sides Of Eastern Parkway
A day after a black teen-ager was acquitted of killing a Hasidic scholar, the racial divide in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, grew into a yawning gulf, with the verdict only heightening the distrust and misunderstanding between blacks and Hasidim that erupted into racial violence in the summer of 1991.
"I think it's a disgrace," said Mendel Shtroks, a 26-year-old rabbinical student who condemned the jury verdict.
"They've said it here 1,000 times: 'Why do Jews always lose the cases?' "


Sir Kenneth MacMillan, 62, Choreographer, Dies
Sir Kenneth MacMillan, the resident choreographer and former director of the Royal Ballet, died on Thursday night backstage at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in London.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the Royal Ballet said.


Transactions
Baseball
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL -- Approved the sale of the Houston Astros from John McMullen to Drayton McLane pending approval of final documentation.
American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Mike Easler hitting coach.


Bridge
Many good players who regularly play social bridge make occasional forays into team play and give shocks to higher-ranked opponents.
One such squad consists of Alfred Lewis, Bob Christman, Steve Landis, David Robinson, all of Manhattan, and Charles Greeley of Larchmont, N.Y.
In the 1991-92 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout they won six straight matches before succumbing to the eventual winners.
And in the Flight B event, with Judith Boies of Manhattan replacing Landis, they are still unbeaten, with two once-beaten teams also in contention.


No Headline


Perot's Account of Withdrawal Casts Doubts on His Judgment
To the Editor:
What kind of President would Ross Perot make if he is spooked and intimidated by possible events?


An Embattled Downey Defends His Record
After 18 years of steadily increasing seniority and influence in Washington, Representative Thomas J. Downey's quest for a 10th term in Congress came down to this: an open invitation to voters to drop by his two-family house here, simply to prove he actually lives a few hundred miles north of the Beltway.
"I live on Long Island, I have lived here all my life," Mr.
Downey said in a televised debate the other night, as his Republican opponent denounced him as a corrupt Washington big shot.
"If you have any doubt, come to 155 Cedar Street, where I have lived for 13 years."


Testimony That Made a Difference
Testimony of some of the police officers and detectives who testified in the trial of Lemrick Nelson Jr.
MARK HOPPE, Arresting officer
Testimony: Told of chasing Nelson down street and over fence.
Said he found bloodied folding knife and three blood-stained dollar bills in Nelson's pocket.
Said he took Nelson to where Rosenbaum lay, and that Rosenbaum identified Nelson as his attacker, saying, "Why did you stab me?"


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Heat Rallies Past Nets  Glen Rice scored 32 points, including a 3-pointer that forced overtime, in leading the Miami Heat to a 117-114 exhibition victory over the New Jersey Nets last night in Palmetto, Fla.
After trailing much of the game, the Heat got even at 109-109 on Rice's 3-pointer with 25 seconds left in regulation.
Miami then took charge, holding the Nets scoreless for 3 minutes 35 seconds until a basket by Drazen Petrovic.
Chris Morris led the Nets with 29 points, and Kenny Anderson had 17. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Beats Korda  Pete Sampras, ranked second and seeded third, overcame fifth-seeded Petr Korda, 7-6 (7-4), 5-7, 6-3, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the Stockholm Open.
In another quarterfinal, No. 4 Goran Ivanisevic knocked out the two-time defending champion, No. 6 Boris Becker, in a power duel, 7-5, 6-4.
Ivanisevic will take on second-seeded Stefan Edberg in today's semifinals.
Sampras will meet No. 8 Guy Forget. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Hart Leads Elizabeth  Shon Hart scored on a 95-yard punt return and a 47-yard pass reception to propel Elizabeth to a 27-7 victory over Plainfield (2-5) last night in Elizabeth, N.J.
Elizabeth (4-2) was staked to a 7-0 lead in the first period when nose guard Wiley Neal pounced on a fumble in the end zone and Jacques Thelemongue kicked the extra point.
In the second period, Hart's punt return increased the lead to 13-0.
Hart's 47-yard touchdown reception from freshman Al Hawkins opened the scoring in the final period and capped a six-play, 83-yard drive.
Linebacker Dulayne Morgan had 13 tackles and 2 sacks, including one on Elizabeth's first scoring play.
CROSS-COUNTRY  Navy's Day in Bronx  Greg Keller of Navy, the runner-up last year, took the men's Heptagonal Games Association five-mile title at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx yesterday.
Keller's time of 24 minutes 41.66 seconds led Navy to the team championship with 32 points.
It was the sixth crown, but the first since 1974, for the Midshipmen in the 55-year-old event.
Pam Hunt and her Cornell team each won for a second consecutive time in the women's 3.1-mile race.
Hunt finished in 17:31.47. (AP)


West and East, Dams Threaten Environments; Meanwhile in Japan
To the Editor:
Big dams, once presumed the essence of conservation, are no longer in good repute in the United States, but are still much admired by Japan's Ministry of Construction.
Japan is driving stubbornly toward the abyss in an ecologically disastrous and hydrologically ruinous river-spoiling scheme, 60 percent complete, on the Nagara, its last free river.


Backer Fills Top Position At U.S. Unit
Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, announced yesterday that Kenneth R. Rogers had been named chairman of the Americas region and chairman and chief executive of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., the advertising agency's American subsidiary.
Mr.
Rogers, who is 46 years old, has been president and chief operating officer of Backer Spielvogel Bates since May 1991.
No successor to Mr.
Rogers was named at these positions.


Macy Posts $1.25 Billion Yearly Loss
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported an annual loss of $1.25 billion yesterday, reflecting not only the huge one-time expenses of bankruptcy reorganization and store closings, but also weak sales and high operating costs.
Despite the stunning figure, analysts said the pace of Macy's losses was slowing enough to assure that the company could keep operating through the spring.
Beyond then, they said, Macy's future depends on whether it can demonstrate to suppliers and creditors that it can turn itself around.


U.S. SEEKS ATTACK ON HYPERTENSION
Saying great strides have been made in lowering deaths and disability from high blood pressure over the last 20 years, Federal health officials called today for a vigorous new effort to prevent Americans from developing the condition in the first place.
In two sweeping reports, the officials set forth a new way to classify high blood pressure; challenged the food industry to substantially lower the amount of salt and calories in processed foods, and recommended more public education programs, like labeling the salt and caloric content of food items in supermarkets, and yearly checks of blood pressure among all children 3 years old or older.


Wagner Joins Movement To Revamp School Board
Mayor David N. Dinkins is about to get a surprising ally in his drive to remake the Board of Education.
Robert F. Wagner Jr., a former president of the Board of Education, is putting together a panel of prominent New Yorkers to press for the abolition of the current board and its reincarnation in some other form.
Mr.
Wagner's move, which comes after a drumroll of calls for the board's abolition in recent weeks, is unusual for a number of reasons.
It springs from a collaboration with the Mayor, even though Mr.
Dinkins declined to reappoint Mr.
Wagner to the board when his term expired in 1990.
And Mr.
Dinkins happens to be a foe of Mr.
Wagner's longtime ally, Edward I. Koch, the former Mayor, who appointed Mr.
Wagner in 1986 to his four-year term.
Mayor Picks Only 2 Members
Though Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Koch have disagreed on many subjects, they do hold at least one opinion in common.
They both feel that mayors should be able to appoint a majority of the members of the seven-member school board so that they can be congratulated for its triumphs and held accountable for its fiascos.
Now, the mayor has only two appointees; the five borough presidents each choose one member.


30-Mile Refugee Line Is Seen in Bosnia
United Nations officials said that a column of refugees reported to extend 30 miles was straggling down a muddy mountain road today, fleeing Jajce, the central Bosnian town that became the latest battlefield defeat for Bosnian Government forces.
The exodus, said to involve as many as 30,000 people, added to a refugee crisis that United Nations relief officials have described as the worst in Europe since World War II.
In seven months of fighting, more than 1.3 million people, accounting for nearly a third of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina, have been driven from their homes.


A Parade of Wrongs
When the sponsors of the St.
Patrick's Day parade refused to let gay Irish march with them up Fifth Avenue, they heartlessly injured fellow Irish-Americans and denied their own best natures.
But when New York City's Human Rights Commission ruled last week that the sponsors may not exclude the gays, it trashed the Constitution.
Once again, two wrongs don't make a right.


The Crown Heights Acquittal
A Brooklyn jury's acquittal leaves unresolved who killed Yankel Rosenbaum, a young Hasidic scholar murdered during mob violence in Crown Heights last year.
The continuing uncertainty evokes deep frustration and pain not only in Crown Heights but in all compassionate New Yorkers.
The verdict also sounds a powerful warning about the dangers of allowing many citizens to lose faith in the police.


Trends Collide in 3d District Rematch
For the second time in two years, voters along Connecticut's middle coastline face the same choice for Congress: Rosa DeLauro, a Democrat who scraped her way to a 7,000-vote victory in 1990, or Tom Scott, a Republican and a former State Senator best known as the archfoe of the state income tax.
In this season of widespread voter discontent, Ms.
DeLauro could find her incumbency a handicap, and Mr.
Scott is quick to characterize her as a Washington insider because of her work with Emily's List, a political-action committee that supports women running for office, and the seven years she spent on the staff of Senator Christopher J. Dodd.


Manuel Antonio de Varona, 83; Ex-Cuba Premier and Castro Foe
Manuel Antonio de Varona, a former Prime Minister of Cuba and a leading foe of Fidel Castro's Government, died on Thursday at his home in Miami.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said without giving further details.


The Ackeifis Cut Their Budget Deeply to Survive a Job Loss
In March 1992, Charles Ackeifi of East Granby, Conn. lost his $51,000-a-year job as a vice president of a high-tech company.
He was paid for two weeks of unused vacation, but got no severence pay and was ineligible for unemployment insurance.


Stanford Has Chance to Scramble Bowl Picture in a Big Way
The giddiness of Bill Walsh's return as coach of the Stanford Cardinal has been replaced by an issue that could affect the top of the college football rankings from coast to coast.
If Stanford (6-2) ends the Washington Huskies' winning streak at 21 games on Saturday, the Cardinal will take a major step toward its first Rose Bowl since 1972.
But if the Huskies (7-0) can extend their streak, they would move closer to at least a share of an unofficial national championship, continuing their continent-wide debate with Miami.


Teachers Go Gaga for Logarithms
The lecturer spoke in standard-issue, support-group language:
"I know we've all experienced the feeling of going to a party and someone asks what you do," she said.
"The conversation ends. Those people who are really repressing their feelings don't even want to talk to you."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats -- Clinton and Bush Compete to Be Champion of Change; Democrat Fights Perceptions of Bush Gain
Battling the impression that President Bush is closing on him, Gov.
Bill Clinton returned today to the basics of his strategy, playing to the interests of the vast middle class of Americans who decide every Presidential race.
Mr.
Clinton and his strategists said Mr.
Bush had moved closer, as they have predicted he would.
But Mr.
Clinton's poll taker and several other aides said today that their own surveys showed Mr.
Clinton's slippage had stopped, and that he still retained a seven-point lead in their own surveys.


Master Is a Woman; Short of Men, Boy Scouts Change
When Sharon Sockwell, a single mother from Brooklyn, enrolled her twin sons in the Boy Scouts, character, not camping, was her prime motivation.
"I wanted them to have a positive male role model," she said.
Things have turned out almost as she had hoped.
Her 11-year-olds have learned about pitching tents, surviving in the woods and black American history.
And the scoutmaster for Troop 621 in Bedford-Stuyvesant is as good as they come: demanding but patient, hard-working, dedicated and, in a drill-sergeant sort of way, funny.


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's Avery Fisher Hall


Review/Rock; The Dirty Beat, Loud and Masculine
The show at Roseland on Thursday night should have been dubbed Dawn of the New Rock Dudes.
Bands from the independent rock world let forth gallons of loud guitar-based music; they shook their manes to the dirty beat and moaned into the microphone.
Each of the featured groups made its own version of this smashing noise, and each revealed something different about the connections between youthful masculinity and rock's power.
The Celibate Rifles from Australia have been around a bit too long to qualify as youth; they opened the show, part of the CMJ Music Marathon, with a short set of basic, untidy hard rock.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans -- Clinton and Bush Compete to Be Champion of Change; President Paints Rival Leading U.S. Astray
Having battered Bill Clinton with assaults on his platform and character, President Bush tried today to challenge Mr.
Clinton's claim to be the candidate of change.
Speaking in Nashville early today, the President argued that the nation would change no matter who leads it.
"The real question," he said, "is not who is for change, but whose changes will make your life better and your world safer."


Review/Theater; O'Casey's 'Juno' as a Musical
The poetry in "Juno and the Paycock" is evident whenever Sean O'Casey's own voice is heard in the Marc Blitzstein musical "Juno." But Mr.
Blitzstein's voice is an entirely different matter, only rarely capturing the mood of the original play.
"Juno" was a failure in its Broadway incarnation in 1959 (with a cast headed by Shirley Booth and Melvyn Douglas).
Despite alterations, the musical has not markedly improved in its newly revised version at the Vineyard Theater.
The show begins promisingly with the song, "We're Alive," in which a hearty anthem about survival is interrupted by a gunshot killing a young Dubliner.
The savage ironies of that scene are not evoked in other aspects of the musical, which focuses on the latent sentimentality within the family relationships and the comic interplay among the characters.


In the Race for Gains, Funds Trail S.&amp;P. 500
WOULD you even consider a complicated investment with a history of lagging the stock market averages?
Of course you would.
Chances are you already own a mutual fund.
Investors have stampeded into funds over the last 10 years, lured by the ease of choice and instant diversification they offer.
In 1982, when investors could choose from 857 funds, it made sense to shun the complications of picking companies from among the 1,526 listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Why get involved in all that research on individual stocks when there was an easy choice to be made among simple, professionally managed funds?


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Briefs
DAEWOO GROUP, South Korea, announced the formal breakup of its joint venture with General Motors Corp., Detroit.
HITACHI LTD., Tokyo, and General Electric Co. have signed an agreement to extend by 15 years an existing manufacturing relationship in gas turbine technology.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Al Gore; Gore and Clinton Share Language of Their Own
Looking a bit stiff and sleepy, Senator Al Gore sat on a stage listening to his running mate speaking from halfway across the country over a television hookup that had linked them both to dozens of union halls.
Then, something made him toss his head and chuckle.
Gov. Bill Clinton was stealing his lines.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
Arguing that the nation will change no matter who leads it, President Bush tried to challenge Gov.
Bill Clinton's claim to be the candidate of change.
"The real question," Mr.
Bush said in a speech in Nashville, "is not who is for change, but whose changes will make your life better and your world safer." The speech amounted to a fresh wrapping for the message he has pounded relentlessly all week: that Mr.
Clinton is a danger to the nation's economy and its character.
Mr.
Bush was also seeking to give voters what his campaign so far has lacked: affirmative reasons for voters to switch from Mr.
Clinton to the President.
BILL CLINTON
Mr.
Clinton returned to the basics of a strategy that served him well, playing to the interests of the middle class, with the hope it would banish the perception that Mr.
Bush is gaining.
Mr.
Clinton also received a political boon with the disclosure of a memorandum written in 1986 by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.
In it, Mr.
Weinberger wrote that Vice President Bush had, in an Administration meeting, supported selling arms to Iran in exchange for the freeing of Americans held hostage by Iranian-affiliated terrorists in Lebanon.
"It diminishes the credibility of the Presidency," Mr.
Clinton said in Pittsburgh.
ROSS PEROT
As Ross Perot prepared to join his rivals for a final weekend of cross-country campaigning, his aides placed their faith in what they maintain is a "silent majority" of newly registered voters whose views have not been reflected in public opinion polls.
Those polls continued to show a decline in Mr.
Perot's support.
Even as Mr.
Perot asserted he could win, his campaign officials began speaking wistfully about the legacy of the Perot movement and of the prospects for keeping it alive after Nov. 3.
"I would like to see him try it again if he doesn't succeed this time," said Orson G. Swindle 3d, a top Perot aide.
ON TELEVISION SUNDAY  President Bush:  10:30 A.M., CNN "Newsmaker Sunday," interview. 6:30 P.M., MTV "Choose or Lose: The Home Stretch," interview.
Ross Perot:  6:30 P.M., MTV "Choose or Lose: The Home Stretch," interview.


Bosnian Threatens Poison Gas Against Serb Forces
The President of Bosnia and Herzegovina said today that his Bosnian Muslim forces had poison-gas weapons and might be forced to use them as a defensive measure against Serbian forces.
"Bosnian Muslims live under very difficult conditions," the Bosnian leader, Alija Izetbegovic, told Iranian television at the end of a two-day official visit to Teheran.
"If the current situation continues, the people of Bosnia will be forced to use poison gas to defend themselves and end the crimes committed by the Serbs, even though this may be against their true wishes."


Kennedy's Protestant Foes
A new book says that in 1960, some 25 Protestant leaders met to discuss blocking the election of John F. Kennedy, a Catholic.
Beliefs, page 10.


Candidates On Television
The New York Senate candidate, Robert Abrams and Alfonse M. D'Amato, have these scheduled television appearances this weekend: TODAY: 9 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.
Separate interviews with each candidate on WPIX-TV, Channel 11 in the New York City area.
TOMORROW: 11:30 to 12:30 A.M.
Joint debates on WNBC-TV, Channel 4 in the New York City area, and on C-Span nationwide.


Treasurer's Records Show Payments by Ex-Employer
Catalina V. Villalpando, the United States Treasurer who is under investigation over influence-peddling accusations, accepted more than $147,000 from her former employer in Atlanta after she was appointed by President Bush in 1989, Government financial disclosure records show.
The payments to Ms.
Villalpando, which she has described in the records as severance pay from the company, Communications International Inc., are the focus of the criminal conspiracy, fraud and bribery accusations under scrutiny by Federal investigators.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Florida; Clinton Sees Opportunity to Break G.O.P. Grip on Cuban-Americans
In 1988, more than 85 percent of Cuban-American voters in Florida cast their ballots for George Bush.
But sensing that Mr.
Bush is vulnerable this year, the Clinton campaign has stepped up its drive to win the support of the ethnic group both sides regard as a key to the state's 25 electoral votes.
With the latest polls showing the Presidential race a dead heat here, in the nation's fourth-most-populous state, even the slightest shift among Cubans, who vote Republican more consistently than any ethnic group in the nation, could be decisive.
With such stakes, Gov.
Bill Clinton has made two forays into the Republican stronghold of Little Havana and has used Spanish-language radio commercials and numerous appearances by surrogates to offer his anti-Castro credentials.


The Candidates, on Children
There's been a lot of talk about "family values" in the current Presidential campaign, but what are the track records of the candidates on improving the health and welfare of children?
The plight of children has worsened during the Bush Administration.
The Census Bureau reports that in 1991 there were 14.3 million poor children, the highest number since 1965.
Poverty among American children has risen for three consecutive years, and 9 of the last 15 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Taxes; Clinton Promises to Protect Middle Class on Taxes
Faced with attacks from President Bush and skepticism from outside experts about his spending and tax proposals, Gov.
Bill Clinton has begun to emphasize that he would cut back spending for new programs rather than raise the taxes of middle-class Americans.
"If the tax proposals I have made do not fund the spending levels I have proposed," Mr.
Clinton said Thursday night at a town meeting in Secaucus, N.J., "then I will scale back the spending, cut other Government spending or both. I will not lower the income levels to raise taxes for the programs I have proposed."


Aide's Departure Another Blow to U.N. in Somalia
The forced resignation of the United Nations representative to Somalia is being viewed among diplomats and aid officials as another frustration for a United Nations operation already fraught with inordinate hurdles.
In many ways, the representative, Mohammed Sahnoun, an Algerian diplomat, was as unorthodox as his assignment.
He often criticized the United Nations for what he considered its ineptness and gained the respect of Somalis and even United Nations field workers for doing so.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Pennsylvania; Pennsylvania Poses the Big One: Can Bush Do It?
Is President Bush really catching up?
On the final weekend of the 1992 Presidential campaign, that is the question of the hour in Pennsylvania, as it is everywhere.
But here at least, there are no definitive answers yet to be discerned.
Ask some experts, and they say Mr.
Bush has a real shot at Pennsylvania's 23 electoral votes, a valuable pile that has made the Keystone State one of the great dueling grounds of American politics for generations.
Ask others, equally well plugged-in, and they say Bill Clinton locked things up here weeks ago.


Surveys Vary
Two new polls show Gov.
Bill Clinton retaining his lead over President Bush, while two other polls show the race virtually even.
Ross Perot's support has dropped since he accused the Bush camapign of threatening to disrupt his daughter's wedding.
When the polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton's support is 42 percent, Mr.
Bush's 38 percent and Mr.
Perot's 15 percent.


Croats Send Back Bosnian Refugees
As sobbing relatives watched helplessly, Croatian police officers forced more than 50 Bosnian refugees onto buses today to be sent back to the war-torn land from which they had escaped only days ago.
Foreign relief workers said the expulsions were part of an unannounced policy the Croatian Government has been following for several weeks.
The Government has repeatedly assured United Nations officials that it is not sending Bosnians back to their homeland, but relief workers believe several busloads have recently been sent back in violation of those assurances.


Last Chance to Vote Early


Bloemfontein Journal; Path of the 'Trekboers' Skirts Africa's Realities
Piet van Niekerk lashed his life to the back of a second-hand truck today, and, in the manner of his Afrikaner forebears, trekked north, toward a dream located deeper in the heart of Africa.
A red dust storm raged across the parched plain as Mr. van Niekerk loaded the microwave oven into a flimsy camper and, with his wife and reluctant 13-year-old daughter, bid good riddance to South Africa.


Halloween Eve Is Not the Devils' Night
Take your pick: Two goals on the first two shots, or three goals on the first five shots.
Either choice portrays a clear picture of the kind of success the Islanders had tonight against the Devils.
With three goals before the game was 8 minutes 50 seconds old, the Islanders went on to a 4-1 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in the first of the home-and-home series that will conclude Saturday night on Long Island.
Third Home Loss in a Row
"They got us on our heels early and we couldn't recover," said Coach Herb Brooks of the Devils, who lost their third in a row at home, dropping their overall record to 6-5-0.
"They played a very smart game once they got ahead."


West and East, Dams Threaten Environments
To the Editor:
"Conflict Over Dam Threatens Prague" (news article, Oct. 28) reports that the Czechoslovak Government might resign over the illegal diversion of the Danube River into Slovakia.
You do not convey the full gravity of the situation.
What is threatened is not only the lame duck government in Prague, but also the Government of Hungary and the stability of the whole region.


Executive Changes
BLOUNT INC., Montgomery, Ala., a manufacturing and construction company, named Harold E. Layman senior vice president and chief financial officer.
JOHNSTON INDUSTRIES, New York, a producer of industrial textiles, named Gerald B. Andrews president and chief operating officer.


Perot's Account of Withdrawal Casts Doubts on His Judgment; 'Real Hillary Factor'
To the Editor:
In "The Real Hillary Factor" (Op-Ed, Oct. 12), Deborah Tannen writes, "When evidence accrued that Hillary Clinton was a devoted mother, Time magazine found her guilty of 'yuppie overdoting on her daughter.' " Ms.
Tannen has taken this quotation out of context and has given it a negative spirit not present in the original.


2 on Stein's Staff Cast Doubt on Sex-Harassment Inquiry
Two women who worked with Randy Daniels and Barbara Wood five years ago said yesterday that they did not believe Ms.
Wood's claim that Mr.
Daniels had sexually harassed her.
They raised questions about how their employer, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, had handled the matter.
The public statements by the women, Sara Vidal and Lilla McFarquhar, were part of a strategy by Mr.
Daniels to quickly and aggressively counter the allegations that led him to step down as a Deputy Mayor of New York City last Monday, less than a week after his appointment.


The Big Race Makes for a Small, Small, Small World
The New York City Marathon is a long race, but a small world.
When runner Alejandro Cruz of Mexico was introduced to a news-media gathering yesterday at Tavern on the Green, his translator was Alberto Salazar, the man who once outran Rodolfo Gomez, who happens to be Cruz's coach.


Azinger Is Atop the Leader Board of the Not-So-Rich
With the fortunes of the PGA Tour's four millionaires of 1992 dwindling today, Paul Azinger led an uprising of golf's middle upper class to take the lead in the second round of the Tour Championship.
Wielding a strange-looking putter he calls "this thing," Azinger fired a five-under-par 66 for a total of six-under 136 over Pinehurst No. 2.
He was one stroke ahead of David Frost and two ahead of John Huston, Dan Forsman and Jay Haas.


Will Jets Be Playing Musical Passers?
All you have to know about the Jets' plight for Sunday's game against division-leading Miami is that when the regular practice ended here today, Al Toon, the veteran wide receiver, was working out at quarterback.
Such a scenario unfolded because Browning Nagle, the team's starting quarterback, worked out for the first time this week, but is still listed as doubtful for the game at Giants Stadium.
Nagle is bothered by a sprained arch incurred during last Monday night's loss to Buffalo.


Knicks Finish Their Last Rehearsal
The Knicks got through their final preseason game tonight accomplishing two goals: They won and no one else got hurt.
New York ended the preseason with a 6-2 record by defeating the Philadelphia 76ers, 101-92, at the Nassau Coliseum.
Neither Rolando Blackman (back spasms) nor Greg Anthony (sprained ankle, injured hand) played for New York, but the Knicks managed without them.


It Pays to Stick to Basics in Credit Cards
With competition rising in the credit card business and more enticements being offered almost every week, consumers should weigh carefully whether the cards they now have are serving their needs at the lowest cost.
A switch might save them money.
But it is no easy task tracking all the wrinkles of some cards.
The GE Capital Corporation's Mastercard, introduced in September, offers discount coupons and rebates from 24 companies, including Kmart, Macy's and Northwest Airlines.
To profit from these deals, consumers must use them to offset the higher costs of the card itself -- a $25 annual fee and an interest rate set at 12.4 percentage points above the prime rate, for a current total of 18.4 percent.


Joan Mitchell, Abstract Artist, Is Dead at 66
Joan Mitchell, an American painter who was an important figure in the second generation of American Abstract Expressionists, died yesterday in a hospital in Paris.
She was 66 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said Robert Miller, her dealer.


Principle Under Fire in Hong Kong
Until July 1, 1997, Hong Kong is part of the democratic world.
A smooth transition to Chinese rule after that date is a desirable goal.
But not at the expense of greater freedom today.
That's the principled stand the colony's new Governor, Christopher Patten, staked out in his first policy speech earlier this month.
Mr.
Patten proposes new electoral rules to maximize democracy now while accepting the restrictive constitution Beijing pledges to respect after 1997.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; What Is Scarier Than Halloween? Tune In to Candidates' Ads and See
The Presidential candidates have embarked on the electronic-age version of a final whistlestop tour.
But the view from America's living rooms is not a pretty one.
As they bombard the airwaves in the closing 100 hours with 30-second, 60-second, two-minute, half-hour and hourlong commercials that are running practically back to back, the campaigns are leaving unmistakably depressing images they hope the voters will carry to the polls.


Transit Officer Kills Suspect In Bronx Theft
An off-duty transit police weapons trainer, who had never fired his gun outside a firing range, shot and killed a 21-year-old robbery suspect yesterday as he tried to handcuff the man in Bronx Park, the transit police said.
The officer, Juan Sanchez, drew his gun as he and two New York City police officers chased and captured five suspects in the park near Bronx Park East and Brady Avenue about 1 P.M., but it was unclear if the gun went off accidentally or was fired in a struggle, said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Q &amp; A
Taxing the Pensions Of Former Residents
Q I have heard that New York State is assessing tax on withdrawals from appreciated 401(k) funds even when a resident moves to another state.
Is this true, and if it is, how is the tax computed?
RICHARD R. STEBBINS JR.
Manhattan  A New York has long had a law authorizing taxes on retirement benefits, including 401(k) plans, of those who worked in the state and later moved.
Periodic payments or funds rolled over into individual retirement accounts are not taxed, but tax must be paid on money received in a lump sum.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Baker Takes New Role, Leading 'Winnable' Bid
Back when James A. Baker 3d was lying low over at the White House, the first invisible chief of staff, cynics in the West Wing said he was trying to avoid being tied too closely to a Presidential campaign that seemed headed for the political dump.
Over the years he has proved himself to be the master of that kind of Washington skittering.
So what's the West Wing line now that Mr.
Baker has surfaced and can be found by President Bush's side at any and all functions?


House Speaker Facing A Well-Financed Rival
Not since 1860 has a Speaker of the House been defeated for re-election to his Congressional seat.
But that has not deterred John Sonneland from spending up to $500,000 of his own money in a bid to make modern history in the home district of Representative Thomas S. Foley.
Mr.
Sonneland, a 68-year-old surgeon who compares Mr.
Foley to the skipper of the Exxon Valdez, says his polls show him within striking distance of pulling off a major upset.
Mr.
Foley's aides scoff at that suggestion, but Roll Call, the Congressional newspaper, has picked this race as one of 10 possible "sleepers."


The Hiss Case Isn't Over Yet
Alger Hiss has never lacked for credentialed defenders.
Dean Acheson, Felix Frankfurter and Eleanor Roosevelt avowed their belief in his claim that he did not belong to a Communist spy ring in the 1930's.
Now, 42 years after Mr.
Hiss's conviction on two counts of perjury, a new defender has come forward bearing the most impressive credentials of all.
He is Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov, chairman of the Russian Government's military intelligence archives and a reputable historian.
In a videotaped interview with John Lowenthal, a longtime student of the Hiss case, he declared in no uncertain terms that Mr.
Hiss was innocent.
The general says he has based his conclusion on his own thorough examination of Soviet intelligence archives where "not a single document -- and a great amount of materials has been studied -- substantiates the allegation that Mr. Hiss collaborated with the intelligence service of the Soviet Union."


Perot's Account of Withdrawal Casts Doubts on His Judgment; Couched in Newsprint
To the Editor:
In "The Faces Behind the Face That Clinton's Smiles Mask" (front page, Oct. 25), you recount an incident at a rally for Gov.
Bill Clinton in California's Orange County on Oct. 22.
Allegedly, after two autograph seekers "evaded a rope in the parking lot," the candidate -- "his body tense and his eyes hard" -- "snapped" at a Secret Service agent.


Varig and Delta Team Up On Marketing and Routes
Varig Airlines, the biggest carrier in Latin America, plans to sign an agreement with Delta Air Lines under which the two airlines will cooperate in marketing and coordinating their routes.
The plan was disclosed yesterday by Rubel Thomas, president of Varig, Brazil's largest international airline, in an interview.
The step could greatly strengthen Varig in its competition with United and American Airlines, which have greatly expanded their flights to Brazil.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Trisha Yearwood Tramps 45 West 21st Street Chelsea


Charles J. Cole, Shoe Manufacturer, 69
Charles J. Cole, the founder of a shoe manufacturing company on Long Island, died yesterday at his home in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 69 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


It Was a Dog's Day As Reds Name Perez
The Cincinnati Reds named Tony Perez as their new manager yesterday in what could be described as the doggonedest day in their history.
Perez, one of the most productive and popular players on the Reds' championship teams in the 1970's, was given a one-year contract as the successor to Lou Piniella, who voluntarily gave up the job.


House Aged Prisoners In Converted Hospitals
To the Editor:
You report Oct. 4 on the blocked efforts in the New York State Legislature to close the almost disused Gowanda Psychiatric Center.
With staff retraining and relatively minor renovations, any one of such facilities could meet the needs of a rapidly aging inmate population at less cost than a correctional institution.


A 26-Mile Dash for Endorsements
Kim Jones, the main American hopeful in the New York City Marathon, may not win tomorrow's race, but in an increasingly commercialized sport, no runner of any nationality gives more value than she does for corporate sponsorships.
At yesterday's pre-race news conference at Tavern on the Green, Jones dutifully wore a white tennis sweater with the John Hancock signature emblazoned on it.
So, for that matter, did the nine other Hancock-subsidized runners entered in the marathon, but Jones easily set a record when she managed to mention the company's name at least a dozen times during the question-and-answer session.


2 Congressional Candidates Know They'll Lose, but It's Still Fun
Neither has much chance of winning a seat in Congress on Tuesday.
If traditions hold, David L. Askren, the Republican challenger to Jerrold Nadler in a heavily Democratic district in New York City will lose by a margin approaching 6 to 1, while David W. Roberts, a Democrat running upstate against a seven-term incumbent Republican, Gerald B. H. Solomon, will fall by 2 to 1.
But losing to Goliath is not necessarily the failure it might appear, these Davids say.
They are preserving the process, they say; setting the gains (or pains) for their egos aside, voters deserve a choice.


About Consumer's World
Articles about consumer products and services, which formerly made up the Consumer's World page on Saturdays, now appear in The Living Section on Wednesdays and The Home Section on Thursdays.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; '86 Weinberger Notes Contradict Bush Account on Iran Arms Deal
Newly disclosed notes on a White House meeting in January 1986 contradict President Bush's assertion that he was unaware at the time that arms sold to Iran were part of an arms-for-hostages deal.
The handwritten notes were made by Caspar W. Weinberger, who was then Secretary of Defense.
They were disclosed in a new indictment of Mr.
Weinberger, returned here today by a Federal grand jury working with the Iran-contra prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh.


NBC Frees Letterman to Negotiate
NBC announced yesterday that it was letting its late-night star David Letterman negotiate with other networks for a future show in exchange for a three-month extension of his current NBC contract.
So Mr.
Letterman is committed to work on NBC through June 25, instead of early April, but NBC will no longer have the right to negotiate with him before giving its competitors an opportunity to sign him.
NBC executives conceded yesterday that such a first negotiation was going to be fruitless because of Mr.
Letterman's unhappiness with the network.


Suffolk Taxes Are Headed Way Up, or Maybe Down
If county legislators have their way, Suffolk homeowners will get a 2.3 percent cut in their property taxes next year, instead of the 20 percent increase proposed by County Executive Robert J. Gaffney.
The legislators completed work early today on a series of amendments that would more than balance Mr.
Gaffney's $1.5 billion budget for 1993.
The changes would provide tax savings and additional revenues while restoring some county jobs and even creating a few new ones.


Beliefs
What better moment than the eve of a Presidential election for a fresh revelation about a critical moment 32 years ago in the religious and political life of the United States?
On Aug. 18, 1960, according to a new book, about 25 leaders of American Protestantism met privately in Montreux, Switzerland, and discussed how they could block the election of John F. Kennedy.
The host was the Rev.
Billy Graham; the most prominent guest was the Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH -- In a speech to Kentucky Fried Chicken owners yesterday in Nashville.
"Yes, AIDS is a national tragedy. But we don't need a bureaucratic czar in our nation's capital. We need more compassion in our hometowns.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Macy posted an annual loss of $1.25 billion, reflecting not only the huge one-time expenses of bankruptcy reorganization and store closings but also weak sales and high operating costs.
Despite the stunning losses, analysts said, the pace of the losses seems to be slowing.  [ Page 37. ]
Bank regulators closed the First City Bancorporation of Texas after finding that its two largest subsidiaries were insolvent.
The move will cost the F.D.I.C. about $500 million.  [ 37. ]
Shell Oil reversed a loss, while Sun posted a deficit of $320 million.
And Pennzoil's profits dropped 70.4 percent.  [ 39. ]
Aetna's earnings more than doubled in the third quarter, helped by a gain from the sale of American Re-Insurance.  [ 39. ]
Ames Department Stores plans to close 60 stores in 12 states as part of its effort to emerge from bankruptcy protection.  [ 39. ]
Varig Airlines of Brazil plans to sign an agreement with Delta under which the two airlines will cooperate in marketing and coordinating their routes.  [ 39. ]
Backer Spielvogel Bates named a new chairman and chief executive of the ad agency's American subsidiary.  [ 39. ]  The Economy
The Government said new-home sales fell slightly in September, and some private groups found that consumer confidence and Chicago-area industrial activity were eroding in October.  [ 45. ]
A Manhattan prosecutor asked a New York judge to reject Clark M. Clifford's request to have state fraud and bribery charges dismissed on the ground he is too ill to stand trial.  [ 45. ]
The U.S.
Treasurer accepted more than $147,000 from her former employer after being appointed in 1989, Government records show.  [ 5. ]  International
Japan's financial crisis is continuing to worsen, despite efforts to bail out the banking system.
Tokyo said bad loans at major banks had soared more than 50 percent in the last six months.  [ 37. ]
Markets
Stock prices declined, with the Dow Jones industrial average losing 19.99 points, to close at 3,226.28.
For the week, however, the Dow gained 18.64 points.  [ 38. ]
Treasury bond prices fell, with the Treasury's 30-year bond losing 17/32 , thus raising the yield to 7.62 percent.  [ 45. ]
Soybean futures surged on the Chicago Board of Trade on reports of increased export sales and on hopes of a breakthrough in trade talks between the U.S. and Europe.  [ 46. ]  The dollar settled mostly higher in quiet trading.  [ 46. ]  Your Money
Stick to basics with credit cards, consumer experts advise, instead of choosing a card for its fringe benefits.  [ 35. ]
Mutual funds trail the S.&amp; P. 500, come in a confusing array and have a variety of fees, but they are still individuals' investment of choice.
Susan Antilla: Investing.  [ 35. ]
Taxpayers need to do year-end planning in the next few weeks to avoid rude surprises in April.
Jan M. Rosen: Taxes.  [ 36. ]


Review/Dance; Ice Skating as a Lyrical, Quirky Art Form
It is hard to imagine cuddling up to an evening of ice dancing.
But the program presented by the Ice Theater of New York on Thursday night at the Sky Rink in midtown Manhattan was as endearing as it was exciting and beautiful.
Attempts to turn ice skating into a form of art or theatrical entertainment can seem something of an intellectual exercise.
Who needs choreography when you can watch Olympic ice-dancing competitors glide across a rink, denying the laws of traction with such enviable freedom?
But Ice Theater made a case for skating as artistic entertainment with a program in which pyrotechnics, lyrical flow and quirky dramatics were nicely balanced.
The program's opening number, "Plie Power," incorporated all of that in what amounted to a statement of purpose.
An ensemble piece choreographed by the company's artistic director, Rob McBrien, to wittily selected music by Rota, Tchaikovsky, Meyerbeer and Rachmaninoff, "Plie Power" suggested exhilaratingly the possibilities of ice dancing and the performers' individual gifts.


Debate on Religion in Politics Rages in New York Churches
In the parish hall of a Roman Catholic church on Manhattan's East Side the other night, anti-abortion protesters disrupted a candidates' forum by passing out color posters of bloody fetuses and leaflets warning that "a vote for Bill Clinton is a mortal sin."
On the other end of the religious spectrum, the historic Trinity Church in lower Manhattan has been broadcasting a television commercial on a religious network in the last few weeks that uses a cartoon of Noah and his ark to rebuke politicians for trying to enlist God on their side.
When Noah announces he wants to run for president of all civilization as the head of what he called God's Own Party, God replies: "My opinions are exactly that: mine.  You don't know them."


Sex-Assault Trial Stresses Woman's Past
The defense in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial began cross-examination of a state psychologist today, trying to reinforce its portrayal of a mildly retarded woman, who is central to the case, as a sexual aggressor whose mental impairment was not immediately obvious.
In the beginning of a counterattack expected to last a week, the defense focused on its theme that the young woman craved sex, and moved to deflate the psychologist's views, expressed in three days of testimony, that the woman was compliant, easily victimized by friends and mentally incapable of refusing sex.


INSIDE
R.
H.
Macy reported an annual loss of $1.25 billion, but the company seems assured of being able to keep operating through the spring.
Page 37.
Japan's Worsening Crisis
The Japanese Government said the nation's financial crisis is continuing to worsen, despite its efforts to bail out the banking system.
Page 37.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
The Village Halloween Parade will close several streets in lower Manhattan.
The parade begins at 7 P.M. at Spring Street and Avenue of the Americas, goes north to Houston Street, goes east to Lafayette Street, north to Fourth Avenue, north to 14th Street, and west to Union Square West.
TOMORROW
The New York City Marathon will close several streets and bridges.
A map appears today in SportsSaturday, page 29.


Vice President Says Bush Is Going to Beat the Odds


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about "Oz," a ballet presented by the Paul Taylor Dance Company on Tuesday night at the City Center, referred incorrectly to the performance by Caryn Heilman, who danced the role of Dorothy.
Miss Heilman sang the song "Deliver Me"; she did not lip-sync it.


Delay by Yeltsin In Baltic Pullout Irritates the U.S.
A day after President Boris N. Yeltsin suspended a pullout of Russian troops, the independent Baltic states reacted with anger and dismay today and new questions were raised in the West regarding aid to Moscow and Russia's long-term intentions in the Baltics.
A spokesman from NATO headquarters in Brussels urged Russia not to delay the pullout, despite the logistical difficulties of housing returning troops.


CHRONICLE
For the 53 years that The Chelsea Clinton News has been published on the West Side of Manhattan, no one has made much fuss about its name.
That all changed during the Presidential primaries when public attention turned to BILL CLINTON and readers realized that his daughter had the same name as their local paper.


Sports of The Times; A Mercedes Waits for South Africa
WILLIE MTOLO sat quietly on the passenger's side, content to take in the noise and madness of snarled, midday Manhattan traffic.
During the last few days, the 28-year-old South African marathoner had been the subject of several newspaper stories.
Most had recounted his rise from a tiny village of mud huts in the Natal province of South Africa to his current status as one of the world's top distance runners.


Jays' Cone and Carter Declare Their Freedom
David Cone and Joe Carter, two members of the World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays, put themselves into position yesterday to become ultra-wealthy.
Dion James just made sure he had a job.
Cone and Carter were among 27 players who declared themselves free agents.
Beginning Nov. 9, they will be free to sign with anyone for whatever anyone wants to pay them.
In the cases of Cone and Carter, that will be a lot of money because Cone is one of the top three starting pitchers available and Carter is one of the top half-dozen hitters.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Iris DeMent The Bottom Line


3 Oil Companies Had Mixed Results in Quarter
Three oil companies reported widely differing third-quarter results today.
The Shell Oil Company said it earned $28 million, in contrast to a loss of $14 million in the 1991 quarter.


Report Misstated Ex-Senator's B.C.C.I. Role
To the Editor:
An Oct. 2 front-page article on the draft report on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International matter submitted by Senators John Kerry and Hank Brown to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee included prominent references to me and my alleged role relative to the investigation by Senator Kerry's subcommittee.


Bernard Moskow, 62, A Dentistry Educator
Bernard S. Moskow, a noted periodontist and dentistry educator, died on Thursday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Engelwood, N.J.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


A Pumpkin Gets a Patch


Bikers for Bush-Quayle. No Kidding.
I don't own a motorcycle, but I do own a motorcycle jacket.
Two weeks ago as I was walking through a Manhattan street fair, an acquaintance working a Republican Party booth slapped a red, white and blue Bush-Quayle sticker on it.
I wouldn't have put one on myself, even though I'm going to vote the G.O.P. ticket, because I'm not a big fan of breast pocket designer logos, T-shirts that say, "That's Not a Bald Spot, It's the Solar Collector for My Sex Machine" and other semiotic clothing.
But I'm glad it happened, because the combination of Bush-Quayle, black leather and New York has made life interesting.
Republicans in Manhattan are a tolerated minority.
We are allowed to practice our beliefs in a discrete way, though displays of zeal are not encouraged.
For the last 12 years, we have been buoyed by a large foreign power, the voters of the rest of America, but even that looks as if it may be lost.
When we do make public professions, we are expected to do so in traditional dress: dark suits for men, strings of pearls for the ladies -- the couture of Pete DuPont and Barbara Bush.


Observer; The Eyes Of Texas
It's typical of Texas that with four men running for President, three should be from Texas: George Bush, Ross Perot and James A. Baker 3d.
Strictly speaking, of course, Baker is not running for President, but what is Bush's promise to put him in charge of domestic affairs if not a sly way of saying, "Though I may wear the title, Jim will be right there in the White House running the country"?


Accord on Fixing Homes With Bad Plywood
A major legal battle over decaying plywood used in town houses and condominiums across New Jersey has been settled, providing 5,000 homeowners with money for new roofs and giving other courts a model for resolving similar claims, according to the judge in the case.
Decay in roofs using the treated plywood was discovered in the late 1980's.
It was apparently caused when chemicals used to make the plywood fire resistant reacted unfavorably to attic heat and humidity.


Do Some Planning Now To Avoid 1993 Surprises
MORE taxpayers than ever before -- middle-class salaried people, as well as those who live on investment income -- need to do year-end tax planning in the next few weeks to avoid any rude surprises in April.
Some will even find a few well-spent hours can pay dividends in lower '92 tax bills.
One reason for a new urgency this year is the reduction in withholding for income taxes that President Bush ordered last winter.
It meant fatter paychecks, up to $345 for the year, but it did not reduce the taxes owed.
As a result, many taxpayers may discover the refunds they have come to expect are disappointingly small, or, worse, that they owe money.


Inquiries Set In '91 Slaying In Crown Hts.
Responding to pleas from elected officials and civic and religious leaders, Federal authorities said yesterday that they would begin an inquiry to determine if the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum during racial violence in Crown Heights last year was a violation of civil rights laws.
A day after a Brooklyn jury acquitted a black teen-ager of all charges in the killing, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo also said that he had ordered a state review of the case.


New Day for 'Patents' And 'Tracking the Markets'
The "Patents" column and the "Tracking the Markets" chart, which have appeared in Business Day on Saturdays, will now be published on Mondays, starting on Nov.2.


When Collision Insurance May Not Make Financial Sense
Anyone driving a car that is more than six years old with a book value under $3,000 may be paying too much for auto insurance.
The collision coverage on such a car may no longer make financial sense because the insurer is unlikely to pay the full cost of major repairs.
"If you get into an accident and you have $4,000 worth of repairs, the company may only offer you $1,500 if that's all that model is worth," said Robert E. Mackoul, president of Mackoul &amp; Associates, independent insurance agents of Lynbrook, L.I.
A company will not insure a car for more than its resale value.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; A Battle of the Negatives
As the 1992 campaign enters its final weekend, President Bush has grasped for the offensive with an attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton's credibility that clearly surprised the Democrats with its ferocity and that shows no sign of abating.
Mr.
Clinton, who had been calling the shots for months, suddenly found himself in a position no front-runner wants -- slightly offstride and struggling to turn the debate back to issues more favorable to him.


Corrections
An obituary on Oct. 19 about Anna Johnstone Robinson, a theatrical designer, listed a stage credit for her in error.
Lucinda Ballard, not Mrs.
Robinson, was the costume designer for "A Streetcar Named Desire."


Top 10 Capital Appreciation Funds
Here are the top 10 capital appreciation funds, ranked by how well they performed over the last three years.
Funds of this type aim for maximum growth.
They are the riskiest of the stock funds and are intended for people willing to hold them as long-term investments.
The usual rule of investing holds that the more risk you take, the greater your potential reward.
That's why most mutual fund portfolios should include at least a sprinkling of capital appreciation funds.


Here's to Kale, Sweetest of Leafy Greens
To the Editor:
"Milking Our Memories" (editorial, Oct. 1) discusses the possibilities raised by a group of doctors that milk might not be the childhood elixir for growing up strong and healthy, and ends by proposing other sources for calcium, such as broccoli and kale, "a green known more for hardiness than taste." You apparently have a serious kale deficiency and tastebuds dulled by a thick coating of milk.
You also need cooking lessons.


Japan Says Bad Bank Loans Soared by 50% in Six Months
The Government reported figures today showing that Japan's financial crisis is growing more severe, despite its efforts to rescue the ailing banking sector.
The Finance Ministry reported that bad loans at major banks had soared more than 50 percent in the last six months.
It also said that the toll of failed loans, mostly to the real estate sector, would continue to rise in the near future.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Aides Count on a 'Silent Majority'
As Ross Perot prepared to join his rivals for a final weekend of cross-country campaigning, his aides placed their faith today in what they maintain is a "silent majority" of newly registered voters whose views have not been reflected in public opinion polls.
Those polls continued to show Mr.
Perot's support on the decline in the wake of a week of turmoil that began when he accused Republicans of dirty tricks.


YOUR MONEY
Your Money, a two-page Saturday guide to personal investing and financial planning, begins this week, on page 35.


Lufthansa's Arizona Flying School
Barring a cloudburst or a violent sandstorm known locally as a devil duster, skies over the Sonoran desert here are dotted with planes.
This is where pilots train to fly jumbo jets -- using single- and twin-engine propeller planes for practice.
And while they talk with the control tower in English, they converse after-hours in German, Japanese, Spanish and Chinese.
This is not some modern version of the Lafayette Escadrille, those volunteer pilots from many nations who battled the Germans in the skies over Europe in World War I.  These are budding pilots and co-pilots with Lufthansa German Airlines, All Nippon Airways of Japan, Iberia Airlines of Spain and EVA Airways of Taiwan, a year-old carrier scheduled to begin daily nonstop flights to Los Angeles and New York this year.


Classical Music in Review
'Magic Flute' New York City Opera New York State Theater


Arazi Is Still Treated Like a French Moving Star
On the day before his grand return to American racing, Arazi walked to the main track at Gulfstream Park at 7 o'clock this morning, cantered about a quarter of a mile and then returned to the seclusion of his barn.
He was still a media star, but not quite the same media superstar of six months ago who was pursued and scrutinized at every step, on and off the race track, from Paris to Louisville.
He also wasn't the favorite to win the Breeders' Cup Mile on the turf.
He was second choice to Selkirk, who is regarded as perhaps the best miler in Europe.
But racing people generally expected the crowd at Gulfstream Park to bet enough money on Arazi and his legend to make him the actual favorite by race time.


Review/Dance; Stillness, Too, Is Part of Paul Taylor's Choreographic Oeuvre
More often than not, the superb members of the Paul Taylor Dance Company are found dancing up a storm.
But Mr.
Taylor is also a master of stillness, and on Wednesday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street) the troupe revived a celebrated experiment in activity and inactivity.
In 1957, when Mr.
Taylor appeared onstage in a business suit and offered a solo called "Epic," his use of ordinary postures like kneeling and standing provoked a succes de scandale in the New York dance world.
Elie Chaib, the soloist in the current revival, elicits no similar outrage simply because scores of young avant-gardists in the 1960's took up where Mr.
Taylor left off.
Yet Mr.
Chaib performs with such astonishing focus and concentration that the questions about the nature of dance movement once raised by Mr.
Taylor are left hanging in the air again.


Dodd Strolls as Johnson Runs Underdog's Race
Entering the final weekend of campaigning before the election, Senator Christopher J. Dodd offered handshakes and small talk through small towns today, while his opponent, Brook Johnson, met business leaders with an urgent message about turning the state's ailing economy around.
It was a day in which Mr.
Dodd, a Democrat seeking a third term, chose to chat with bank tellers and local officials rather than stress his campaign theme that his experience in Washington would best protect the interests of the state.
Tickets to the Big Game
His schedule included visits to Shelton, a rally at Wesleyan University with Senator Al Gore and an appearance at Willow Brook Park Stadium in New Britain for a football game between New Britain High School and Newington High School.


Ferraro Is Said to Back Abrams, Ending Silence
Ending a bitter silence just three days before the election, Geraldine A. Ferraro plans to endorse her former rival, Robert Abrams, in his campaign against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, and has made a television commercial supporting him, Democratic officials said last night.
The Abrams campaign refused to confirm the officials' report and Ms.
Ferraro could not be reached for comment.
Mr.
Abrams's campaign director, Ethan Geto, said: "We have no comment on that. We have been having ongoing discussions with Ms. Ferraro. We're not going to say anything tonight."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  TROOP ISSUE STIRS BALTICS
President Yeltsin's suspension of the pullout of Russian troops from the Baltic states was greeted with anger and dismay in their capitals and in the West.
The move raises new questions about Moscow's intentions in the region.  1


Pop and Jazz in Review
Roy Haynes Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Greenwich Village Through tomorrow


No Headline
Police bashing has become fashionable in many quarters, and the truth often takes a back seat to political expediency. -- RAYMOND W. KELLY, Police Commissioner of New York City.  [ 1:1. ]


