Miss Abrams to Wed G. C. L. Ritchie
Mr. and Mrs.
Staats M. Abrams Jr. of Montclair, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Wiggins Abrams, to Gregory Curtis Lee Ritchie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham M. Ritchie of Fayetteville, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Abrams, 27 years old, is an associate at Lehmann Brothers, a New York investment banking concern.
She graduated from Yale University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Crossley Surveys, a New York market research company.


How Professor Helped Estonia Win Freedom
ARNO LIIVAK was just 7 years old when he left his native Estonia with his family in 1949, after his country and neighboring Lithuania and Latvia were absorbed by the Soviet Union.
But as he grew up in the Trenton area, Estonia was never far from his thoughts, and Mr.
Liivak's devotion to his homeland held fast as he earned a degree at the Rutgers University Law School in Camden and joined the school's faculty.
From 1984 to 1988 he served on the Governor's Commission on East European Affairs, reviewing the way East European history was presented in textbooks used in New Jersey schools.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 276,000
19 Aspen Circle
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; underground sprinkler system, walk-in closets; taxes $5,493.
Freehold 320,000
85B Georgia Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old colonial farmhouse; patio, family room, fireplace, 3.4 acres; taxes $3,285.
Howell 112,500
16 Charles Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, fenced yard, patio, porch; taxes $2,530.
Jackson 132,000
6 Marc Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, eat-in kitchen, deck, family room; taxes $3,703.
Plainfield 152,000
30 Norwood Drive
7-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old two-family; 5-car garage, convenient to schools and transportation; taxes $2,673.
South Plainfield 144,000
422 Anthony Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, full basement, c/a; taxes $2,721.
OTHER AREAS New Britain, Conn. 138,000
329 Francis Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; walk-out basement, living room with bay window and fireplace, lower-level family room, 50- by 140-foot lot; taxes $2,537.
Purdys, N.Y. 331,500
135C Fox Den Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, lake rights, 1 acre; taxes $7,474.
Williston Park, L.I. 180,000
210 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, attic; taxes $2,800.


A New Burst of Life for 'Faust'
For all the contempt in which Gounod's "Faust" is now generally held, the stubborn fact remains that the opera refuses to go away.
It's startling to realize that with the latest influx of releases, all six stereo recordings are available on CD.
From Toulouse comes EMI's latest attempt at the opera, conducted by Michel Plasson (CDCC 54228; CD).
Then there's a midprice reissue of Erato's 1976 Strasbourg recording, conducted by Alain Lombard (2292 45685-2; CD).
Finally, there's a "Faust" installment in the Great Operas at the Met series: 144 minutes' worth of commercially recorded excerpts, spanning the period 1905 to 1978, by artists who sang these roles with the company (MET 513; CD and cassette; available from the Metropolitan Opera Guild, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10023).


Q and A
Working on a Cruise Ship
Q.
Where can I get information on summer employment on a cruise ship? -- Floria M. Meehy, Detroit


In Germany, West Plus East Means Policy Shifts
Among the fragile myths that have crumbled in the two years since the Germanys unified is the assumption that after West Germany had absorbed the prostrate East, the resulting colossus would lumber along on much its accustomed course.
As it turns out, the addition of the East has caused a distinctly German, distinctly eastward look to become visible to everyone -- a look that is making itself felt in policy choices and in the choice of leaders.
As in any major power, it turns out, there are strong links between domestic and foreign policy in the new united Germany.
When Germany dragged its European Community allies into recognizing Croatia and Slovenia last December, for instance, domestic sympathy for the embattled separatist Yugoslav republics was an important factor.


Latest Offtrack Action Is Governmental Jockeying
The statehouses stole the spotlight from the winner's circle this week as political issues flared in racing in New York and Florida.
In Albany, the main issue was the role of the New York Racing Association, which owns and operates the tracks at Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga.
In Tallahassee, the main issue was the role of the Japanese, who recently took control of the tracks at Gulfstream Park and Calder.
And that issue provoked new charges of Japan-bashing in sports, similar to the recent disputes over the possibility of Japanese investing in the Seattle Mariners baseball team and Japanese ownership of the Pebble Beach golf club in California.


Malta, Emerges From the Waves of Time
A small rock set in the southern Mediterranean between Sicily and North Africa, only 18 miles long, with a population of more than 300,000, the island of Malta is a palimpsest of cultures, developed over thousands of years of successive invasions by Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Arabs, Normans and the Spanish, French and British.
For nearly 300 years, from 1530 to 1814, it was the sovereign domain of the crusading order of the Knights of Malta, who built many of its most enduring monuments.
Today Malta is a sleepy island resort, heavily dependent on mostly elderly British tourists.
If the landscape seems North African, with its rough, arid terrain and low, whitewashed houses, the towns maintain the air of a British colony, which Malta was, from 1814 to 1964.
Most street and shop-window signs are in English; there are still red wooden phone booths capped with the royal crown, and the roads are filled with English cars from the 1940's and 50's -- Hillmans, Vauxhalls, Bedfords, Austins and Morrises -- adding to the sense of a time warp.


PRAGUE
On top of Castle Hill in Prague, towering over the city, stand the Hapsburg Emperors' Castle and St.
Vitus Cathedral, a sumptuous complex of Gothic, Renaissance and neoclassical buidings.
Circling them is an equally magnificent ring of gardens.
The Royal Garden, the Garden of Paradise, the Garden on the Ramparts and the Garden on the Bastion, laid out on the slopes of the hill over the centuries, beginning in the 16th, delight the visitor with works of nature and of man.
Artful plantings mingle with statuary from all periods.
Ornamental staircases lead to royal pleasure domes and pavilions.
Viewing terraces offer breathtaking glimpses of the ancient Mala Strana quarter, at the foot of the castle on its side of the Vltava River, and the Old Town on the opposite bank.


Snips and Snails And Dinosaur Tails
These are the kinds of clothes that kids really like.
They look cool but don't get in the way.
Some people might say these new spring styles are as timeless as a Tyrannosaurus rex, and as fresh as the ancient Barosaurus that recently moved into the American Museum of Natural History in New York City (where our photographs were taken).
Because these clothes are made of easy-care fabrics like gingham, khaki, seersucker, denim and cotton jersey, they're a hit with parents too.


TOM HARKIN'S OLD-TIME RELIGION
Thanks for the article on Tom Harkin ("Tom Harkin's Old-Time Religion" by Judith Miller, Feb. 9).
I'm still undecided, but at least I'm now interested in the campaign.
N.
ROOD
San Francisco


Sherri G. Cohen, Student, to Wed
Holly Cohen of Clark, N.J., and Steven Cohen of Freehold, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sherri Gayle Cohen to Robert J. Bothe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Bothe of Scotch Plains, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Cohen, 21 years old, is a senior at Syracuse University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Host Apparel Inc., a New York clothing manufacturer.
Her mother is a sales associate at Weichert Realtors in Westfield, N.J.


Unesco Comes Knocking, Seeking U.S. Help


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Concerned About Buchanan, Bush Makes Final Appeal in Georgia
President Bush today began making a final appeal to Georgia Republicans before the state's closely watched primary election, as his advisers expressed new concern that his opponent, Patrick J. Buchanan, may again seize an embarrassing share of the vote.
As Mr.
Bush delivered a speech in Dallas early today, an official in his party said campaign strategists now fear that the Georgia election could end in "New Hampshire or worse."


Italian-Americans And Their Heritage
It was with great interest and empathy that I read of Gay Talese's experiences growing up in Ocean City ("From Ocean City 'Outsider' to Author Who Learned to Listen," Feb. 9).
The father was, indeed, a central figure in the boy's life and maturing process.
I'm sure many Italian-Americans were affected by the war news from Italy in 1943 and 1944.
As the United States Fifth Army inched its way up the mountainous terrain of the Italian peninsula, former inhabitants of the towns and villages in that part of Italy must have read about the progress of the war with dread, with mixed feelings, with regret.
But, on the other hand, those inhabitants' sons may have been in the steady push up Italy.


TOM HARKIN'S OLD-TIME RELIGION
Here's one dyed-in-the-wool-and-proud-of-it bleeding heart liberal who's tired of hearing that she doesn't exist.
And further news: There are plenty of us out here.
ANDREA WOLPER
New York, N.Y.


Allison Payne To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Payne Sr. of Harveys Lake, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison Marie Payne, to Lloyd James Derrickson 3d, a son of Mr.
Derrickson Jr. of Washington and Marian C. Mellon of Naples, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Payne, 30 years old, is a sales associate at the Nordstrom store in Walnut Creek, Calif.
She graduated from College Misericordia where her father is chairman of the English department.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
Kingsolver's column comes at a time of shrinking school budgets and a host of entrenched social ills that effectively victimize our children and undermine not only their future but that of our nation as well.
Real problems don't just go away, anymore than a bawling baby on an airplane can miraculously disappear.
WENDY MACBETH
Westport, Conn.


Review/Folk; Marginal Repertory, But Not Dead
Just because the sort of reflective urban folk music popularized by James Taylor and Joni Mitchell has become commercially marginal doesn't mean that the genre is artistically moribund.
Its health was abundantly evident on Thursday evening at the Bottom Line (15 West Fourth Street) where David Wilcox and Patty Larkin, two 30ish acoustic songwriters, performed their own material for an enthusiastic capacity audience.
Mr.
Wilcox, who is from South Carolina, and Ms.
Larkin, who is Boston based, are direct stylistic descendants of Mr.
Taylor and Ms.
Mitchell, but their music has been shaped by the mood of diminishing expectations of the last decade.
Mr.
Wilcox, who has put out two albums on A&amp;M Records, sings with a mellow fluency that suggests a hybrid of Mr.
Taylor and Kenny Rankin, but he has better enunciation than either.
Many of his songs analyze the dynamics of relationships in epigrammatic verses that are at once earnest and gently humorous.


In Health Care, Canada Beats U.S. and Britain; The Insurance Game
To the Editor:
President Bush, in his "comprehensive health plan" (front page, Feb. 3), thinks that uninsured Americans, given tax incentives, would rush out and buy insurance.
I wouldn't.
I'm sure I'm not the only one.


Miss Armstrong To Wed in May
Robert L. Armstrong and Shannon Harrison Armstrong, both of Austin, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Martha Louise Armstrong, to George Andrew Hagerty, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger C. Hagerty of Grand Junction, Colo.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Armstrong, 28 years old, is a vice president of Hambro Resource Development Corporation, a New York investment bank.
She graduated from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father directs the energy office for the Governor of Texas.


Perez de Cuellar Is Named to Policy Group
Javier Perez de Cuellar, who retired as Secretary General of the United Nations at the end of last year, has been named co-chairman of the Inter-American Dialogue, an independent public policy group for leaders in the Western Hemisphere.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, whose appointment becomes effective today, will share the chairmanship of the organization with Sol M. Linowitz, a former mediator in the Middle East and former chairman of the Xerox Corporation.


Chugging Down the Amazon
BEFORE I visited the Amazon, I envisioned steamy jungles, narrow rivers, monkeys swinging from vines, clouds of monster mosquitoes, constant parade of sloths, jaguars and monkeys, and few humans.
Had I done my research, I would have understood this image to be, at best, oversimplified, at worst, incorrect.
The Amazon we encountered was far more complex.
Water levels were at the lowest they had been in eight years when my parents, my husband and I set out along the Rio Negro, a tributary of the Amazon, early last November on the Lady Ana.
A typical Amazon riverboat, one of a few that our Boston-based operator, Ecotour Expeditions, rents out for its trips, the Lady Ana is top-heavy with a shallow draw.
Measuring 70 by 23 feet, it sleeps 10 in moderate comfort (air-conditioned bunks, two to a cabin), and has three bathrooms with showers and toilets, an enclosed dining area and a large, shaded top deck for observation and relaxing.
Along with a Portuguese crew of five and our two guides -- Ecotour's owner, Mark Baker, a former buyer of exotic hardwoods "gone green," and Andrew Whittaker, a British ornithologist currently living in Brazil -- our group included seven Americans and two Britons, ages 28 to 68.
We would cover roughly 700 miles in nine days.
The expedition, titled White Waters and Black, is slightly different each time out, Mark said.
He informed us that, because of the low water and his own curiosity, we would be exploring places he himself had never seen.
This approach, though not specified in the tour company's brochure, appeared to animate rather than concern the group, an adventurous lot.


May Wedding For Ms. Altman
Mr. and Mrs.
Earle S. Altman of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Altman to Andrew Robert Steiger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel J. Steiger of Ridgewood, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Altman, 27 years old, graduated from Boston University and is an account executive at Steven Stolman Inc., a New York clothing manufacturer.
Her father is a senior vice president at Helmsley-Spear Inc., the New York real-estate company.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle on page 78 of The Times Magazine today renders the clues for 67 Across and 80 Across incorrectly.
Both should appear in capital letters.


Dottie Enrico, Reporter, Wed
Dottie Joanna Enrico, the daughter of Dominic and Dorothy Enrico of Harmony, Ind., was married yesterday evening to Gregory Luke Dankert, the son of Curtis and Janet Dankert of Indianapolis.
The Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Ms.
Enrico, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a business reporter for New York Newsday.
She graduated from Indiana University.
Her father, who is retired, was an aerospace engineer for the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in Huntington Beach, Calif.
Her mother, also retired, owned a women's clothing store in Brazil, Ind.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidates Records; White House Hopes to Trip Buchanan on His Paper Trail
As the contest between President Bush and Patrick J. Buchanan heats up in the South, the White House believes that it has found a weapon with which to bludgeon the conservative challenger: his own words.
In recent days President Bush's campaign has moved to the attack, saying that Mr.
Buchanan's past newspaper columns, speeches and interviews show him to be prejudiced against women, lacking in patriotism during the buildup to the Persian Gulf war and lacking in the experience and balance required to be President.


Review/Rock; James Brown's Personal Soul Retrospective
He didn't do a split.
But every other aspect of James Brown -- soul singer, dancer, showman, bandleader, public figure, eccentric -- was on full display on Friday night at the Paramount, in Mr.
Brown's first New York concert since he was released from jail last year.
The show was a full-fledged event, drawing an audience that was thoroughly integrated by age, race, class and gender.
Partway through his 80-minute set, Mr.
Brown brought his wife on stage along with the Rev.
Al Sharpton, who said that when he hears Mr.
Brown's music, "I forget I'm a preacher and start to dance." His rhyming remarks drew only a smattering of applause.
Like a candidate facing a tough primary, Mr.
Brown lowered expectations before he made his appearance.
His band, the Soul Generals, warmed up on its own, playing tepid funk with errant horn parts; then it was joined by Mr.
Brown's three female backup singers, Bittersweet, who wore gold lame gowns and sang the lounge warhorse "People." Half a dozen dancing showgirls flanked Mr.
Brown as he started his set with "Living in America." During the song he shouted the names of Manhattan boroughs, most of them two or three times; by the end, the showgirls were waving flags.


2-Year Pact for Ventura
Third baseman ROBIN VENTURA and the Chicago White Sox agreed yesterday on a $2.3 million, two-year contract.
Ventura made $120,000 last year when he hit .284 with 23 homers and 100 runs batted in. (AP)


Impact Fees Forcing Up The Price of New Houses
IN the seven years since this city of 169,000 first tried to finance its growth through imposing impact fees on new construction, it has encountered many surprises in the way they work -- and don't work.
For one thing, city officials say, the fees come nowhere near meeting all the expenses related to new development.
For another, they significantly raise house prices, making affordable housing more difficult to find.
And though home builders have accepted the fees, they have done so grudgingly and only because they ensure that utilities and roads are in place to support new construction.


Syracuse Recovers With 3-Point Shots
What looked like a soft spot in Syracuse's schedule, a visit tonight to Miami, had the earmarks of an upset.
But freshman forward Lawrence Moten, held scoreless in the first half, clicked on five second-half 3-point shots en route to 20 points that helped ease the 22d-ranked Orangemen to a 68-63 Big East victory.


Caring for Wood-Floor Finishes
CARING for modern wood-floor finishes can be tricky, as procedures recommended for some floors can ruin others.
With all wood floors, frequent cleaning to remove dirt, and particularly grit, which causes scratches, is essential.
Go over the floor with a dry untreated dust mop every few days or more often, and vacuum floors with a brush attachment as frequently as you vacuum carpets.


Nancy A. Nielsen Marries Richard Caccappolo
Nancy Ann Nielsen, a daughter of Charles L. Nielsen and Dr.
Beverly B. Nielsen of Miami Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Anthony Caccappolo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard J. Caccappolo of Madison, N.J.
Dr.
Randall Bosch, a Dutch Reformed minister, officiated at the Cornell Club in New York.


Youth, 15, Shot to Death Leaving Brooklyn Party
A 15-year-old Brooklyn youth leaving an overcrowded birthday party on Friday night was shot to death after he got into a fight with another teen-ager, the police said.
The youth, Tashane Wells, a ninth-grader from Bedford-Stuyvesant, died early yesterday at Kings County Hospital from a single gunshot wound in his chest.


Discovering the Ruby-Red Juice and Pulp of Blood Oranges
AMERICANS have been slow to discover blood oranges.
With their ruby-red juice and pulp, they are dramatic looking, a little frightening to slice into.
In Europe, people eat them plain or have the juice for breakfast (there is nothing like it).
The oranges also make beautiful tarts and superb sauces, especially good for seafood.
Sicily produces the best blood oranges.
They are very dark and have a pleasant, slightly bitter flavor.
They are now in season until late spring and can be found in specialty stores or markets with good produce departments.
Some of them have reddish skins; some look like regular oranges (until you open them up).
Their hue is affected by their exposure to sun on the tree; it does not indicate anything about the quality.


Duke University President Plans to Resign
The president of Duke University, H. Keith H. Brodie, announced on Friday that he intended to resign at the end of the next academic year to return to teaching.
Dr.
Brodie, a psychiatrist, has been president of the university in Durham, N.C., since 1985.
When he completed his first five-year term in 1990 he was reappointed to another, but he said at the time that he did not intend to remain for the full term.


Adelaide Hall Cabaret Show
The cabaret singer Adelaide Hall is to celebrate her 90th birthday this week with shows on Wednesday and Thursday evenings at 8 o'clock at Weill Recital Hall.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Baby's Number
Taxpayers must have Social Security numbers for each child who has reached the age of one by the end of the tax year in order to claim the child as a dependent.


Heavy Snow in Israel Helps the Trains, Sort of
The Israeli train system, maligned for its creaky carriages and agonizingly slow service, has experienced a boom with the heavy snows that have cut roads to Jerusalem.
Scores of frantic passengers push and shove their way onto the overcrowded cars, despite three or four extra runs a day between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
One train slipped the tracks this week, a woman fell into a snowbank -- the drifts and the snail-like speed leaving her with only bruises -- and more agile passengers now board and exit through the windows.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY, Buffalo; Building Bridges Between Lawyers And Physicians
Malpractice suits visited upon doctors by lawyers seem as common today as house calls from physicians to patients were in years past.
The State University of New York at Buffalo is trying to cure this adversarial relationship with a new program to bring prospective lawyers and doctors together.
Professors from the university's Law and Medical Schools have coordinated a weeklong program of projects involving 11 law students and 6 medical students.
The first session was in early February, and the next will be in the fall.


The Question: To Cut or Not to Cut? The Answer: Maybe
Sometimes what's cut from a dance is as significant as what's left in.
Take "Giselle." This beloved ballet's final moment is virtually never performed today.
Most productions of "Giselle" end with the ghostly heroine fading away.
And Albrecht, the count who woos her while betrothed to a noblewoman, poses sorrowfully as the curtain falls.
Back in the early 1960's, I saw a Royal Ballet production in which, as Giselle vanished, Albrecht's fiancee and his squire rushed in to support him in his grief.
I was startled by what seemed a contrived attempt to give the work a sentimental happy ending.


Ms. Pettus Wed In Australia
Anne Tompkins Pettus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald H. Pettus of Keysville, Va., was married yesterday in Burrawang, New South Wales, Australia, to Garth Cameron Paterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Paterson of Bowral, New South Wales.
The Rev.
David Hawkins performed the ceremony at the Burrawang Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Paterson, 33 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Harvard University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a lawyer in Keysville.


CORRECTIONS
An article last Sunday about Parsippany-Troy Hills misidentified a museum devoted to Gustav Stickley, the late architect and furniture designer.
It is Craftsman Farms.
The article also misstated the times and fees for touring it.
It is open from 2 to 5 P.M. on Thursdays and Sundays, April through October.
The suggested donation is $2.


Residents Have One Word for Income Tax: Help!
AS people begin to sit down with their state income tax forms and instructions, they may understand why the legislature is already considering measures to repair the new tax.
One section of the manual warns, "Caution: Rounding off to whole dollars may affect the amounts of your personal exemption, and your personal tax credit." It certainly can, said an accountant in Stamford, Michael S. Kanter.
A married couple with joint income of $30,000 face a tax bill of $22.41.
But if they rounded off a few items, and their adjusted gross income worked out to $30,001, their tax bill would jump to $58.74.


New Site and Names For Trend Spotters
Something new always comes out of the Fashion Coterie.
Since it began in 1986, this trade show of small design houses with a high-fashion slant has become a must for store buyers and fashion editors seeking the latest trends.
The first bit of news about the fall edition of the Coterie held last week was its setting.
The show moved into the Plaza Hotel, whose spacious suites and wide corridors provided a more comfortable home than the Omni Park Central for an event that has grown gradually to 167 exhibitors attracting 4,600 visitors.


Political Memo; D'Amato's Persistence Shows His Party's Shift
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was a political plum ripe for the picking, at least in the eyes of Democrats.
Five jumped into the campaign for the right to take him on.
But Republicans saw the Senator as a ferocious tiger, wounded perhaps but still dangerous.
Despite glaring electoral handicaps, they chose to avoid a fight and gave him the nomination by default, an incalculable advantage in what promises to be a bitter race.


You'll Flip
A rare Honus Wagner baseball card sold yesterday for $220,000 at an auction of sports memorabilia at Sotheby's in Manhattan.
The winning bidder was RON OSER, an executive with Sports Heroes, a sports-memorabilia company based in Philadelphia and Oradell, N.J.
Last year, WAYNE GRETZKY and Los Angeles Kings owner BRUCE McNALL together paid $451,000 for a Wagner card.
Only about 40 Wagner cards are known to exist. (AP)


Germany Will Mediate Japan-Russia Island Rift
Germany has agreed to mediate between Japan and Russia on a longstanding territorial dispute that has until now blocked large-scale Japanese aid for the former Soviet Union.
According to German and Japanese diplomats, the German offer was conveyed by Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher during talks in Tokyo this month, as part of Germany's effort to build a new and closer relationship with Japan as Germany emerges as a dominant political and economic power in Europe.


Pruning Takes Skill and the Right Tools
FOR those who have an acute case of cabin fever, there is a cure: pruning.
Not every plant in every garden will need pruning at this time of year.
But there may be woody plants on the grounds that need a trim or two to provide outdoor activity that may relieve indoor blues.
Several precautions should be taken before getting to work.
The most important is to tackle only those plants that can be safely pruned from the ground.


A Plague Threatens to Exterminate Humanity
THE arts are kept alive by a continuing influx of new works.
In theater, new plays by as-yet-unknown playwrights keep drama from stagnating into an endless series of overproduced revivals.
On Long Island, the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale has taken the lead in searching out scripts for premiere productions.
That this theater has a commitment to new work is commendable.


Results Plus
TENNIS Becker and Volkov Advance Boris Becker of Germany, who beat John McEnroe, and Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, who defeated Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, advanced to today's final of the ABN World tournament yesterday in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Becker defeated McEnroe, 6-2, 7-6 (7-1).
Volkov beat Haarhuis, 6-2, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2. (AP)


Saberhagen Will Rise or Fall on the Curve
The date was April 4, 1984, and Bret Saberhagen, age 19 years 11 months 24 days, had been summoned from the bullpen at Yankee Stadium.
With his first pitch, Saberhagen would become the youngest player ever to appear in a game for the Kansas City Royals.
Saberhagen met briefly with Manager Dick Howser on the mound and then looked in for the sign from catcher Don Slaught.
He saw two fingers, and so he spun the baseball in his hand until he had found the right seam for his curveball.
He snuck a peak at the man on first before breaking off a curveball and thereby breaking into the major leagues.


CORRECTIONS
A report in the Postings column on Dec. 29 about the construction of the United States Post Office General Mail Facility in Manhattan misidentified its builder.
A recent letter from a representative of the builder noted that it is the Crow Construction Company, not the Tishman Construction Corporation.


Devils Bottle Up Islanders In Victory
The officials went to the video tape for clarification of how the water bottle was knocked off the roof of the Islanders' goal tonight.
The replay clearly showed it was nudged by a shot from Aleksandr Semak that had gone undernearth the roof of the net, so he got a goal.
The question was whether the puck might have bounced directly off the water bottle, thereby missing the net.


Ilene W. Shane Is the Bride of Brian T. Baxter
Ilene W. Shane, the founder and executive director of the Disabilities Law Project, a nonprofit public-interest law firm in Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Brian Taylor Baxter, the first deputy comptroller of New York City.
The Rev.
Judy Buck-Glen officiated at the First Unitarian Church in Philadelphia.


O'Rourke Defends His Housing Plan
THE County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, has outlined an ambitious county plan to build and finance 5,000 units of housing over the next five years, which he said he hopes people earning $50,000 a year can afford to buy.
In an interview after his State of the County address last week, Mr.
O'Rourke defended his plan, which calls for 4,500 of those units to be owner-occupied housing rather than rental units.
A recent county housing study recommended that the county concentrate on rental housing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Profile; Can Morality Be a Campaign Issue? Tsongas Has Trouble Not Making It One
St. Paul is fiddling with his halo.
Paul E. Tsongas, christened with his saintly nickname by a former political rival in Massachusetts, says he struggles not to lay claim to all the moral high ground in the Presidential campaign.
But some days it is hard.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANTLER, BEAR, CANOE: A Northwoods Alphabet Year.
Written and illustrated by Betsy Bowen.
Joy Street/Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) The author-illustrator lives in northern Minnesota near the Canadian border, and her colored woodcut images and annotations capture the seasons she knows so well -- with kayaks, minnows, outboards and wolves.


Help at Home
People who employ household help, even on a part-time basis, face tiresome paperwork.
Those who pay more than $50 in a calendar quarter need to file Form 942, the Quarterly Tax Return for Household Employees, along with payment of required Social Security taxes and any income tax withheld.
An annual household employee return is also required.
Some people avoid filing for years only to land in hot water when a long-time employee files to receive Social Security.


Chess
One cannot count on strong players' sticking to strategies they have used before.
In studying their games, one must, of course, master the ones for which they are best known, but the work cannot stop there.
Nor can one adopt a defense just because the opponent has relied on a line of play that one feels safe in facing.
Strong players are self-critical, and those that convince themselves that their previous performances against a specific defense have left something to be desired will alter course without warning.
So schooling oneself in one-tenth of a defense is not good enough; one must digest it all.


Ellen H. Sirot Plans Wedding
Margaret Sirot of Greenwich, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Ellen Hana Sirot to Peter Joseph Pucci, a son of the late Cecilia and Fred Pucci.
A wedding date has not yet been set.
Ms.
Sirot, a graduate of Barnard College, is a freelance model and dances in New York with Peter Pucci Plus Dancers, a modern-dance company of which her fiance is artistic director.
Her mother is the director of alumni programs at the Columbia University School of Law and the author of "Beyond Loss," a nonfiction book published by Dutton in 1989.
Her father, the late Marvin Sirot, was founder and president of Round Hill Group, a pension investment firm in Greenwich.


Correction
A front-page chart last Sunday about systematic investment in mutual funds misplaced figures for total average annual returns on three types of investment.
Value averaging returned 18.4 percent annually; value averaging without selling returned 17.8 percent, and dollar-cost averaging returned 16.7 percent.
In addition, the credit line rendered the source's name incorrectly.
He is Michael E. Edleson.


Dana A. Krug To Wed in July
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Krug of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dana Alice Krug to Stephen Lichtenstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Lichtenstein of Monsey, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Krug, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Duke University and is the assistant director of advertising at the New School for Social Research in New York.
Her father is a professor at Rutgers University, and chairman of the department of molecular biology and biochemistry.
Her mother, Marjorie Krug, is the project director of the Middlesex County Healthy Heart Program in Colonia, N.J.


A Tax Boon, Or Boondoggle?
Almost weekly there are calls for New York City's government to change the way it operates -- whether it is downsizing, "rightsizing," consolidating umpteen departments or privatizing services, all efforts requiring a broadside on the status quo.
Just as frequently, members of the Dinkins administration and the City Council respond that they are indeed engaged in revamping government.
Then along comes an issue like the Industrial and Commercial Incentive Program to remind everyone of just how hard wholesale change is.
On Tuesday, with the Dinkins administration's blessing, the City Council voted 44 to 6 to extend the I.C.I.P. program, as it is known, for six months.
To those familiar with the controversies surrounding the program, the decision speaks volumes about the current state of local politics.


Suzanne Fischbein Is to Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Fischbein of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Beth Fischbein to Michael Eric Rosenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Seligman Rosenberg of Tenafly, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Fischbein, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a law student at Yeshiva University.
Her father and her mother, Dr.
Brenda A. Merritt, are dermatologists practicing in Livingston, N.J.


Sports of The Times; Creating A New Standard
EVEN though the trial ended two weeks ago, the tremors created by Mike Tyson's rape conviction continue to reverberate.
Perhaps, as some suggest, this is because the former heavyweight champion made a lot of money for a lot of people and had so many more millions to make.
But there seems to be more to the sustained interest than that cynical assessment would suggest.
Clearly there is something more deeply troubling about the ordeal than a loss of money.


Shoreham's Options Concentrate on Gas
THE Long Island Power Authority may have finally found a noncontroversial profit-making use for Shoreham, at least for a brief period.
A subsidiary of the Walt Disney Company is making a movie about Chernobyl and has sent scouts to check whether the stillborn reactor on Long Island could double for the one that exploded in Ukraine.
After that, the future is uncertain.
But an inexorable momentum that led the Long Island Lighting Company to pour billions after fruitless billions of dollars into the nuclear-power plant now seems to grip the new master of Shoreham, the Long Island Power Authority.
The agency recently gave a tour of the plant for executives of companies that sell and install generating equipment.


Noted With Pleasure
The Endless Search for the Real
Our theories of the universe will always, necessarily, be incomplete.
And that, according to Timothy Ferris, is good news.
This is from "The Mind's Sky: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context" (Bantam).


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'AHMET, THE WOODSELLER
The Children's Opera Company of Ossining will present a single performance of "Ahmet, the Woodseller" by Gordon Crosse and Ian Serraillier on Thursday at 7:30 P.M. in the Ossining High School auditorium.
Admission is free.


POSTINGS: Owners' Seminar; Can Sun Set on Controls?
"Constitutional Challenges to Rent Control: Is It Time?" That will be the topic of discussion at a luncheon Tuesday sponsored by the Community Housing Improvement Program, a building owners' organization based in Manhattan.
The speaker will be George Kimble, a Los Angeles lawyer who has participated in several major cases that have resulted in the overturning of rent-control statutes.
He is also involved in a case now before the United States Supreme Court, Yee v.
Escondido, that deals with mobile homes and rent control.


Elizabeth Schierloh to Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Schierloh of Oradell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Ann Schierloh to Jason Herbert Maltby, a son of Mrs.
Robert Madison Butler of Port Washington, L.I., and Thomas W. Maltby of Syracuse.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Schierloh, 27 years old, is an assistant production coordinator at Bonaventure Textiles in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College, as did her fiance.
Her father is the chairman of HUBCO Inc., a bank holding company in Union City, N.J.


Lydia Beatrice Herman Weds Bart Allen Lazar
Lydia Beatrice Herman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertrand Herman of Montclair, Calif., and Bart Allen Lazar, a son of Marvin Lazar of Douglaston, Queens, and Mrs.
Richard Gordon of Lindenhurst, L.I., were married yesterday evening at the 410 Club in Chicago by Rabbi David Fine.
Mrs.
Lazar, 32 years old, is a group leader at Waste Management Inc. in Oak Brook, Ill.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and has a master's degree in urban hydrology from Columbia University.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
FLYING PERSONAL FLAGS
IT gets complicated this time of year for Regina Wolf of Holtsville.
"The holidays are so close together," she said.


'New Directions in Multiples'
THE Aldrich Museum's "X-6 New Directions in Multiples" looks like a trade show and proves to be just as exhausting.
Robert Klein, curator of the show and assistant director of the museum in Ridgefield, says in the catalogue preface that the "thread," if there is one, "is the way that the objects project themselves into the viewer's space." He is dead right.
Multiples are art objects, usually three-dimensional, that are produced in editions, like prints.
As such, they rate below unique works in value but above run-of-the-mill reproductions in value, and, again like prints, they have publishers.
The names of the six represented in the display are posted above their stands. (One half expects to come upon a counter where orders may be placed.)


Topics of The Times; Born in the U.S.A.
A young man of Asian heritage was talking, proudly but impatiently, about Kristi Yamaguchi's Olympic gold-medal victory in the Winter Olympics.
No one troubles to identify Senator Edward Kennedy as
Irish-
American anymore, or Congressman Dan Rostenkowski as
Polish-
American. How long, he asked, do we have to live with the hyphen?
Kristi Yamaguchi was born in the United States.
So were her parents -- although that didn't prevent their becoming, just 50 years ago, victims of Exective Order 9066, forcing Americans of Japanese descent into internment camps.
She is as American as can be, a role model for all Americans.
Yet there's hardly a reference that doesn't call her Japanese-American.


Musicke Maker


Abroad at Home; Without A Country
It is a small thing by the bloody standards of the Middle East: just a man cut off from his home and family, arbitrarily, without legal process.
But the story does shed some light on the reality of that abstract term "occupied territory."
Dr.
Khalil Ibrahim Shikaki, 38 years old, is a Palestinian political scientist who got his Ph.D. at Columbia University.
He taught at An-Najah University in Nablus, the West Bank, until Israel closed the universities in the occupied West Bank and Gaza at the end of 1987 because of the intifada.


On a Pizza-Size Disk, the History of American Art
At this very moment in Washington, George Washington and the White Girl are being converted to zeros and ones in a computer (George by Gilbert Stuart, the Girl by James MacNeil Whistler).
Digitized, in company with about 2,500 other works from the National Gallery of Art, the President and the Beauty will be reconstituted in splendor on a slim, iridescent videodisk in time for the opening of school next fall.
Mr.
Stuart, Mr.
Whistler: meet the 21st century.
This disk will be the equivalent of a slide library of 10,000 images (7,500 of them details), plus captions, that will occupy less space than a pizza.
It could hold 54,000 pictures if anyone had the time, staff and money to photograph, scan, color-correct and caption that many, but 10,000 images of American art in one package is not bad, considering that the art school at Cooper Union in New York has some 49,000 slides on the entire history of art.


Marcie Gow, Executive, Wed
Marcie Gow, a daughter of William C. Gow 3d of Darien, Conn., and the late Nancy Henderson Williams, was married yesterday to Thomas Richard Pajolek, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Chester R. Pajolek of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Victor Martin, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted at St.
Luke's Parish in Darien.
Mrs.
Pajolek, 34 years old, is a vice president of USGI Inc., a mortgage banking concern in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father is the chairman of USGI Holdings Inc., a financial services holding company in Norwalk.


Learning New Ways of Worshiping
Worshipers attending a service at St.
Patrick's Cathedral for the 25th anniversary celebration of the Charismatic Renewal, a movement gaining wider acceptance in the Catholic Church.
Page 28. (Lee Romero/The New York Times)


Miss McKnight Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
William G. McKnight 3d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Serena Rhinelander McKnight, to Bradley Clayton Bowman 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bowman 2d of Wayzata, Minn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McKnight, 26 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is an assistant designer at John F. Saladino Inc., the New York interior design company.
Her father is a vice president of Citibank in New York.


Turning Point


Review/Piano; Bach, Brahms and Reger In Recital by Andras Schiff
Andras Schiff's main calling cards for the last decade have been the works of Bach, Mozart and Haydn, music that demands a light but purposeful touch and clarity of texture when it is performed on a modern piano.
Recently, he fortified his image as a Classicist by making recordings on the fortepiano.
But for his recital at Avery Fisher Hall last Sunday afternoon, Mr.
Schiff looked in a different direction.
Although he began with a graceful, thoughtfully ornamented account of Bach's French Suite No. 5 (BWV 816) and later played a short Handel suite, his main offerings were two towering late-Romantic variation sets, the Reger Variations and Fugue on a Theme of J. S. Bach (Op. 81) and the Brahms Variations and Fugue on a Theme by G. F. Handel (Op. 24).


Whiffing For Charity
To the Sports Editor:
To illustrate the existence of good-guy athletes, Claire Smith mentions Bobby Bonilla and Don Mattingly, who have pledged to donate a fixed amount of money to a particular charity for each run batted in and home run, respectively, that they produce ("Celebrating Gifts of the Good Sports," The Times, Feb. 16).


V.A.T. Refunds
To the Editor: Apropos Betsy Wade's column on overseas retail purchases ("Those Elusive V.A.T. Refunds," Travel, Feb. 2), the growing practice among merchants in Ireland to discount value-added-taxes on the spot provides an economic lesson other countries well could heed -- that relieving tourists of the burden of seeking tax rebates translates into sales.
On a recent trip to Dublin I bought a watch for $:90 (about $135).
I was attracted as much by the watch as by the merchant's willingness to assume full responsibility for paying the V.A.T., and no tax appeared on my charge-card receipt.
The merchant did, however, hand me a self-addressed stamped envelope containing a tax rebate voucher payable to himself.
On leaving the country I was to present the form to a customs agent at Dublin Airport, have it countersigned, and drop it in the nearest mailbox.
I complied.


SUIT TIES LAYOFFS TO DISCRIMINATION
A former assistant art director of DCA Advertising contended in a lawsuit filed on Friday that the Japanese-owned agency discriminated against employees born in the United States and favored its Japanese workers when the company dismissed 26 employees last year.
In his lawsuit, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan, Julius Filicia said that of the 26 employees who were dismissed only one was Japanese and that employee had already informed the agency that she was returning to Japan.


CAIRO
Life in Cairo, congested, polluted and noisy, necessitates a refuge.
One of the finest in the city is the 82-year-old Orman Botanical Garden across from Cairo University.
This 14-acre garden has long been a haunt of young lovers, who sit close together on wooden benches beneath the pines, bamboo and palms that arch over the main lawn.


Toll-Free Phones For Hotel Group
Travelers can now book rooms in any of the 315 Radisson hotels in 25 countries using a new toll-free telephone reservation system.
Radisson Hotels International has established toll-free numbers in 14 countries that are routed directly through to the reservation center in Omaha.
The toll-free service is available to travelers in the following countries by calling the numbers given: Australia, (008) 021 211; Austria, (195) 043 0004; Belgium (11) 9898; France, 05.90.06.78; Germany, (0130) 81 44 42; Hong Kong, (800) 7877; Ireland, (800) 55 7474; Italy, (1678) 70303; Mexico City (533) 11 95; the rest of Mexico, (91 800) 90 0 90; Spain (900) 95 1441; Switzerland (1) 55 2777; Britain, (0800) 89 1999, and the United States and Canada (800) 333-3333.
Operators fluent in French, Spanish, German and Italian are on duty during times when Europeans are most likely to call.


Miss McCullough to Wed in October
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank S. McCullough Jr. of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristin Helen McCullough to Brent Lawrence Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Brown of Kirkville, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss McCullough, 25 years old, is the assistant director of the Upward Bound program at St.
Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y.
She graduated and received a master's degree in counseling and human development from St.
Lawrence.
Her father is a senior partner in the Harrison, N.Y., law firm of McCullough, Goldberger &amp; Staudt.
She is a granddaughter of Frank S. McCullough, a former administrative judge of State Supreme Court in White Plains.


MANY ON MEDICARE ARE OVERCHARGED DESPITE NEW LAW
Despite a Federal law intended to protect Medicare patients against excessive doctors' bills, many patients have been overcharged and have been unable to get refunds or assistance from the Government, say state insurance commissioners and the beneficiaries themselves.
Part of the problem is that, for more than a year, Medicare officials have used inaccurate, misleading language on forms sent to beneficiaries who filed claims.
After a reporter made inquiries, the officials said on Friday that they would correct these forms and they instructed regional offices to be more diligent in monitoring the billing practices of doctors.


The Mocking 'Do'
I know you don't often 'do' punctuation," writes Rebecca Warburton of Victoria, British Columbia, "just as many domestics don't 'do' windows, but I notice you place periods and commas before a terminating quotation mark, regardless of whether the period or comma is actually part of the quote.
Prevailing practice now seems to place all punctuation marks outside the quotes; is this a sign of ignorance?"
I have already taken a stand on the placement of periods.
"Here's where I stand on period placement." In that case, the period goes inside, at the end of the quoted sentence.
"Now let's try it with the period outside".
That makes the period look like a lonely end; it's a no-go.
What about this, though: "Here's my stand," say I, "on what punc-junkies call 'period placement'." Right in the middle, between the marks that end the inside quote and the whole quotation, because it completes the quoted sentence and, besides, it looks right.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; Open Space Deal in Doubt
A SUPERIOR COURT judge's ruling has jeopardized Rhode Island's efforts to buy land for open-space preservation in at least 10 locations.
Judge Alice Gibney's decision came in a controversial case known as Black Point.
At issue are 44 acres of waterfront property in Narragansett bought by Ocean Road Partners, a development group, in 1984.
It paid $2.4 million for those 44 acres and 23 acres across the street.


Kinkiness Is One Thing . . .
To the Editor:
Regarding John J. O'Connor's essay on the television version of Scott Turow's "Burden of Proof"  [ "Between the Lines of Page-Turners," Feb. 9 ] : I, too, have found this work, as well as Mr.
Turow's earlier books, to be disturbing.
Kinkiness has a way of grabbing attention, particularly in characters one doesn't know well, both in life and on the pages of fiction.
It is a diverting part of entertainment.


Review/Dance; Songs of Love, With Waltzes by Eliot Feld
Eliot Feld's "Love Song Waltzes" is a piano-and-lieder ballet, danced by couples in vaguely period ballroom dress.
Sound familiar?
The suite of dances is set to some of the same Brahms songs as Balanchine's "Liebeslieder Walzer," and both touch on similar themes of love and estrangement.
But Mr.
Feld's ballet is charged with overt emotions.
It is a rush through a dimly lit ballroom echoing with sobs and laughter instead of decorous social conversation.
The man and woman in one of the four couples know each other intimately enough so that the man's quick lowering of the woman into deep falls looks both easy and devastating -- as dance and as emotional behavior.
Another man and woman know each other less well.
Their protracted, chilling battle may kill them, or at least their love.
The woman dances away from the crowd in a troubled, dreaming solo.
The man slides urgently through as two other couples dance, then hurtles back to his partner.
And a young woman moves away to dance by herself, looking as lost as if she were the only one awake in a dream.


Chicago Unveils A Proud New Temple of Books
It is grand, it is noble, it is a temple of urban glory.
There are things to criticize about the new central library here, named the Harold Washington Library Center in honor of the former mayor, but let's give it its due: no building erected in our time has demonstrated more clearly a total commitment to the notion of the public realm.
This building is of the city and for the city; every brick, every piece of carved granite, every metal gargoyle, proclaims a respect for the street, a love of the city, and a deep belief in the idea that architecture can ennoble everyday life.
For that alone, this $195 million project is worth celebrating.
Here, in what remains America's first city of architecture, by virtue of sentiment if not always by performance, the government has stood up once again to assert the importance of building seriously and building well.
It has happened time and time again in Chicago -- a generation ago with such masterworks as Mies van der Rohe's elegant Federal Center and Jacques Brownson's brilliant, post-Miesian Civic Center, and now with the library.
This new building is altogether different from those modernist monuments, but it stands as equal proof of Chicago's determination to turn an architectural value system into built form.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
My first reaction to Kingsolver's article was to nod in agreement -- our society has increasingly made itself a place in which children are not welcome.
By the end of the article, I could only hope that I never have to share a seat with her.


Victoria Emery Has Wedding
Victoria Hetherington Emery, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James C. Emery of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Shaun Michael Morrison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Morrison of Los Alamos, N.M.
The Rev.
Francis A. Sirolli performed the ceremony at Our Mother of Consolation Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Morrison, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where her father is a professor of decision sciences.


Indy 500 Rookie Shows A Proven Track Record
The story outline is as follows: A prominent Brazilian race driver, a former world champion, gets fed up with Formula One.
He has heard a lot about the Indianapolis 500 (as has every driver worldwide) and is eager to try it.
So he gets a ride with a less prominent team, hoping to work his way up to one of the better ones.
No, this is not an eight-year-old rehash of Emerson Fittipaldi's second career.
This is the current plan of Nelson Piquet.


Another Voyage In Search of Atlantis
"Unraveling the Mystery of Lost Atlantis"  [ Feb. 2 ]  on "Unearthing Atlantis" puts me on the immediate lookout for Charles Pellegrino's new book.
As a reader fascinated with antiquity and a high school English teacher in Oceanside who often shares her reading enthusiasms with her students, I was happy to learn about the publication of another book identifying the Greek island of Thera with Plato's fabulous Atlantis, especially as I was right in the middle of reading Dr.
James W. Mavor Jr.'s 1969 book, "Voyage to Atlantis."


United Nations Begins a New Peace Effort in Somalia


On the Campaign Trail


Henry H. Rice, Real-Estate Broker Known for Innovation, Dies at 80
Henry Hart Rice, a real-estate broker who was instrumental in many major developments and won awards for his innovative deals, died on Thursday at his Manhattan home.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Oh, the Quest for the Cheapest Air Fares
GATE 19 at Long Island MacArthur Airport consists of a door.
No ticket counter, or waiting area with seats.
No jetway.
Just one glass door leading to the outside and, hopefully, a plane.
On the warm dry side of the door the other night, Long Islanders awaited their traveling fates.
On the other side, in a driving rainstorm, stood Trina Cummo of Malverne, a Braniff International Airlines supervisor.
The raccoon coat she wore looked as if an overzealous animal had licked it to distraction.
Her black felt hat wilted from the weight of the water streaming down the brim.


Detained


Buchanan Takes The Hot Seat
Pity Patrick J. Buchanan, America's first 100-percent made-by-television Presidential candidate.
Having attracted enough support to keep him running for the Republican nomination, he faces more interviews in which he will be asked whether he is still an anti-Semite.
He will answer, as he did to Sam Donaldson last month, with a resigned sigh, a dismissive remark, a crack about those people in New York who keep churning out such stuff.
Or he may muster indignation, as he did last Sunday, when Mr.
Donaldson started up again.
Who can fail to sympathize?
How exasperating for a fellow who has been making a nice career as a television yakker to be held accountable for a few drops of the ocean of verbiage that has poured from him over the years on "Crossfire" and "The McLaughlin Group" and in hundreds of newspaper columns.
Since when, he may fairly ask, does anybody take such paid-by-the-phrase spoutings seriously?
Just because a performer decides to run for President, should his punch lines be used against him?
It's like blaming an actor for playing a bad guy in a movie. (And there's the biggest good guy of all, Arnold Schwarzenegger, out to get him.)


Lisbon: Reliquary of Portugal's Golden Age
In the Belem Tower, a 500-year-old stone bulwark in Lisbon, near the point where the Tagus River gets lost in the iron-gray nothingness of the Atlantic, a disk symbolizing the celestial sphere revolved slowly in the middle of a blackened room, illuminated by a spotlight.
It was a stormy day.
I was the tower's only visitor.
As ocean gusts belted the shutters -- evoking what I imagined to be the sound of solar winds in space -- the deathly loneliness of exploration, both in our day and in Vasco da Gama's, became overwhelmingly manifest.
Winds whistled up the spiral stone stairs and rain lashed the gangplank connecting the tower to the shore, 50 feet away.
Only in this weather could I envisage the Belem Tower as it was before the Tagus changed course, when it stood far out in the water, the final beacon for generations of Portuguese navigators facing an ocean, only recently charted, beyond which lay the virgin shores of Africa and South America.


AN EYE FOR DANGER
In his insightful article "An Eye for Danger" (Jan. 19), Bruce Weber writes that Robert Stone is an ex-Navy man, and Stone says that a sentence from the Navy handbook stuck in his mind when he was writing his most recent book, "Outerbridge Reach": "The sea isn't inherently dangerous. But it is unforgiving." This suggests another source of inspiration for his writing.
A sailor is pushed to his limits by the harsh realities of the open sea.
Those who sail must pay attention to detail and make quick decisions under conditions that rapidly can become overwhelming.
In such an exacting environment, it is no wonder that the Navy has fostered the development of so many business and political leaders and, in the case of Robert Stone, a great novelist who takes readers to the threshold of danger.
JOSEPH C. SAKRAIDA
Fair Haven, N.J.


Phoebe Davis, a Pastor, Is Engaged
Mrs.
William S. Davis Jr. of Middletown, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, the Rev.
Phoebe Townsend Davis, to Douglas Andrew Kitson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Kitson of Janesville, Wis.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Davis, 32 years old, is an associate pastor of the Reformed Church in America in Bronxville, N.Y.
She graduated from Springfield College and received a master of divinity degree from Princeton Theological Seminary.
She is the daughter also of the late Mr.
Davis, who was a stockbroker in New York.
Her mother is the manager of Hazelton/Van Horn Realtors in Rumson, N.J.


Business Diary/February 23-28
ECONOMY Playing Veto Games With the Tax Bill


Taxes, Deficits and the American Way
Familiarity breeds contempt: Ten years after economists began warning that mega-deficits meant mega-trouble, Congress is flirting with another budget-busting tax cut.
The deficit, it seems, has been demoted from impending crisis to nagging worry, one ranking somewhere between the population explosion and failure to floss.
Were the economists, in fact, just a bunch of Chicken Littles?
Can Washington indefinitely spend $5 for every $4 it collects?


Gibson Is Grumpy
He hit only .236 last year and he's having a bit of trouble keeping his metaphors straight, but outfielder KIRK GIBSON, who has been told he will be relegated to a backup role with Kansas City, managed to make the point that he is not happy with the assignment and wants to be traded.
"I'm not here to be a caddie," he said.


POSTINGS: Ribbon-Cutting; Rossville Shopping Center
The developers of the 75-acre Woodbrooke community in the Rossville section of Staten Island marked the official opening of the Rossville Shopping Center Thursday with a ribbon-cutting that also took note of the sale of the community's last town house, a few blocks away.
"You can say it took 15 years to get final approval for Woodbrooke and another three years for the shopping strip," said Joshua M. Muss, a partner in Muss Development Company of Forest Hills, Queens, whose other projects include the mixed-use Renaissance Plaza in downtown Brooklyn.


2 European Organists To Perform in County
THE pooling of musical and financial resources by Rye Presbyterian Church, Grace Episcopal Church of White Plains and the Westchester County chapter of the American Guild of Organists has enabled two eminent European artists to visit the United States.
Daniel Roth, organist of St.
Sulpice in Paris, will appear in Rye today at 4 P.M. and Simon Preston, the renowned British concert organist, will give a master class and recital in White Plains on April 4 and 5.
Mr.
Roth will play works of Bach and the French masters Clerambault and Guilmant, as well as offering one of the improvisations for which he is so well known.
According to Le Figaro, "The wild character of his improvisations as well as his strong technique and accomplished knowledge of harmony have rightly impressed the audience." For more information on today's concert, call 967-0842.


Saudi's Seek to Cut Funds for Militants
Saudi Arabia's Government is beginning a quiet campaign to convince wealthy Saudis who give money to Islamic causes to beware of financing radical fundamentalist movements like those in Algeria and the Sudan.
Over the last decade, hundreds of millions of dollars are believed to have flowed from wealthy Saudis to such movements with the acquiescence of the Saudi Government, senior Saudi officials and foreign diplomats here say.


Miss Wehner, Actress, Weds
Jacquelyn Scott Wehner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Wehner Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Christopher Scott Gilroy, a son of Bryan Gilroy of Brooklyn and Barbara Gilroy of West Islip, L.I.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller performed the ceremony at St.
Mary the Virgin Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gilroy, 25 years old, graduated from Florida State University and is an actress in New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of American Progressive Life and Health Insurance of New York.
Her mother, Donna Wehner, is a fashion model in New York.


Tuning Out the Madding Crowd With Some Help From Electronics
The National Football League seems prepared to quiet the disruptive stadium crowd noise on visiting offenses with a "Star Wars" approach.
At the N.F.L. owners meeting March 15 in Phoenix, the N.F.L. competition committee will consider using electronic devices, implanted in the helmet of the quarterback and the offensive tackles, that will amplify the quarterback's voice so that signals can be heard over the roar of the crowd.


Why Marginal Changes Don't Rescue the Welfare System
From the White House down, public officials are talking tough about welfare and pledging to put the system right.
But less is likely to come of it than meets the ear.
In the states, much of the activity is prompted by budget crises.
Some officials are proposing plain old cutbacks dressed up in talk about prompting self-reliance.
Others add a carrot to the stick, offering to pay the poor to stay in school, seek health care or marry.
Some of the proposals seem cynically calculated to appeal to conservative middle-class voters; others spring from genuine concern, and may even bring small accomplishments.
But none are remotely likely to fix what is really broken.


Ms. Nidds to Be Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
John A. Nidds of Huntington, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Margaret Mary Nidds, and James Cahill Holland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene P. Holland of Fair Haven, N.J.
Ms.
Nidds, 29 years old, is studying for a master's degree in education at C. W. Post College.
Mr.
Holland, 34, is the vice president and national sales manager of Berwick Knitwear in New York.


From I.B.M. Jobs to Assignments in Paris
SINCE Benjamin Franklin's time, Americans have been drawn to Paris, and its attraction continues today.
Among those who now temporarily call the city home are two young scientists who grew up in Westchester and started their professional lives at the International Business Machines Corporation.
Dennis E. Shasha, an associate professor at New York University's Courant Institute who grew up in Scarsdale, is spending a sabbatical year doing research at the Institut National de Recherche-Automatique Roquencourt, a laboratory outside Paris, which is run by the French Government.


Behind Home Plate, Age Is No Hindrance
Unlike old soldiers, old catchers neither die nor fade away; they stay around -- and around and around.
Rick Dempsey, 42 years old with 19 years in the major leagues, is in camp with the Baltimore Orioles.
Alex Trevino, 34 years old with 12 years in the majors, is a nonroster player with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Gary Carter, who will turn 38 on the third day of his 18th season, and Rick Cerone, who has spent 15 of his 37 years in the majors, are both in camp with the Montreal Expos.


Ms. Linsenmeyer, an Editor, Weds
Adrienne Elizabeth Linsenmeyer, a New York financial editor, and E. Davisson Hardman Jr., a New York real-estate executive, were married yesterday in Phoenix.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Cathedral.
The bride is a daughter of Ernest Linsenmeyer and Margaret Brignall, both of Phoenix.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hardman Sr. of Clarksburg, W.Va.


CORRECTIONS
The Residential Resales column last Sunday misstated the closing price and the number of bathrooms for a condominium at 149 East 73d Street in Manhattan.
The closing price was $1.217 million.
The apartment has four bathrooms.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 1, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
2
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
3
5
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
4
2
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
43
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
6
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
7
2
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) A woman and a man find true love while fighting to save her family's business.
8
6
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
9
5
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman finds family problems and love when she establishes a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
10
1
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Continuing the story of life in the fantasy land of Shannara.
11
6
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
12
1
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the strange death of a widow from England's Lake District.
13 *
15
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
14
1
FACES OF FIRE, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.99.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise in an encounter between warring interstellar factions.
15
10
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
10
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
41
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
434
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
4
2
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood.
5 *
5
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case.
6
33
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
5
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) The case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
8
15
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
9
119
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
18
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
11 *
2
PLAIN AND SIMPLE, by Sue Bender. (HarperSanFrancisco, $10.95.) An urban woman finds peace of mind in Amish communities.
12 *
33
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
29
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
77
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
58
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
26
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
1
WAYNE'S WORLD, by Mike Myers and Robin Ruzan. (Cader/Hyperion, $7.95.) Lists, games, etc., inspired by a "Saturday Night Live" skit.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Music, Art and Raindrops
THURSDAY -- The American Foundation for AIDS Research gave a cocktail party and a preview screening of the Merchant-Ivory film "Howards End" at Alice Tully Hall.
A dinner dance followed at Tavern on the Green.
WEDNESDAY -- The 99-year-old Henry Street Settlement programs benefited from a preview gala for "The Art Show" at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
The exhibition, which runs through tomorrow, consists of works from 64 American art galleries.
It was organized by the Art Dealers Association of America.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lycoming; Good Deeds Help Greek Groups Pay Insurance Costs
If it hadn't been for a group of 10 young men, an acre of leaves would still be sitting in the yard of 72-year-old Robert Gill.
Mr.
Gill, a disabled World War II veteran, has a hard time maintaining the property around his rural home here.
But after getting wind of a community-service program at Lycoming College, a 1,400-student college here affiliated with the Methodist Church, Mr.
Gill found some volunteers to help.


Fay of 'Kiwinado' Is Cup Favorite
Michael Fay's failure to win the America's Cup in the late 1980's -- first by sea and then by land -- has given him reason to make sure the "unfinished business" comes to a more successful conclusion here.
Fay, as founder of New Zealand's America's Cup challenge and the 1992 regatta's odds-on favorite, is more determined than ever to take home the 141-year-old trophy.
His sailing team took the lead for keeps midway in the second round of the challengers' trial races by defeating Italy, considered to be one of New Zealand's toughest adversaries.


'Democracy in America' at Yale Rep
A YOUNG woman's lamentation on the death of her 37-year-old brother -- and "a life ignored" -- turns into an incrimination of a society's skewed priorities.
He was a drifter, a victim of the "debilitating effects of schizophrenia."
"He lost hope, and the world broke his heart," she says, implicating a government that neglects the indigent and the infirm -- and "the living who join in that silence."


Discovering the Ruby-Red Juice and Pulp of Blood Oranges
AMERICANS have been slow to discover blood oranges.
With their ruby-red juice and pulp, they are dramatic looking, a little frightening to slice into.
In Europe, people eat them plain or have the juice for breakfast (there is nothing like it).
The oranges also make beautiful tarts and superb sauces, especially good for seafood.
Sicily produces the best blood oranges.
They are very dark and have a pleasant, slightly bitter flavor.
They are now in season until late spring and can be found in specialty stores or markets with good produce departments.
Some of them have reddish skins; some look like regular oranges (until you open them up).
Their hue is affected by their exposure to sun on the tree; it does not indicate anything about the quality.


June Wedding For Miss Ewing
Mrs.
S.
Blaine Ewing of Eastham, Mass., has announced June wedding plans for her daughter, Lydia Macy Ewing, and Christopher Stuart Tolley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
B.
Stuart Tolley of Larchmont, N.Y.
Miss Ewing, 32 years old, is an information specialist with Braxton Associates, a management consulting concern in Boston.
A graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, she has a master's degree in library science from Simmons College.
Her late father, Mr.
Ewing, was an associate professor of English at Lehigh University.
Her mother, Eliza Jackson Ewing, who is retired, was a lawyer in Bethlehem, Pa.


Everett Makes the Most of New York's Indoor Meets
For New York's indoor track season, which opened and closed with two meets three weeks apart, Mark Everett was the athlete of most conspicuous merit.
He ran two exciting, winning races faster than anyone else in the annals of indoor track here at 500 meters and 600 yards.
And he also won some significant money.


The End of the Modern Era
The end of Communism is, first and foremost, a message to the human race.
It is a message we have not yet fully deciphered and comprehended.
In its deepest sense, the end of Communism has brought a major era in human history to an end.
It has brought an end not just to the 19th and 20th centuries, but to the modern age as a whole.
The modern era has been dominated by the culminating belief, expressed in different forms, that the world -- and Being as such -- is a wholly knowable system governed by a finite number of universal laws that man can grasp and rationally direct for his own benefit.
This era, beginning in the Renaissance and developing from the Enlightenment to socialism, from positivism to scientism, from the Industrial Revolution to the information revolution, was characterized by rapid advances in rational, cognitive thinking.


History Overheard
MR. MANI
By A. B. Yehoshua. Translated by Hillel Halkin. 369 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


CAMPUS LIFE: Harvard; Cinema a la Spike Lee In a Curious Setting
It could have been a movie premiere, but instead it was a lecture hall at Harvard.
In the first week of a new semester, classes are open to everyone, and more than 1,400 people showed up at the campus's Sanders Theater recently to see what it would be like to take a class with Spike Lee.
Mr.
Lee, who directed the films "Jungle Fever" and "Do the Right Thing," is making his teaching debut with a course called "Contemporary African-American Cinema." The class, which meets one day a week for two hours, is made up of 60 undergraduates selected by Mr.
Lee from more than twice as many applicants.


Father's Day


Technology; Polyvision Nips at the Heels of the LCD
The term -- electronic flat panel display -- may be unfamiliar, but the product is everywhere.
Flat panel displays are used on calculators, digital watches, home appliances, hand-held video games and laptop computers.
All these panels, most of them using liquid crystal display screens, add up to a huge market that is growing rapidly.
But a new generation of flat panel displays is expected to enter the consumer electronics marketplace later this year.
These new displays are inexpensive and relatively simple to manufacture, and unlike some current displays, they show up well in virtually all lighting conditions.
They may eventually be used in everything from large-screen color televisions to auto mirrors to billboards.
And they represent a challenge to the current market stranglehold held by the Japanese -- Sharp, Hitachi and Toshiba.


Malta, Emerges From the Waves of Time
A small rock set in the southern Mediterranean between Sicily and NorthAfrica, only 18 miles long, with a population of more than 300,000, the islandof Malta is a palimpsest of cultures, developed over thousands of years ofsuccessive invasions by Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Arabs, Normans andthe Spanish, French and British.
For nearly 300 years, from 1530 to 1814, itwas the sovereign domain of the crusading order of the Knights of Malta, whobuilt many of its most enduring monuments.
Today Malta is a sleepy island resort, heavily dependent on mostly elderlyBritish tourists.
If the landscape seems North African, with its rough, aridterrain and low, whitewashed houses, the towns maintain the air of a Britishcolony, which Malta was, from 1814 to 1964.
Most street and shop-window signsare in English; there are still red wooden phone booths capped with the royalcrown, and the roads are filled with English cars from the 1940's and 50's --Hillmans, Vauxhalls, Bedfords, Austins and Morrises -- adding to the sense of a time warp.


Discovering the Ruby-Red Juice and Pulp of Blood Oranges
AMERICANS have been slow to discover blood oranges.
With their ruby-red juice and pulp, they are dramatic looking, a little frightening to slice into.
In Europe, people eat them plain or have the juice for breakfast (there is nothing like it).
The oranges also make beautiful tarts and superb sauces, especially good for seafood.
Sicily produces the best blood oranges.
They are very dark and have a pleasant, slightly bitter flavor.
They are now in season until late spring and can be found in specialty stores or markets with good produce departments.
Some of them have reddish skins; some look like regular oranges (until you open them up).
Their hue is affected by their exposure to sun on the tree; it does not indicate anything about the quality.


Supporting the Hunger Strike for Haitians


In Health Care, Canada Beats U.S. and Britain; Trying to Buy a Policy
To the Editor:
I agree with those who believe President Bush is applying a Band-Aid to the health care problem with his plan (front page, Feb. 3).
He (and the other candidates) should know that there are many people who can afford health insurance, but the insurance companies do not want to sell them policies because they have medical problems.


Dick Wolf Breaks and Enters With 'Law and Order' on NBC
On a steel-gray, frigid morning, the cast and crew of "Law and Order," the only network television drama filmed entirely in New York City, has set up shop in Chinatown.
It's the first day of filming on an episode about the murder of a Jewish man by three young blacks.
The investigation by police and prosecutors, played out against burgeoning racial hysteria in the city, provides an unexpected twist by the end.
Thus the story line conforms to the ripped-from-the-headlines, imagined-into-fiction format that has made "Law and Order" popular enough to be a scheduling weapon for NBC.
A speech-heavy, and occasionally disquieting, variation on television's well-worn solve-the-crime genre, the series splits the hour in half.
It opens on the streets with a police investigation and ends in the courts with a prosecution.
"Law and Order" was recently slid from its 10 P.M.
Tuesday slot, where it regularly won the time period, to 9, where it does battle with the hugely popular "Roseanne" on ABC.
And though the move has cost the show some viewers, NBC believes that its audience will find it again by the time the fall season begins.
Critics have found "Law and Order" intriguing, challenging, generally well written, suited for the literate, upscale audience it appeals to.
The series ranks a respectable 44th among the more than 100 prime-time shows.


Corrections
An obituary headline last Sunday about James W. Wagner, longtime director of the National Spelling Bee, misstated his age in some copies.
He was 70 years old.


Martha Bush-Brown Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Bush-Brown of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Bush-Brown to Nicholas Risom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ole C. Risom of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Bush-Brown is an account executive at the advertising agency of Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College.
Her father, an architectural historian, is the former director and chairman of Barclays Bank of New York and the former chancellor of Long Island University.


Quotation of the Day
"They weren't altar boys. And they weren't the worst in the school, either. They were just run-of-the-mill kids." -- LIEUT.
KEVIN PERHAM, a police detective in East New York.  [ 32.3. ]


Filing Status
Some taxpayers who check the filing status "single" are eligible for the more favorable "head of household." A single person who maintains a household that is also the principal abode for more than half the year of a son, daughter, grandchild, adopted or foster child or certain other dependents may qualify.
So may single taxpayers who maintain households for dependent parents, even if they are in a nursing home.


TOM HARKIN'S OLD-TIME RELIGION
As a British reader, I was startled by the tone of Miller's profile.
She sounds guilty of rank class prejudice.
For example, she writes: "Harkin often comes across to those who don't know him as sour and small, as the man who shows up to repair you washing machine. Not Presidential." This sounds like the antique contempt of The London Sunday Times toward some upstart Labor Party politician.


Caring for Wood-Floor Finishes
CARING for modern wood-floor finishes can be tricky, as procedures recommended for some floors can ruin others.
With all wood floors, frequent cleaning to remove dirt, and particularly grit, which causes scratches, is essential.
Go over the floor with a dry untreated dust mop every few days or more often, and vacuum floors with a brush attachment as frequently as you vacuum carpets.


Zulu Ex-Aide Tells of Arms Training
The South African armed forces secretly spent more than $1 million for paramilitary training and wages for 200 young loyalists of the Zulu political movement Inkatha, a former aide to Inkatha's leader acknowledged today.
But the aide, Melchizedec Zakhele Khumalo, who worked for 15 years as a personal assistant to the Inkatha leader, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, said Chief Buthelezi was not aware that the money, channeled through a confidential bank account that the two of them controlled, had come from the South African military.


Tough Trekking in 'Little Tibet'
WE were picking our way along a narrow trail cut into a mountain slope when we heard a merry jingling and shouts of laughter.
Scrambling off the trail, we stared in wonder as a group of Zanskaris galloped past on their ponies.
It was a wedding party, carrying the bride to her new husband's village.
The little Zanskari horses were hung with bells and brightly colored, folded rugs were strapped onto their backs.
On these the guests rode in their finery -- maroon robes with pink sashes, multipointed gold caps on the lamas.
One woman wore a headdress festooned with turquoises, while the bride was half-enveloped by a big white cloth draped over her and tied at the waist.
As they rode by, they waved and cheered at us, and some leaned over, superb riders that they are, reached out and gave us a quick handshake without stopping their horses.
My husband, Philip, and I were part of a group of 10 trekking across Zanskar into Ladakh, two ancient Himalayan kingdoms that are now part of India.
The area is known, however, as Little Tibet, for this high, remote, sparsely populated area lies at the western edge of the Tibetan plateau, to which it is attached geographically and culturally.
Since the destruction of most of the great monasteries across the border, Tibetan culture is said to survive most authentically in Zanskar and Ladakh, whose inhabitants practice Tibetan Buddhism and speak a language related to Tibetan.


In Health Care, Canada Beats U.S. and Britain; Drug Company Studies
To the Editor:
David Ridenour's contention that "Even though per capita health spending in America and Canada is roughly the same, Americans have 40 percent more surgical procedures than Canadians" is the most egregious of many falsehoods in his Feb. 7 Op-Ed article.


Ms. Auerbach to Wed Nicholas Papapetros 2d
Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Auerbach of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Paule Auerbach, to Dr.
Nicholas Papapetros 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Papapetros of Quincy, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.


Pins That Make an Ethnic Point
Pins can be more than accessories: they can be an expression of a culture.
Today, pins appear on hats, scarfs, belts, lapels -- almost anywhere on clothing -- and in the hair.
Often they depict people with African or Latin facial features and hair textures.
Talana Pritchard, who has a studio in her home in Brooklyn, designs what she calls "Blackface," miniature clay sculptures that wear their own hats, scarfs or crowns.


The Softly Spoken Message of Martin Puryear
It is always a pleasure to spend time with Martin Puryear's sculptures.
His art does not grab a viewer by the lapels.
It has nothing to do with the media-driven, overconceptualized culture of the last decade.
Although unmistakably his own, and each in its way distinct, Mr.
Puryear's sculptures are remarkably, often touchingly, soft-spoken and self-effacing.
They make ideal interlocutors -- particular in attitude, elegant and lively in address, but wide open to a range of interpretations.
A work like "Sanctuary" (1982), for instance, with its neatly constructed wooden box perched atop two curving tree branches that in turn rest on either side of a wooden wheel, is a meditation on craftsmanship and the beauty of wood.
The sculpture can also bring to mind the image, slightly comical, of a thin-legged unicyclist.
And like many of Mr.
Puryear's sculptures, it is about movement; it looks poised, arrested in its tracks, at any moment capable of rolling away.


Cooperative School Fills a Need
Re: Letters to the New Jersey editor (Feb. 16), in regard to Rhonda Silver's response to an article about the Montclair Cooperative School ("Where Parents Are Part of the Fun of Learning," Feb. 2):
Although I applaud Rhonda Silver's invovement in her son's education at the Rand School in Montclair, I wish to point out a few things in regard to her response to the accurate portrayal of the Montclair Cooperative School's philosophy and its implementation through the curriculum.


Another Losing Battle With Japan?
As the United States has lost ground to Japan in so many ways, Americans have at least been able to take heart in knowing that their country is unsurpassed in the amount its industry spends for research and development.
But now even that edge might be slipping.
In February a Federal agency reported that for the first time since the 1970's American spending on research and development, including Government and private money, has begun to shrink.
This week the Competitiveness Policy Council, recently created by Congress, is expected to report that in terms of research spending Japanese business is now No. 1


Judith L. Cavuto To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Domenic V. Cavuto of Hammonton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Judith Lee Cavuto, to James Robb Birle Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Birle of Greenwich, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cavuto, 33 years old, a registered nurse, is a clinical research manager for Sterling Winthrop Inc., a pharmaceuticals maker in Malvern, Pa.
She graduated from Thomas Jefferson University.
Her father is an electrician in Hammonton.


When Corporations Become Collectors
FROM the mid-1970's to the mid-80's, museum exhibitions of corporate art collections were nearly commonplace.
But they are rare today, and it is not because business has lost interest in the subject.
Far from it.
In the last decade, the number of companies acquiring art has gone from 300 to about 1,200, according to the Directory of Corporate Art Collections.


Commercial Property: Downtown Detroit; Hines Helps in Living Down a Disaster-Zone Image
IN the late 80's, when developers were pouring billions into commercial projects all over the country, David McGinnis, a vice president for development for the Hines Interests Limited Partnership of Houston, was struck by the repeated rejections of downtown Detroit as a development site.
Its disaster-zone image -- drugs, crime, race riots and decay -- had frightened off the smart money.
Even the Japanese were investing primarily in the suburbs, which were nearer to their American-based auto operations.
Compared with overpriced and overbuilt markets elsewhere, downtown began to look more and more like an out-of-favor stock.


Ravel's Piano Style: A Bermuda Triangle
Are performers ready to rediscover Ravel?
Of course, Ravel is the most popular composer of the century, and his works have survived years of use and abuse at the center of the piano and orchestral repertories.
Constant play has proved the durability of the music but has made it too easy to take its qualities for granted.
New piano recordings by Andre Laplante, Christopher O'Riley and Alexander Toradze show that for all its popularity, the music remains an elusive mixture of styles and sensibilities.
Critics have often assumed that Ravel's music is performer-proof.
"Play what you see," Ned Rorem instructs performers.
"The notes will take care of themselves." That advice is no more helpful for Ravel than for any other composer.
Virgil Thomson claimed that Ravel's music was self-evidently "about a nonromantic view of life . . . as if the 19th century had never, save for its technical discoveries, existed." So much for the Lisztian "Gaspard de la Nuit," and the evocations of Schubert, Chopin and Schumann in "Valses Nobles et Sentimentales."


Quilts Composed as 'Poems' in Cloth
MARILYN HENRION calls the quilts she composes "cloth poems." Bits of fabric take the place of words.
The 13 examples now on display at the Chauncey Gallery of the Educational Testing Service in Princeton resonate with rhythmic variations of shape, color and pattern.
For each one, she selected and sewed together dozens of colorful plain or printed pieces of cloth, much as a poet integrates the sounds and accents of syllables within a phrase.
Stitches of hand quilting add barely visible lines that crisscross the surface and furnish gentle undertones.


Q and A
A Hybrid Tenancy  Question: Two relatives (not husband and wife) are jointly listed on a lease as tenants in a rent-stabilized apartment in a building that was converted into a co-op several years ago.
The sponsor of the conversion, who did not sell all the apartments, is now offering them at substantially reduced prices to renters.
One of the two relatives in this tenancy wants to accept the offer, the other does not.
In such a case, would the nonpurchasing tenant have the right to continue his tenancy under rent stabilization? . . .
Itzhak Sharav, Manhattan


The Year That Was: Refinancing, Recession and War
With interest rates in last year's recession-battered economy at their lowest point since the seventies, many homeowners refinanced their mortgages.
At the same time, hundreds of thousands of lives were disrupted as the recession led to layoffs and a search for new jobs, and the Gulf War brought many into military service.
Following is a discussion of the tax consequences of these events, as well as of new concerns this year about the "kiddie tax," in light of changes on parents' returns.
Refinancing a Home
Tax professionals report a widespread misconception among homeowners: mortgage interest is deductible; therefore, any refinancing costs will be deductible, they believe.


Gauging Fitness For Active Trips
ONE prescription for a nightmare trip is a long bus tour that includes an obnoxious couple.
However, in desperation, you can always forfeit your money and go elsewhere.
In more rugged travel, there is often no escape: trekking requires that everyone be able to keep up without griping; paddlers on canoe trips cannot multiply themselves if one participant will not help in portaging.
Fortunately, as one trip leader said, "In adventure travel, almost everyone is on good behavior and wants to make a good impression."
Several outfitters interviewed for this column, all with a minimum of eight years of experience, could remember only one or two disasters created by participants.
All of these adventure-travel organizers said that when prospective clients phoned for information they paid close attention to the caller's concerns to identify people who should not go.
Medical forms are not often used, mostly because tour operators concur that doctors rely on their patients' assessments of their fitness.


Headliners; Alumnae Spirit
College officials launching campaigns to raise money from their graduates have long assumed that the biggest givers will be men.
This myth was put to rest recently when three women's colleges ranked among the four private liberal arts schools that had been most successful in raising money from alumni.
At the top of the list was Wellesley College, which recently completed a five-year campaign that raised $167 million, the largest fund-raising drive ever by a liberal arts college.
"It is just a myth that women don't give as much as men," said Nannerl O. Keohane, the president of Wellesley.
The other three schools, in descending order, were Smith College, Pomona College (a coeducational school), and Mount Holyoke.
Wellesley also ranked first in a survey by the Council for Aid to Education, which ranked colleges by the average amount donated per enrolled student in 1989-90.
Bryn Mawr, another women's college ranked third, behind Lafayette in Pennsylvania.


Miss Campbell Has Wedding
Elizabeth Lee Campbell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Campbell of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Wilmot, a son of Mrs.
Robert L. Wilmot of Pittsford, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Wilmot.
The Rev.
Wilson Brown officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Rochester.
Mrs.
Wilmot, 30 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Duke University.
She is a leasing agent with Wilmorite Inc., a real-estate development and management company in Rochester.
Her father, who is retired, was a national sales manager for Lord, Abbett Inc., a personal investment company in New York.


The Fatal Vortex: Collision of 3 Lives in East New York
They did familiar teen-age things.
Ian Moore liked to coat the neighborhood with his graffiti tag: "E-LO." The "E" stood for Ian and the "LO" for Polo, the brand of shirt he favored.
Tyrone Sinkler, called "Dizzy" for his loopy behavior, relished video games.
Like other skinny youths, Khalil Sumpter found himself intimidated and worried that he was being branded a punk.
But the familiar often leads to the exceptional in the ruthless surroundings in which they lived in Brooklyn's East New York section, a neighborhood recognizable by the crunching of crack vials beneath one's feet, the plentiful guns packed under youthful jackets, the crumbling housing that stifles hopes of opportunity.


Dwight L. Bolinger, 84, English Linguistics Expert
Dwight L. Bolinger, an English linguistics expert and scholar of Spanish language, died last Sunday at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 84 years old and lived in Palo Alto.
Dr. Bolinger died of cancer, his family said.


Warm Welcomes, Even for Strangers
IL Sogno in Hewlett has been a closely held secret in the Five Towns, its regular patrons having filled the elegant little Italian storefront every noon and night for the last two years.
Strangers were a rarity.
When I called for a reservation, as always using an alias, the person answering said, "You've never been here before." When we arrived, the maitre d'hotel greeted us with, "Is this your first visit?"
Despite our newcomer status, we received the same warm, heartfelt Italian welcome, as did valued regulars.


This Week
As weather permits, start cautiously removing winter mulch from perennial beds and protected shrubs or trees.
Remove salt hay or evergreen boughs in stages.
Don't prune spring-flowering shrubs or trees now (it eliminates flower buds), but do prune deciduous trees and shrubs.
Birches and maples should be fully leafed before branches are removed.


Review/Dance; Festival Presents Choreography by Men
Choreography by men was the focus of the second program of the Morningside Dance Festival on Thursday night at the Theater of the Riverside Church.
But that was about as unified as the evening ever got.
Andrew Jannetti started things off with "Ribbon of Dreams," a strangely purposeless-looking abstract piece to music by Toby Twining, danced by Barbara Crosio, Mr.
Janetti, Roxlyn Moret, Lauren Naslund, Jennifer Schmidt and Andi Wirz.
Sabatino Verlezza's "Principia" was a deft but somewhat rambling duet for himself and Nancy Lushington that was a good deal less lush than its melodic score by Delibes.
Richard Haisma offered a look at the split between restful nature and driving civilization in "Do Animals Meditate," a solo that needed editing but that had an engagingly wry ending.
It was danced by Mr.
Haisma to music he composed with David Parsons.
And Todd Goodman danced with a flame-haired gypsy of a woman in a wheelchair in "Gypsy," performed with Mary Verdi-Fletcher to music by the Gypsy Kings and Albeniz.


V.A.T. Refunds
To the Editor: The column on the dificulty of obtaining V.A.T. refunds states "these problems can be forestalled if the store accepts your credit card for a purchase and agrees to apply the V.A.T. as a credit to the card."
Unfortunately, in my case, this is a myth.
Upon leaving England on Oct. 5, after a two-week trip, I submitted the required stamped paperwork for the inspected goods, all purchased on my Visa card.
It is now Feb. 18 and only one of the three stores has credited my account with the V.A.T. due me.


TOM HARKIN'S OLD-TIME RELIGION
After noting that Tom Harkin has been credited with having backed legislation that "put the Democrats squarely in favor of 'restoring' morality in foreign policy," Miller continues: "But his protectionist and trade policies and isolationism -- he opposed the gulf war, aid to the Nicaraguan contras and American involvement in Central America -- have alienated several liberal activist Democrats. . . ." That's isolationism?
I would like to point out that although the President did a splendid job of muddying the debate over the gulf war, many people objected on moral, not isolationist, grounds.


Grace Farrell to Wed
May wedding plans have been announced for Grace Moore Farrell, a daughter of Mrs.
Clifton W. Ragsdale of Greenwich, Conn., and Duncan G. Farrell of Bethesda, Md., and Jonathan David Roemer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Roemer of Princeton, N.J.
Miss Farrell, 28 years old, is studying for a master's degree in urban planning at Columbia University.
Mr.
Roemer, 28, is a photographer in New York.
Both graduated from Wesleyan University.


Welles's 'Othello' Made Chaos Into an Art Form
On Sept. 12, 1955, "Othello," a film produced and directed by Orson Welles and based on the Shakespearean tragedy, opened at the Paris Theater in New York.
Reviewing it in The Times, Bosley Crowther wrote: "There are flashes of brilliant suggestion in this tumbled, slurred and helter-skelter film. But they add up to nothing substantial -- just a little Shakespeare and a lot of Welles."
Other critics concurred, as did the public.
After a brief run, the distributor, United Artists, withdrew "Othello" from release.


Mutual Funds; Closed-End Nuts and Bolts
Across the board, in both stocks and bonds, closed-end funds have solidly outperformed their close cousins, mutual funds, lately.
In 1991, closed-end stock funds handily surpassed the average stock mutual fund, returning 41 percent to the mutual funds' 30.7 percent.
Closed-end bond funds gained 33.3 percent last year, compared with 18.2 percent for bond mutual funds.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
I wonder if Kingsolver has ever,
traveling alone
, gone to the airport well ahead of departure time in order to secure the seat of her choice, only to be asked, after departure, to change her seat to accommodate a couple who arrived two minutes before boarding and couldn't get seats together.
The initial request from the flight attendant usually is polite; not so, the reaction to a polite refusal.
MARCIA BIKALES
New York, N.Y.


Miss Danforth Wed in Capital
Dorothy Duncan Danforth, a daughter of Senator and Mrs.
John C. Danforth of Newburg, Mo., and Washington, was married in Washington yesterday to Johannes Per Burlin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nils Henning Burlin of Stockholm and Luxembourg.
The Rev.
Francis Wade performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Burlin, 24 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is a law student at Georgetown University, as is her fiance.
Her father, a Republican, is the senior Senator from Missouri.
She is a granddaughter of the late Donald Danforth of St.
Louis, who was the chief executive of the Ralston-Purina Company.


TOKYO
Tokyo is not known for its greenery.
It has fewer parks per person than any major capital in the developed world.
But once you wander into one, not only the city but also the era melt away: Tokyo's best parks are reminiscent of an age when the tea ceremony was not an oddity and Zen had nothing to do with motorcycles.
Shinjuku Gyoen, in the midst of one of the city's busiest quarters, is a 145-acre park on the site once owned by a powerful feudal lord.
Designed in 1906, it is one of those odd mixtures of European elegance and Japanese esthetic that the Japanese do not find in the least jarring.


Adelphi Wants to Add 3,000 Resident Students
I would like to correct a statement in the otherwise fair and interesting piece on Adelphi University.
The article says, "In 1984, freshman English was taught entirely by adjunct faculty." Adjunct faculty have never been the exclusive teachers of freshman composition at Adelphi.
With two or three exceptions for administrative reasons, all full-time faculty teach freshman writing.
It is one way of making sure that we establish a connection early on between the entire English faculty, including senior professors, and the freshman class.
PETER P. FARLEY Chairman, English Department Adelphi University Garden City


New Haven Celebrates the Americas
THE Shubert Theater in New Haven is commemorating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's first voyage to the New World with a series of programs accenting the diverse artistic and musical achievements that have been developed in the Americas since the explorer's time.
The series has been designated an official project of the Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission.
Judith Lisi, executive director of the Shubert and coordinator of the series, "Celebration of the Americas: 1492-1992," said the programs will help raise money for several of New Haven's social-service organizations.


New York and Other Cities Diverge Over How to Help the Homeless
A decade ago, New York became the first city in the nation to provide shelter as a right to any and all who asked for it.
Only a handful of cities followed, and recently some of them have begun to draw their open doors shut.
Now as New York seeks to remake a $350-million-a-year shelter system that is widely regarded as profoundly flawed, it is again embarking on a path unlike that of any other city, researchers on homelessness say.


Fire on Ship Ends Cruise To Bangkok
The 371 passengers aboard the Ocean Pearl of Pearl Cruises were taken ashore in Bali after a fire in the engine room Feb. 12 knocked out the vessel's power.
The cruise line said that no one was hurt.
The Ocean Pearl, which had begun a 13-day Bali, Bangkok and Beyond cruise from Singapore the previous day and was en route to Jakarta, Indonesia, was towed back to Singapore.
A spokesman for Pearl Cruises in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said the line was awaiting damage reports from Singapore before determining the ship's future schedule.
An Ocean Pearl cruise to Singapore that was due to leave Bangkok on Feb. 24 was canceled.
The passengers were at their muster stations for about three hours while the fire was put out, the spokesman said.
They had dinner and remained on board overnight before they and their luggage were transferred by tender the next morning to the Sea Princess of P &amp; O Cruises, which was on the way to Jakarta on an around-the-world voyage.
The Sea Princess landed the passengers in Bali on Feb. 15.
The P &amp; O vessel, which has a capacity for 714 passengers, had enough empty cabins, according to a Pearl Cruises official, to accommodate the disabled ship's passengers and some of her crew.
The Ocean Pearl was off the coast of Sumatra, Indonesia, when the fire broke out.


Jennifer Lennard Is Married to Greg Gutbezahl
Jennifer Lennard, the daughter of Stephen Lennard and Topaz Lennard, both of New York, was married yesterday to Greg Michael Gutbezahl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Gutbezahl of Albany.
The Rev.
Allen Jenne, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Sung Hai restaurant in New York.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
Does Kingsolver believe that the "forty-something New Yorker traveling alone" should have relinquished the seat if she didn't want to?
I hope not.
I've seen several situations -- also on airplanes -- in which parents acted as if they deserved special consideration because they were traveling with a child.
One woman assumed she would receive her meal first; another assumed that the passenger sitting next to her wouldn't mind if her child lay down across both of their laps.
Do I think the other airline passengers should accept a "collective responsibility" for those children?
Hardly.
Does this mean that I don't love children.
Of course not.
NANCY MUELLER
Seattle


What the Voters Say About Abortion
Sue Bartczak  [ Letter to the Editor, Feb. 9 ]  believes that public funding of abortion apparently should be given a very high priority in any governmental budget.
Unfortunately, Ms.
Bartczak fails to understand the will of the voters in both Nassau and Suffolk Counties, particularly as it relates to the abortion issue.
Specifically, in two recent major campaigns in which abortion had been made the premiere issue by pro-abortion leaders, such as Ms.
Bartczak, the Right-to-Life-endorsed candidates won handily on both occasions.
They included the 1989 Nassau County District Attorney race and the most recent contest for County Executive of Suffolk County (1991).


Political Talk
Tuneup for the Real Thing?
Picture this: A deadlocked convention, a jammed meeting hall, hundreds of delegates and supporters clamoring for Tsongas, Clinton or Kerrey.
No one knows who the nominee will be.
And then, a moment of high drama.
Up to the microphone, to deliver the keynote address, strides Mario M. Cuomo.


Why Handel Shifted Gears
To the Editor:
There was much of interest in Matthew Gurewitsch's article on semi-staged opera, "Opera Heard, Not Seen (Much)"  [ Feb. 9 ] .
But while Mr.
Gurewitsch is correct in describing Handel's oratorios as dramatic works, "operas in all but name," he is wide of the mark on the reason why Handel's main output changed suddenly in mid-career from opera to oratorio.


Images of God
To the Editor:
Sarah Boxer, in her interview with Abraham Pais (Jan. 26), the author of "Niels Bohr's Times," highlights Mr.
Pais's contrast between Albert Einstein and Bohr.
Mr.
Pais told her: "Einstein is a typical Old Testament figure, with the Jehovah-type attitude that there is a law and one must find it. Bohr is a New Testament figure -- more tolerant, in an intellectual way." Mr.
Pais went on to say that sometimes he took Bohr's side.


Does She Speak for Today's Women? -- Patricia Ireland, President of NOW
With fist raised and eyes hard as flint, Patricia Ireland will lead an angry army of women down Pennsylvania Avenue in April.
They will be protesting an assault on abortion rights, defying a conservative judiciary and a hostile Administration and telling America that the National Organization for Women is tired of hearing that feminism is a dusty relic or a dirty word.
It will be a hard sell on all counts for the new president of NOW.
A former airline stewardess and corporate lawyer, Ireland has taken the reins of the country's largest and most prominent women's rights group at a time of national anxiety about gender issues, the feminist movement and the organization itself.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 16 about the film designer Anton Furst misstated the movie credits of Beverly D'Angelo.
She did not appear in "Tender Mercies."


Review/Cabaret; Annie Ross in Solo Mode
Annie Ross, who is best known as the high voice in the trio of Lambert, Hendricks and Ross, sang the trumpet parts in their vocalization of jazz instrumental arrangements in the late 1950's.
But that is just one aspect of her talents.
She is a sensitive singer of ballads, a sly comedian, a lusty cabaret performer and a writer of song lyrics as well as an established actress in straight roles in theater and movies.
Her show at Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, where she opened a six-night engagement on Tuesday, was a tightly paced, skillfully developed display of her versatility.
Opening with a bit of her Lambert, Hendricks and Ross repertory -- the fast, tongue-twisting "Cloudburst" -- she was off in high gear, hitting the words with clarity and precision as she moved from one of the trio's voices to another.
In this song as well in her own challenging lyrics to "Twisted" and the slower but no less daunting Brazilian and Welsh place names that Stephen Sondheim scattered through his parody of bossa nova, "The Boy from . . . ," she was in flawless command.


The Executive Computer; The Quest for the Longer-Lasting Battery for Portables
Computer makers believe that what traveling executives really need is a fully functional computer, weighing no more than seven pounds, that can last through an entire cross-country flight on a single battery, or through a full business day.
Indeed, the cross-country flight has become something of a holy grail.
Now, the elusive target is coming into view.
New semiconductors, software and battery technology promise to double the battery life of notebook computers to six hours or more, rather than the current two hours to five.


V.A.T. Refunds
To the Editor: At least one British store has found a simple way of rebating the 17.5 percent value added tax to overseas visitors.
Last December my wife purchased several items at Westaway, a Scottish apparel retailer in London.
We paid only the tax-free price and signed a credit card voucher for the amount of the V.A.T.
The store manager asked us to have the tax rebate form he gave us validated inside the customs area at our departure and deposit it in the mailbox next to the customs desk.
Upon receiving the validated form the store would destroy our credit-card slip.


Men and Women Replacing the Paperboy of Tradition
The paperboy, a centuries-old symbol of youthful enterprise, is growing up.
Changes in the newspaper industry over the last decade, as well as demographic shifts and the recession, have pushed more adults into the business of delivering daily newspapers, a job once dominated by 12-year-olds.


Once Again, Repair Crews Rush In
Swiss folklore holds that people are driven mad each spring by the Fohn, the hot wind that blows in from the south, melting the Alpine snows.
If the Fohn has a counterpart in America, it is undoubtedly the hot air emanating from Capitol Hill, where legislation to change the nation's tax laws is, once again, being debated.
"Americans are fed up with constant changes, which affect any long-range planning," said Joel S. Isaacson, who is in charge of personal financial planning at Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York certified public accounting firm.
That is particularly true, Mr.
Isaacson added, when the changes are "politically driven and ill-conceived."


Public &amp; Private; To Defray Expenses
"They are the children who fall out of their perambulators when the nurse is looking the other way. If they are not claimed in seven days they are sent far away to the Neverland to defray expenses."
The Lost Boys made news.
The television crews and the newspaper reporters went to that Neverland called East New York to take note of the fact that one of them, aged 15, had allegedly shot and killed two others in a high school hallway in what classmates called a "beef." This means a disagreement.


Mix-up


Coins
Currency Art
A trompe l'oeil painting tricks the eye but not the mind, or at least that's the way it's supposed to work.
But for more than a century American trompe l'oeil artists using currency as their inspiration have found themselves caught between the dictates of art and law.


Talking: Damage; Apartment Repairs: Who Pays?
THE question of who must pay for repairs to a rented apartment -- the landlord or the tenant -- has long been controversial.
Tenants say landlords are dilatory in making needed repairs.
For their part, landlords complain that tenants, especially in rent-regulated areas like New York City, resist paying for repairs made necessary by their own negligence.


Marni Schwartz Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Schwartz of Old Brookville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marni Alison Schwartz, to Samuel Harvey Gaer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gaer of Paramus, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Schwartz, 25 years old, is an associate with the New York law firm of Samuels &amp; Grossman.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a J.D. from Brooklyn Law School.
Her parents are the president and vice president of the International Newspaper Printing Company in Long Island City, Queens.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
Kingsolver's charming essay rings true in many respects.
We Spaniards do indeed dote on children, with unabashed enthusiasm; our prandial habits are certainly of the late-night variety, and, yes, we are unlikely to engage in the mile-high carryings-on she so distressingly encountered.
A.
JAMES VAZQUEZ-AZPIRI
New York, N.Y.


Italian Tours: Food and Art
Cooking, art treasures and Palladian villas are the subjects of three tours in Italy.
La Cucina Italiana is the title of the seven-day cooking courses to be held in Bologna by the International Cooking School of Italian Food and Wine.
Four formal classes of four to six hours each in a modern restaurant kitchen and accommodations and breakfasts at the Hotel Roma near the city's food market are included in the cost of $2,550 a person, double occupancy (air fare not included).
Restaurant meals and a day in Venice are also provided.
The courses begin July 11, Sept. 19 and Oct. 10.
A four-day course on wines and truffles priced at $1,850 will begin Oct. 17.
Information: International Cooking School of Italian Food and Wine, 300 East 33d Street, New York, N.Y 10016; (212) 779-1921.


Little Village Makes This Old World New
The words are about women, cars and dives; the music rarely uses more than three guitar chords.
From those rock-and-roll fundamentals, Little Village concocts songs that can swagger and cackle and twang, twist a perfect bit of wordplay, then reveal unguarded longing and pain.
Little Village is the band that made John Hiatt's breakthrough album, "Bring the Family," with Ry Cooder on guitars, Nick Lowe on bass and Jim Keltner on drums abetting Hiatt's vocals.
This time, the whole band collaborated on songwriting, making the songs slightly less private in tone and winding the rhythms a little tighter.


Judith Riven, Editor, to Wed
Judith Riven and Ed Goldman, New York publishing executives, were married yesterday in New York.
Judge Stephen G. Crane, a justice of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, performed the ceremony at the Chanterelle restaurant.
The bride is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Moe Riven, and the groom's parents are Sam Goldman of Glen Head, L.I., and Anne Hertz of Boca Raton, Fla.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2
Special Today: Your Taxes/Section 3


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
REIMAGINING AMERICAN THEATER By Robert Brustein. Hill &amp; Wang, $25.


The First Crusades


Pruning Takes Skill and the Right Tools
FOR those who have an acute case of cabin fever, there is a cure: pruning.
Not every plant in every garden will need pruning at this time of year.
But there may be woody plants on the grounds that need a trim or two to provide outdoor activity that may relieve indoor blues.
Several precautions should be taken before getting to work.
The most important is to tackle only those plants that can be safely pruned from the ground.


U.S. MOVES TO BAR AMERICANS' BUYING SOVIET TECHNOLOGY
The Bush Administration has quietly blocked the purchase of missiles, rocket engines, satellites, space reactors, spacecraft and other aerospace technology from the former Soviet Union, Federal and industry officials said last week.
The Federal officials said their opposition to the purchases is part of an Administration policy intended to force the Russian space and military industry into such a decline that it poses no future threat to the United States.


Caught in Time
What makes the 88 black-and-white photographs in ELIOT PORTER'S SOUTHWEST (John Macrae/Holt, Paper, $29.95) so moving is not how they show the sheer starkness of the American Southwest (though they do that), or how they evoke the feeling of the country at midcentury (though they also do that), but rather how they catch the particularity of a single place at a single time.
Eliot Porter, who died in 1990 at the age of 88, became a photographer when he was 38, a few years after he met Alfred Stieglitz.
Though Porter's color photographs are now far better known (indeed, this is the only one of his books that is not in color), it was his black-and-white work that captured Stieglitz's attention, and it is not hard to see why.
In these photographs of the ranches, graveyards, canyons, mines, churches, mesas and forlorn streets of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah and Arizona, taken between 1939 and 1963, the resolution is almost eerie.
How is it possible that in a photograph of a miner's house in Leadville, Colo., one can see not only the splintering planks of the house but also the individual shoots of the weeds in front of it and the stones of the mountain of scree behind?
It is a more than human view, and there is something almost sad about it.
Even if one had lived in that second, much of the detail would have been lost.
One can see that
this
was the way
that
moment looked in all its unrecognized fullness.


Action in Noriega Trial Shifts Outside Courtroom
The trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is concluding its sixth month with a burst of unusual activity outside the courtroom.
But inside the chamber, lawyers for both sides seem reluctant to stray from what has become a predictable and slow-moving routine.
For the second consecutive week, jurors have been patiently watching videotaped depositions taken in a Panamanian prison in late January from three of General Noriega's subordinates.
Out of the jury's earshot, though, lawyers for the deposed Panamanian leader are complaining that Panama's current civilian government is persecuting those witnesses and a fourth former military official whose testimony they regard as essential.


Deaths Cast Shadow on Vote in Yugoslav Republic
Overnight bombings and two shooting deaths raised tensions today in the ethnically mixed Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina as voters began casting ballots in a two-day referendum on independence.
A Muslim Slav and a Serb were reportedly shot dead at a roadblock run by Serbs near the central Bosnian town of Travnik on Friday night.
Bombings were reported in Maglaj and Banja Luka, and gangs of armed Serbs and Croats jammed traffic by blocking roads in several areas.


Beyond Productivity
To the Editor:
If productivity is the issue ("Attention America! Snap Out of It"), we should ask whether its traditional definition is still relevant.
"Output per worker" says nothing about how well you're serving the customer.
What good is high productivity if customers don't want your products?
Or they question your quality?
Or they can't get a straight answer when they ask about delivery?


Jessica Kovar Wed in Boston
Jessica Anne Kovar, the daughter of Barbara Kovar of Newton Center, Mass., and the late Edward Kovar, was married last evening in Boston to Mark Sigmund Lichtenstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Lichtenstein of New York.
Rabbi Seth Bernstein performed the ceremony at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Lichtenstein, 30 years old, is an editor at HarperCollins in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her mother is the executive director of Family Service of Dedham, a social-work agency in Massachusetts.
Her father was a public-health planner for the Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs.


Review/Music; 2 Philharmonic Bills Conducted by Masur
The New York Philharmonic is younger than the Vienna Philharmonic by only a few months, though here in the New World we tend to think of our native orchestras as youthful arrivistes, unburdened and unassisted by long traditions.
But by one of those accidental juxtapositions musical life occasionally offers, these two 150-year-old orchestras played in New York this week.
And with our local Philharmonic under the sure hand of its new Old World maestro, Kurt Masur, the organizations seemed closer in temperament and accomplishment than I would have suspected.
This was partly because in two concerts, Mr.
Masur proved that in a relatively brief time, he has helped the New York players produce a robust, almost European sound.
There was no sentimentality or strain in the playing.
And a stylistic signature seems to have developed in Mr.
Masur's conducting as well, heard in singing, well-articulated bass lines that give a strong foundation to the rest of the ensemble.


Recent Harvest


Double Exposure
To the Editor:
In his article "Leo Castelli in His 85th Year: A Lion in Winter"  [ Feb. 16 ] , Paul Taylor states that "five of Mr. Castelli's sculptors" -- Claes Oldenburg, Richard Serra, Donald Judd, John Chamberlain and Dan Flavin -- "are now at Pace Gallery." Although I show with Pace Gallery, I have never left the Leo Castelli Gallery and have no intention of doing so.
RICHARD SERRA New York Mr.
Taylor replies: Although Mr.
Serra may not have left the Leo Castelli Gallery, he has, for five years, been represented by the Pace Gallery.


Chatanika Journal; The Theater Is Freezing, But the Show Is Dazzling
At 3 A.M., a group of Japanese tourists stamped their feet on the hard snow and pointed to the Alaskan sky.
It was 35 below zero, and some of the visitors were on their honeymoon.
Without warning, an arc of green and white light appeared overhead -- show time.
The light band split into a fork, then rippled over the horizon, the curtain call of another grand display of the aurora borealis, or northern lights, in the bush country north of Fairbanks and close to the Arctic Circle.


NEW DELHI
Not far from the chaotic jumble of New Delhi, in a quiet residential district, lies an expanse of lawn, groves of exotic trees and a scattering of 15th-and-16th century monuments from the era of the Delhi sultanate.
Once a burial ground for Muslim rulers, this spacious area was transformed during the British raj into an English-style landscaped garden called Lady Willingdon Park.
Now known as Lodi Gardens, the park is landscaped with gently rolling lawns, a classical English hub-and-spoke rose garden and a profusion of trees and shrubbery -- stands of bamboo, groves of casuarinas, huge badam trees and bulbous royal palms.
Walkways are edged with begonias, pinks and marigolds.
But it is the magnificent tombs that give the garden its atmosphere of gentle antiquity.


ATTACKS IN KENYA: SAFARI TO DANGER?
A new spate of violence against foreign visitors in Kenya's game parks is threatening to undermine the financially strapped country's biggest earner of hard currency, tourism.
Most alarming has been a series of incidents in a popular and accessible wildlife reserve, the Masai Mara, an area 125 miles or so southwest of Nairobi, where tourists riding in mini-vans can easily photograph lions, elephants and other wildlife.


Bush Sees Progress, but U.S. Report Sees Surge in Drug Production
Two days after President Bush declared that the United States was making "significant progress" in the war against drugs, the State Department has reported sharp increases in worldwide production of the raw materials for cocaine and heroin.
While acreage under cultivation for cocaine has declined slightly, the State Department estimated in a report released late Friday that the volume of coca leaf, from which cocaine is extracted, actually rose 8.2 percent in 1991.


26 Teams Have Questions to Be Answered, So Let the Games Begin
Buck Showalter is the sixth manager the Yankees have had in six springs, but he is not alone in directing his team through spring training for the first time.
Twelve other managers have that status -- six who took over their teams during last season and six who, like Showalter, are just beginning their tenures.
Furthermore, eight general managers were not in their positions a year ago.
It is an unprecedented turnover from one spring to the next, indicating that the price of losing -- more precisely, not winning -- grows in direct proportion to the escalation of club payrolls.


Canceled Ticket
To the Editor: In September I purchased nonrefundable round trip American Airlines tickets from New York to New Orleans for $258.
About 10 days before my flight Nov. 23, I found I would be unable to use the first portion of my ticket.
So I called the American 800 number and told the agent I was unable to use the first portion.
The agent told me that the ticket could not be used by my niece, as I wished, but did not inform me that if I didn't use the outgoing ticket the return portion would be invalidated.
On Nov. 29, the day before my return flight, I called to confirm my reservations and was informed that my ticket had been canceled.
The agent and supervisor I spoke to told me brusquely that I would have to buy a new one-way ticket at full cost to get back to New York.
It appears that I was considered a "no-show" when actually I had informed the agent that I would only be using the return portion of my ticket.


Regina Conlon To Wed in May
Regina Elizabeth Conlon and John F. Tratnyek are engaged to be married in May.
Miss Conlon, 25 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree from Columbia University Teachers College.
She teaches mathematics and social studies at the Ursuline School, a private girls' school in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Elizabeth Trust Conlon of Crestwood, N.Y., a psychologist for the New Rochelle Board of Education, and the late John M. Conlon, a lawyer for Consolidated Edison in New York.


Miss Bainbridge Is Wed in Alabama
Philippa McClellan Bainbridge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank M. Bainbridge of Birmingham, Ala., was married there yesterday to Michael Straus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Straus of South Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Hugh Agricola performed the Episcopal ceremony at Cathedral Church of the Advent.
Mrs.
Straus, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Alabama and its law school.
Her father is a partner in the Birmingham law firm of Bainbridge, Mims &amp; Rogers.


POSTINGS: New School Simulator; Gauging a Project's Effects
In coming years, the most striking changes in the New York City landscape will be fashioned not by cranes but by computers and cameras.
The Environmental Simulation Center of the New School for Social Research opened Thursday at 65 Fifth Avenue, between 14th and 13th Streets, under the direction of Michael Kwartler.
Its purpose is "to inform the manner in which the planning process governs physical development in New York City" and around the country.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A J.P. Morgan Brownstone and a Hospital for Italians
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
A Gift From J.P. Morgan?
Q.
My landlord tells me that my building at 108 East 37th Street was built as a wedding gift from J. P. Morgan to his daughter.
A walking tour guide told me the front of the building was actually construction-grade brick exposed when the brownstone facing was taken off.
Are they both right? . . .
Ann Shoemaker Maloney, Manhattan.


THE GUIDE
EARLY MOZART
Thomas Crawford's Fairfield Orchestra, now 11 years old, will perform on Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Concert Hall at Norwalk City Hall, following its debut at Lincoln Center on Wednesday evening as part of the Mozart Bicentennial series.
The 26-member period instrument ensemble will also release its first recording on the Music Masters label this summer.


Behind Half a Million Petitions, One Happy Printer
In their struggle to gather the 10,000 signatures needed under New York State's cumbersome election law to win a place on the New York primary ballot, the five major Democratic Presidential candidates, and two minor ones, circulated half a million petitions around the state in the last month.
The process is a nightmare for candidates and political operatives.


New &amp; Noteworthy
BLACK ICE, by Lorene Cary. (Vintage, $10.) For more than a century St.
Paul's, a boarding school in New Hampshire, was all white, all rich and all male.
In 1972 Lorene Cary, a black teen-ager from Philadelphia, was invited inside its doors.
She describes the experience in what our reviewer, Phillip Lopate, last year called a "stunning memoir . . . an extraordinarily honest, lively and appealing book."
TYPICAL AMERICAN, by Gish Jen. (Plume, $10.) When Lai Fu left China for America, he intended to study engineering and then return.
But with the rise of Communism back home and the lure of capitalism in the United States, Ralph Chang, as he now was called, found himself with a house in the suburbs and a fast-food chicken business, delighting in the trappings of the American dream.
"No paraphrase could capture the intelligence of Gish Jen's prose, its epigrammatic sweep and swiftness," A. G. Mojtabai said here when this novel was published last year.
"The author just keeps coming at you, line after stunning line."


Headliners; Doing Well
When employees at companies across the country agree to earmark a percentage of their salaries for the United Way, they probably don't intend for any of the money to pay for rides on the Concorde, chauffeured limousines and an annual salary and benefits package of nearly half a million dollars for the charity's national director.
Actually only 1,400 of the 2,100 local chapters send about 1 cent of each dollar they collect to the national office in Alexandria, Va., but after recent reports of the lavish style of United Way of America's president, William Aramony, many chapter leaders said they would pay no more dues until he was removed.
Last week United Way announced that they had accepted Mr.
Aramony's "thoughtful and sensitive offer to retire immediately." Some members of the national board defended Mr.
Aramony, noting that he had raised some $35 billion during his tenure.
The new acting president, Alan S. Cooper, earns $140,000 as senior vice president.


MEASLES OUTBREAK IN SOUTHERN TEXAS
Health officials in south Texas are reporting the first measles outbreak of the year, the latest in a series of recurrences of the disease since 1989.
Since mid-December, 325 cases have been confirmed in a dozen southern counties, with 200 of the cases in coastal Corpus Christi, the state health department said this week.
Most of the cases are children.


At Work; When Employers Rule by Whim
Matt Darcy managed to live for 31 years ignorant of the doctrine of at-will employment, the notion that an employer exerts near-omnipotent control over an employee's continued employment.
Then in January Mr.
Darcy, a car salesman in Garden City, Mich., told the CBS correspondent Lesley Stahl on "60 Minutes" that he bases his purchases on quality not provenance: "If America makes a good product, I buy it," he said.
"If they don't, I buy what's good for my money." For his candor, Mr.
Darcy's employer fired him.
Experts in employment law say Mr.
Darcy may have cause to be outraged at the dismissal -- but little ability to translate his outrage into legal action against his employer, Gordon Chevrolet in Garden City, Mich.
"Honesty will get you into trouble every time," said Joseph Golden, an employment lawyer in Southfield, Mich., a Detroit suburb.


A May Wedding For Ms. Conrad
Dr.
Edward H. Conrad of Freeport, L.I., and Rona H. Conrad of Mount Vernon, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Abby Francesca Conrad to Mark Gordon Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter G. Smith of Somerville, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Conrad, 26 years old, is a project director at the NPD Group, a market research company in Port Washington, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Union College and received an M.B.A., also cum laude, from Boston University.
Her father is a psychologist and the director of the Whitman Institute for Counseling and Psychotherapy in Brooklyn.
Her mother, a psychologist, is chairman of the Committee on Preschool Special Education for the Mount Vernon school district.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Winter's Consolations
Q.
My garden looks bare now, and I wondered if you could suggest plants to add in spring to make it look better next winter.
Francine Liu, Brooklyn.


Economists Assess Loss of G.M. Jobs
THE current rate of local unemployment will probably exceed 6 percent shortly, and newly released reports cite a loss of 10,400 jobs in the county over the last year.
Westchester not only continues to feel the current effects of the recession, economists and labor analysts say, but is expected to feel the pain for many months to come.
With the announcement last week that General Motors, the county's third-largest employer, will close its North Tarrytown assembly plant in the summer of 1995, analysts projected tough times ahead for 2,500 auto workers who live in Westchester and whose skills may be too specialized to be easily transferable.
Only International Business Machines and Nynex employ more workers locally than the automaker.


Style Makers; Anya Hindmarch, Handbag Designer
Anya Hindmarch was studying Italian in Florence when she noticed that a drawstring leather duffel bag was all the rage among fashionable women.
Miss Hindmarch, 18 years old at the time, borrowed $1,000 to import some bags to England.
She sold 500 by mail through a fashion magazine, enough to propel her into business.
Now, at 23, it is her handbags that are all the rage in London, New York, Japan, France and Italy.


'Glass Sheathing'
To the Editor:
I was intrigued by your article on Jan. 5 headed "Glass Sheathing for Open Cages" about a very interesting project to soon start at the old "Tweed" Courthouse.
The antiquated manual elevators were to be automated and enclosed with a glass shaft.
The wrought-iron elevator doors were to be glazed.
The concept to keep the old designs, while providing improved service, was very good.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
New Britain, Conn. 138,000
329 Francis Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, lower-level family room, 50- by 140-foot lot; taxes $2,537.
Simsbury, Conn. 122,500
25 Barry Lane  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; expansion attic, hardwood floors; eat-in kitchen, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,877.
Vernon, Conn. 137,000
44 Scott Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; remodeled kitchen, deck, zoned heating, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,135.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 814,500
10 Sheldrake Lane
7-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; 3 fireplaces, library, butler's pantry, playroom, 1.5 acres; taxes $15,712.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 412,500
Major Lockwood Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 29-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, library, dining room, screened porch, pool, 2.25 acres; taxes $6,793.
Purdys, N.Y. 331,500
135C Fox Den Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, lake rights, 1 acre; taxes $7,474.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 276,000
19 Aspen Circle
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; underground sprinkler system, walk-in closets; taxes $5,493.
Howell, N.J. 112,500
16 Charles Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, fenced yard, patio, porch; taxes $2,530.
Farmingdale, L.I. 160,000
5 Ivy Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,500.


Tax Bills and a Capital Gains Cut Turn Into Capitol Games
The Congressional debate over growth and taxes suggests that there may be a way to balance the Federal budget after all.
It cannot be found in the hundreds of pages of the bill the Democrats pushed through the House, nor in the Bush Administration program the House rejected.
But actions by Congress and the White House in recent weeks suggest that a lot of money could be raised by just one more violation of the "no new taxes" rule, a tax on political gamesmanship.
Consider just a few examples:
The ploys began with Mr.
Bush proposing that Congress put aside partisanship and pass a cut in capital gains taxes, which has been one of the most partisan issues in Washington for years.


Discovering the Ruby-Red Juice and Pulp of Blood Oranges
AMERICANS have been slow to discover blood oranges.
With their ruby-red juice and pulp, they are dramatic looking, a little frightening to slice into.
In Europe, people eat them plain or have the juice for breakfast (there is nothing like it).
The oranges also make beautiful tarts and superb sauces, especially good for seafood.
Sicily produces the best blood oranges.
They are very dark and have a pleasant, slightly bitter flavor.
They are now in season until late spring and can be found in specialty stores or markets with good produce departments.
Some of them have reddish skins; some look like regular oranges (until you open them up).
Their hue is affected by their exposure to sun on the tree; it does not indicate anything about the quality.


Yale Newman Dies; Ex-Reporter Was 68
Yale Newman, a pioneer in international television news and a former Foreign Service officer, died on Monday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 68 years old.
He died of amyloidosis, a disease that attacks the body's tissues and organs, a family member said.


Officials Study New School Near Site of Students' Deaths
The Brooklyn neighborhood around troubled Thomas Jefferson High School is the likely site for one of 10 alternative high schools being planned throughout the city.
Under a community group's proposal, now being studied by the Board of Education, the new school would siphon up to 600 students from Jefferson as early as July 1993 and ultimately result in Jefferson's overhaul.


A Haunt of the Bloomsbury Group
The premiere of a dramatization by Patrick Garland of the correspondence between Vita Sackville-West and Virginia Woolf will be presented at the annual Charleston Arts Festival at Charleston Farmhouse in East Sussex, England, former home of the artists Duncan Grant and Vanessa Bell, and a focal point for members of the Bloomsbury Group.
The festival is from May 20 to 24 and the play will be performed May 24 at 6 P.M.
Eileen Atkins, who recently toured the United States in her one-woman show as Virginia Woolf in "A Room of One's Own," will appear with a co-star yet to be announced.
Tickets for the play are about $22, which includes a tour of the house and drinks before the performance.


A Museum That Goes Where It's Needed
WHAT if an art museum invited you to touch everything in sight and you didn't have to walk and talk quietly or listen to lectures that made you feel you could never make anything as good as what you saw there if you lived a thousand years?
What if you went to an art museum for the first time in your life and had so much fun learning about shapes and colors and patterns and styles that you couldn't wait to go back?


Judicious Activism; Justice Thomas Hits the Ground Running
From the junior Justice's traditional seat at the end of the Supreme Court bench, Clarence Thomas watches the proceedings in the courtroom in nearly complete silence.
Only rarely does he join the other Justices in questioning the attorneys arguing before the Court.
While others may tip their hand in the course of lively debate, Justice Thomas gives no clue to what he is thinking.
But Justice Thomas has displayed no such diffidence when it comes to deciding cases.
His first four months on the Court offer significant clues about the kind of Justice he intends to be.
Through his votes and his written opinions, he has already defined himself more clearly than he did in a week of fencing with the Senate Judiciary Committee last September.


Endorsement for Bush Collapses in California
President Bush's re-election campaign, already worried about his prospect in the California primary on June 2, ran afoul today of that state's muddled political situation and abandoned an effort to win a formal endorsement from the California Republican Party.
The chaotic series of events that led to the collapse of the endorsement effort provided another embarrassment for Mr.
Bush's campaign and another opportunity for Patrick J. Buchanan, the Republican challenger, to portray Mr.
Bush as confused and weak.


Trained on Home Offices: Secret Weapon 8829
The Internal Revenue Service, which has long considered home-office deductions an area of abuse, is getting tougher in its fight against them, despite some court setbacks, tax professionals say.
This year it has introduced a new weapon, Form 8829, which taxpayers must use to claim the deduction.
"They have a lot of audit traps hidden right in the form," Sidney Kess, a New York tax lawyer and accountant, said at a recent continuing education conference sponsored by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.


Despite Agreement, Haitians Express Pessimism
For a long, uneasy moment Friday afternoon, even as workers still labored under a punishing sun to nail together carnival reviewing stands, many who milled around to watch wondered if there really could be a celebration of this holiday in Haiti this year.
Many in the small crowd grumbled that the traditional five-day pre-Lenten festival bore little resemblance to a celebration.
Policemen carrying machine guns were mounted atop the two floats emblazoned in glitter with the word "Unity," and dozens of other policemen and soldiers sternly herded the revelers assembled around the Champs de Mars.


Social Events
About Fathers
March 2 -- Dr.
Kyle D. Pruett, a clinical professor of psychiatry at the Yale University Child Study Center and author of "The Nurturing Father," will lead a panel discussion on fatherhood.
The evening at Christie's, Park Avenue at 59th Street, opens with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail party.
It benefits the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services and the Child Development Center.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 582-9100, extension 266.
Children with AIDS
March 3 -- "One Great Party" at the HMV Music Superstore, 86th Street and Lexington Avenue, will raise funds for the Program for Children With AIDS, which provides counseling and care.
Starting at 8 P.M., there will be drinks, desserts and a show.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 746-3326.
YMCA Benefit
March 3 -- The programs for teen-agers at the YMCA of Greater New York will benefit from a dinner and auction of sports memorabilia in the rotunda of Madison Square Garden at 5:30 P.M.
It will be followed by the Knicks-Mavericks game, with a special half-time exhibition.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 986-5448.
Provincetown Fund Raiser
March 3 -- The Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown, Mass., will benefit from a multi-media exhibition and cocktail party at the Midtown Payson Galleries, 745 Fifth Avenue at 57th Street, from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $75, at the door; (508) 487-9960.
Dinner at Home
March 3 -- Dinners in the Manhattan homes of committee members of the Visiting Nurse Service of New York, followed by a performance of "Private Lives," will benefit the service.
Transportation from the homes to the Broadhurst Theater will be provided.
Tickets, $250; $125 or $175 for the performance alone, from (212) 794-9200.
Scientific Inspiration
March 3 -- Five Nobel Laureates will be honored at a black-tie dinner at the New York Hall of Science in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
The evening, which starts with cocktails at 7 P.M., will benefit the Science Career Ladder program, which trains city students to become science teachers and professionals.
Starting at 6:30 P.M., buses will leave for the Hall of Science from the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, and return trips will be made after the 8:45 P.M. dinner.
Tickets, $300, $400 and $500; (718) 699-0005.
Humanitarian Award
March 3 -- Joseph A. Pollicino, vice chairman of the CIT Group, a financial-industrial concern, will receive the National Jewish Humanitarian Award at a dinner at the Grand Hyatt starting with cocktails at 6 P.M.
The evening will benefit the National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine in Denver.
Tickets, $400; (212) 382-0711.
Dance Company Benefit
March 3 -- The Doug Elkins Dance Company will hold a benefit performance followed by a party at the Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street.
Performance at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $40, at the door; (212) 228-2071.
Happy Birthday, Mrs.
Astor
March 5 -- Brooke Astor will celebrate her 90th birthday with a party in the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue at 67th Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment that will include the Marie Brooks Caribbean Dance Theater.
Guests' dance begins at 9:30 P.M.
The evening will benefit the Citizens Committee for New York City, which supports neighborhood organizations throughout the city.
The dinner is black tie, but those in business attire may attend the dance.
Tickets, $500, or $50 for the dance alone; (212) 685-1095.
Puerto Rican Families
March 5 -- The Puerto Rican Family Institute will hold its annual fund-raising event at the Grand Hyatt starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200; (212) 924-5216.
Pediatric Health Care
March 5 -- A black-tie dinner and dance at the Plaza, held by the Children's Miracle Network, will benefit pediatric health-care programs at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Rich Little will perform and act as host with Carolyn Sapp, Miss America.
Tickets, $300; (212) 737-9010.
Aid for Harlem
March 5 -- For 33 years, the Little Sisters of the Assumption have provided social and health services to families in East Harlem through the L.S.A.
Family Health Service.
A benefit for the work of the Roman Catholic order will be held at the Marriott Marquis, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M., then dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $175; (212) 289-6484.
Junior League Benefit
March 6 -- The New York Junior League's Winter Ball to honor outstanding volunteers and benefit the league's charitable activities will be at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 8 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $140 for cocktails, dinner and dancing or $65 for dancing only (at 9:30 P.M.) from (212) 288-6220, extension 267.
At the door, $75 for dancing only.
Opera Ball
March 7 -- The Metropolitan Opera Club will hold its annual ball in the Opera House with a salute to Canada and its artistic contributions.
After the 8 P.M. performance of "The Barber of Seville," guests will attend the ball and supper starting at about 11 P.M.
White tie.
Tickets, $600 for performance and ball, $500 for the ball alone; (212) 496-1516.
Chorale Recital
March 7 -- The 15-member St.
George's Chapel Chorale will hold a recital to benefit the much larger St.
George's Choral Society of the Episcopal Parish of Calvary/St.
George's.
A 6:30 P.M. buffet in a private home on Gramercy Park will precede the 8:30 P.M. recital at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
Tickets, $100 for buffet and recital, $60 for the recital alone; (212) 533-1392.
Dollars for Dates
March 8 -- The Business and Professional Women of the New York Chapter of Hadassah will hold a casino party with dancing, raffles, prizes and an auction of dates with eligible men and women at the Omni Park Central Hotel starting at 7 P.M.
The evening will benefit the Children's Pavilion of the Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem.
Tickets, $55, which includes $10 in playing chips; (212) 765-7050.
At the door, $70.
Red Cross Auction
March 9 -- The American Red Cross in Greater New York will hold a fund-raising auction with items and events as diverse as a movie and dinner date with the actor Bill Murray, a Metropolitan Opera performance by Placido Domingo followed by a backstage introduction to the tenor, a custom-designed fireworks display, modern art works and vacations near and far.
The auction, with drinks and hors d'oeuvres, starts at 6 P.M. at the 200 Fifth Avenue Club at 23d Street.
Tickets, $40; (212) 875-2036.
Wishing on a Star
March 9 -- The Starlight Foundation of New York, which grants wishes to seriously ill children, will hold its annual fund-raising event starting with cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Marriott Marquis.
The theme will be "Legends of Rock 'n' Roll." Black tie.
Tickets, $350; (212) 268-1545.
For Boys and Girls
March 9 -- Samuel Ramey of the Metropolitan Opera and Julie Wilson, the cabaret singer, will be the stars of a concert at Carnegie Hall's Weill Recital Hall to benefit the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club.
A 6 P.M. dinner next door at the Russian Tea Room precedes the 8 P.M. concert.
Intermission will feature a dessert tasting.
Tickets, $275 for dinner and concert, $225 for concert alone; (212) 532-0858.
Dance, Supper and Shopping
March 9 -- Four dance companies -- the Mark Morris Dance Group, Garth Fagan Dance, LadyGourd Sangoma and the Doug Elkins Dance Company -- will perform at a benefit for the Dance Theater Workshop at 7:30 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, Eighth Avenue at 19th Street.
From 9:30 P.M. to midnight, there will be cocktails, a buffet supper, dancing and shopping at Barneys New York, 17th Street near Seventh Avenue.
Tickets, $175 for performance and party, $50 for performance alone; (212) 691-4823.


Correction
An article on Feb. 16 about Baja California, Mexico, included several incorrect telephone numbers.
The number in the United States for the Hotel Palmilla, near San Jose del Cabo, is (800) 637-2226 and the direct number is (684) 21707.
Hotel Las Arenas, southeast of La Paz, has no telephone.
In Cabo San Lucas, the Hacienda Beach Resort's number is (668) 48644.
The preferred number in the United States for the Hotel Mar de Cortez, also in Cabo San Lucas, is (408) 375-4755.
The Hotel California, in Todos Santos, no longer has a United States number, and the "800" number for Hotel Los Arcos, in La Paz, has been disconnected.


SEATTLE
Winter is seldom harsh in Seattle, the most northern city in the contiguous states; flowers and some vegetables grow year round.
It is the darkness, from the predominant cloud cover and short days, that depresses the soul during cold months.
So when spring arrives, in early March, it comes not just with color, but with bursts of light -- what the forecasters here call sunbreaks.
The flowering shrubs, rhododendrons and azaleas, are in full conspiracy with the dancing light, and it is time for a stroll down the Azalea Way, in the Washington Park Arboretum.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
China Trade: Vote on passage of a bill that would impose stringent conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade status with the United States in June.
Approved 59 to 39, Feb. 25.
2.
Line-Item Veto: Vote to give President Bush line-item veto authority to delete Federal projects from spending bills passed by Congress.
Rejected 54 to 44, Feb. 27.
1
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
N
House
1.
Taxes: Vote on President Bush's proposal featuring a cut in taxes on capital gains that he said would do much to stimulate the economy.
Rejected 264 to 166, Feb. 27.
2.
Taxes: Vote on a Democratic-sponsored proposal emphasizing a tax credit of up to $400 a year for working couples.
Approved 221 to 209, Feb. 27.
3.
Haitian Refugees: Passage of a bill that would impose a six-month moratorium on repatriation of Haitians who fled before Feb. 5.
Approved 217 to 165, Feb. 27.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
N
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
N
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
N
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
N
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
A
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
N
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
N
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
N
N
15. Green (R) . . .
N
N
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
N
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


A New High School Gets a New Bridge


Disasters
Hurricane Bob and other storms brought havoc last year to 12 states, which were declared Federal disaster areas -- Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Rhode Island, Nebraska, Tennessee and Wisconsin.
Taxpayers who suffered uninsured losses in the storms can deduct those losses on either their 1991 returns or on amended 1990 returns.
It is worth calculating both ways.
An amended 1990 return may bring a faster refund.


Tyson Debate, Cont.
The Indianapolis businessman who publishes the city's oldest black-owned newspaper says that the ministers who have been circulating petitions seeking leniency for MIKE TYSON are on a misguided mission.
"If Mike Tyson is an African-American hero, as some of our ministers claim, God knows we don't need another hero," is the way WILLIAM G. MAYS put it in a signed editorial in The Indianapolis Recorder.


Cadillac's All-American Contender
MY wife came home the other day with a very good question from a co-worker.
With all that's going on, he had asked her to ask me, what exactly
is
an American car?
Ah, interesting puzzle that. And I have to say that it gave me pause.
Today, almost every automobile is an amalgam of parts from all over.
"Japanese" cars are built hither and yon.
A lot of "Detroit" cars are made in Canada.
Some are from Mexico.
And almost all of them have tires from Europe or transmissions from France or odometers from Timbuktu.
But then it struck me.


A Tall Tale
A good big man should beat a good smaller man every time.
That's a boxing adage, but it seemed to apply to basketball Friday night when 7-foot-2-inch KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR bested 6-7 JULIUS ERVING, 41-23, in their "Clash of the Legends" one-on-one contest in Atlantic City.
"I'm the bigger man and I used it to my advantage," said Abdul-Jabbar.


A Good Nose for Coffee Is a Job Requirement
El Exigente and Juan Valdez don't have anything on Justin D. Colten.
Mr.
Colten has devoted 55 of his 72 years to smelling, feeling, buying, selling, roasting, grinding, brewing and sipping coffee.
Mr.
Colten, the chairman of the Board of Graders at the Coffee Exchange in the World Trade Center, is wary of revealing any of his secrets.
"I'll never give a straight answer if someone asks me a direct question about coffee," he said.


Finally, a Light Shines On a Troubled Team
For a team inexperienced in the chaotic practice of wild celebration, Lafayette High School acquitted itself quite well yesterday on a gymnasium floor it had grown accustomed to leaving in defeat.
Most impressive was the bearish power forward, Kareem Sims, who lifted the Frenchies' lanky center, Antonio Carrasquillo, as if he were holding a doll.
Two sidelined players, Tony Rexha, with a fractured left arm, and Dexter Wooten, recovering from triple gunshot wounds he suffered during a street fight last November, forgot their ailments for the moment and rolled jubilantly on the floor.


Carolyn Gold to Marry F. M. Miggins
Mrs.
Joel Steven Ullman and John Allen Gold, both of New York, have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Carolyn Lee Gold and Fredric Michael Miggins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Miggins of New York.
Miss Gold, 27 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is an account manager at Oxford Industries, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her mother, known professionally as Mari S. Gold, is the deputy press secretary for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.
Her father is a founder of Executive Monetary Management, an investment advisory concern in New York.


MADRID
When Queen Isabella II first opened the 17th-century Parque del Retiro to commoners in 1868, the 325-acre park was on the outskirts of Madrid.
Today it is surrounded by a large and noisy city but has lost none of its royal elegance.
The main gate of Philip IV stands in front of a fragment of the 17th-century palace known as the Cason del Buen Retiro, which now houses Picasso's "Guernica," and leads immediately to a French landscape garden.
The Velazquez Palace, the Crystal Palace and the Casa de Vacas, which hold exhibitions and special events, were all ordered built by the monarchy in the 19th century.
A statue of King Alfonso XII looks over the lake.


Pruning Takes Skill and the Right Tools
FOR those who have an acute case of cabin fever, there is a cure: pruning.
Not every plant in every garden will need pruning at this time of year.
But there may be woody plants on the grounds that need a trim or two to provide outdoor activity that may relieve indoor blues.
Several precautions should be taken before getting to work.
The most important is to tackle only those plants that can be safely pruned from the ground.


Nicole Felton Weds Paul Ginsberg
Nicole Lynn Felton and Paul David Ginsberg, associates in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, were married last evening by Rabbi Harlan Wechsler at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Maxwell Felton of New York.
The bridegroom is the son of Dorothy Bogart of New Hyde Park, L.I., and the late Saul Ginsberg.
Mrs.
Ginsberg, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is the director of surgery at Kings Highway Hospital in Brooklyn.


INSIDE
Rights Mission to Iraq Urged
Britain and France are pushing for the United Nations to send an envoy to Iraq to report on the situation of the Kurds and other groups.
Page 3.
New York's Plan for Shelters
New York continues to pursue a different, and more ambitious, approach to shelters for the homeless than any other American city.
Page 31.
Tax Rebellion, II
California's Proposition 13 capped property taxes but also created unequal burdens, an issue the Supreme Court will now decide.
Page 16.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Pages 38-39 Weather, Page 39 Radio, Late TV, Page 52


Harold Friedman Is Dead at 80; Broker Was Active in Charities
Harold Friedman, a longtime stock brokerage executive and a leader in several major philanthropies, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Marbly Pure and Dazzling
WASHINGTON ON VIEW
The Nation's Capital Since 1790.
By John W. Reps.
Illustrated. 297 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. $49.95.


Candidate For Discovery
To the Editor:
The question concerning forgotten composers that Arthur Kaptainis poses in "Shady Characters Glow Again"  [ Feb. 16 ]  -- "Can it be that some, because of prejudice, bad timing or the vicissitudes of their private lives, were wrongly denied entry to the pantheon?" -- certainly applies to the Hungarian composer and ethnomusicologist Laszlo Lajtha.


Review/Concert; Friends Join Pavarotti's Annual 'Plus'
Luciano Pavarotti's annual "Pavarotti Plus" concerts bring together a few of the tenor's well-known colleagues and a few newcomers for evenings of duets, trios and quartets from favorite operas.
This year's edition, presented at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening, was telecast live as the 100th edition of "Live From Lincoln Center."
The concert featured nine singers and the New York City Opera Orchestra, conducted by Edoardo Muller.
A great many notes were sung, but if music is more than the sum of the dots on the page, not much was made in this three-hour performance.
Indeed, anyone inclined to argue that the state of opera singing today is deplorable need only brandish a tape of this concert.


Ex-Chief's Conviction Taints Rochester Police
The sagging reputation of the Rochester Police Department is unlikely to recover soon, despite the conviction of former Police Chief Gordon F. Urlacher this week on embezzlement charges.
Mr.
Urlacher and five other former officers still face Federal charges on civil rights violations stemming from incidents that prosecutors say include throwing a handcuffed suspect down a set of stairs and taking pliers to the teeth of another suspect.


'Crazy for You' Is Splashy, But Magical Would Be Better
"Crazy for you" has everything a 1930's-style musical comedy could want, except a leading man and a leading lady.
It features more than a dozen songs by George and Ira Gershwin -- some that are already etched in your memory; others, just out of the trunk, that in all likelihood you'll be hearing for the first time.
The Technicolor sets, courtesy of Robin Wagner, recall the glory days of M-G-M, when M-G-M boasted the best sound stages in Hollywood for singing and dancing.
Most impressive, it allows an abundantly gifted choreographer, Susan Stroman, opportunities galore to indulge her talents on a grand scale.


Cosmo Woman


Bridge
National and international organizations in various sports and games occasionally have to deal with deliberate attempts to lose.
It happens even when gambling is not involved, and the fault sometimes lies in the structure of the event itself.
Chess players have been known to throw or dump a game against a friend who is in contention for a prize.
In tennis, similar accusations were made a decade ago at Madison Square Garden when Ivan Lendl lost to Jimmy Connors without appearing to play hard: the winner qualified to play Bjorn Borg and the loser a player of lesser rank, putting Lendl in a better position in the playoffs.
Lendl denied the charge.


Trade Is More Critical Than Productivity
To the Editor:
American industry is, indeed, in serious trouble ("Attention, America! Snap Out of It!", Feb. 9).
But lack of productivity growth is not the key problem.
More important is the trade imbalance and its effect on employment.
Since manufacturing is the most productive economic activity, when we import a large proportion of manufactured goods, we lose the best-paying jobs and their contribution to the Federal budget.
The deficit is caused by the trade imbalance -- not the other way around.


What Clinton and Tsongas Want to Do With the Economy
In their economic proposals, both Gov.
Bill Clinton and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas share such an eagerness to break with many Democratic traditions that they sometimes sound like classic conservatives.
Mr.
Clinton says Democrats must move beyond thinking government can tax and spend its way out of every problem, and he pledges to limit Federal growth.
Mr.
Tsongas blames the Democrats for taking an us-vs.-them attitude toward business, and he makes a capital gains tax cut, anathema to liberals, a centerpiece of his program.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 172,500
103 Barbara Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Farmingdale 160,000
5 Ivy Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,500.
Mineola 255,000
237 Latham Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, Florida room; taxes $6,500.
Searingtown 300,000
78 Sugar Maple Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,800.
Uniondale 145,000
578 Senimore Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Williston Park 180,000
210 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, attic; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS New Britain, Conn. 138,000
329 Francis Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; walk-out basement, living room with bay window and fireplace, lower-level family room; taxes $2,537.
Purdys, N.Y. 331,500
135C Fox Den Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, lake rights, 1 acre; taxes $7,474.
Howell, N.J. 112,500
16 Charles Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, fenced yard, patio, porch; taxes $2,530.


German Judge Frees 3 in an Attack on Foreigners
A judge has freed on probation three men accused of assault in an attack on a residence for foreigners in eastern Germany, fueling the political debate in Germany over how to handle the growing number of foreign refugees.
Some human rights advocates said they feared that the verdict would send the wrong signal to rightist gangs who have staged demonstrations against foreigners, many of whom are refugees who have sought asylum in Germany.
The human rights advocates conceded, however, that the number of attacks on foreigners has fallen in recent months.


As American As Apple Pie
The french call it la bonne cuisine du terroir, that style of food particular to a place, food that you find in one region and not another, food that belongs there because the climate, the soil and the ethnic groups who settled that place all work together to create it.
If you want to know what a region's food is like, look first at the lay of the land.
Take the Pacific Northwest, for example, and take Seattle because it's an easy town in which to explore local food ways.
Facing Puget Sound and home port to a fishing fleet that ranges the North Pacific, Seattle thrives on salmon, oysters and other products of the sea, drawing on its hinterland, the rain-washed Cascades and the Olympic Peninsula, for a bounty of berries, mush- rooms and other wild and home-grown edibles.


Aftermath


Michele Bialek Weds
Michele Lesley Bialek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arden G. Bialek of New York, was married last evening to Todd Alan Neufeld, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Neufeld of Wesley Hills, N.Y.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Vietnam Hotels
To the Editor: Steven Erlanger's calling it his favorite hotel in the city ("For Many Vietnamese, It's Still Saigon," April 28) was good enough for me to book the Hotel Majestic during a visit there last fall.
I found it an amiable dump badly in need of renovation and with limited services.
The only English-language newspaper in the hotel rack was two months old, for example.


Headliners; Stepping Down
When a neurosurgeon named Dr.
Frances K. Conley resigned from Stanford Medical School last year, saying she was tired of demeaning sexual remarks by her male colleagues and other forms of subtle sexism, she singled out Dr.
Gerald Silverberg, the acting chairman of her department, as the worst offender.
Convinced that her point had been taken seriously, Dr.
Conley rejoined the faculty, and last week Dr.
Silverberg said that he had been removed from his post and would not be considered for the permanent position.
"I don't believe I've done anything wrong or different than any other chairman at the medical school," he said, contending that the school asked him to step down to avoid adding to the bad publicity caused by Stanford's overbilling of research expenses to the Government.
The one female resident in the neurosurgery program, Kimberly Page, said Dr.
Silverberg was a "chauvinist, like most of the physicians here who are 50 plus." But she called him an excellent teacher.


Wendy P. Crisp Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter O. Crisp of Mill Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Parsons Crisp to Edward T. Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Henderson of Rumson, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Crisp, a graduate of St.
Lawrence University, is an account executive at Yves St.
Laurent Parfums Corporation in New York.
Her father is a founding partner of Venrock Associates, a New York venture capital company.
Her mother, Emily Crisp, is the president of Crisp Computer Corporation, a computer services company in Mill Neck, L.I.


A Fall Wedding For Miss Kaiser
Elizabeth Ann Kaiser, a lawyer in Philadelphia, and John Bernard Neff Jr., a lawyer in Aston, Pa., are engaged to be married in October.
Miss Kaiser, 29 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and the Case Western Reserve University School of Law.
She is an associate with Saul, Ewing, Remick &amp; Saul and is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert F. Kaiser of Longwood, Fla.
Her father retired as president of ABB Power Distribution Inc., a manufacturer in Sanford, Fla.


V.A.T. Refunds
To the Editor: "Those Elusive V.A.T. Refunds" points out that these refunds are best handled by specialized foreign exchange firms.
Our company, New York Foreign Exchange, although not mentioned in the article, makes such transactions as a daily routine.
We process these checks, providing checks in United States dollars, either in person at our office at Suite 805, 61 Broadway at Exchange Place, New York, N.Y. 10006, or by mail.
We do not charge a fee, and the rate of exchange is the one in effect on the day of the transaction.
Our toll-free number is (800) 346-3924.
LOUIS BARON New York


June Wedding For Ms. Riley
Mr. and Mrs.
David Riley of Montvale, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joanne Christine Riley to Michael Walter Gambert, a son of Walter and Karen Gambert of Elmwood Park, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Riley, 24 years old, graduated from William Paterson College and works for Lang Communications Inc. in New York as an advertising coordinator at Sassy magazine.
Her father is an area manager for BMW North America in Montvale.


Stamford Benefit Features Dudley Moore
NOT every celebrity who makes an appearance on behalf of an arts organization does it for love.
But one thing is sure about Dudley Moore's concert at the Palace Theater tomorrow night for the benefit of Stamford Theater Works: he'll be doing the show for Susie Fuller.
The way Ms.
Fuller -- a director, longtime friend of Mr.
Moore and a member of the theater's board -- remembers it: "I sent Dudley a letter on Feb. 23 of last year, and I felt the only way was to be straight. So I came right out and wrote, 'Give us a benefit.' Two days later, he called and he said, 'Yes, yes, yes.' "


Mutual Funds; A Return to Risk-Reward Standards?
One familiar rule of investing is: the higher the risk, the greater the return.
But this has not been true since interest rates peaked in May 1989.
Since then, returns for the high-rated and low-rated corporate bond funds have been almost identical.
In January, for example, the high-rated funds dropped 1.6 percent while lower-quality funds lost 1.2 percent.
The reason is that lower-quality bonds are more vulnerable to recessions than their high-quality counterparts because the probability of defaults rises as the economy sours.
This caused investor demand to decline in the last two years and prices to drop.


America's Cup In San Diego
Spectators at the America's Cup races in San Diego have a new gathering place that offers exhibits as well as the latest competition results.
The America's Cup International Center, a 90,000-square-foot pavilion built especially for the Cup and sponsored by A.T.&amp;T., is on Pacific Highway between Broadway and Ash Street and adjoins the Santa Fe Depot.
The pavilion opened shortly after the first 1992 America's Cup trials began on Jan. 14 and will remain in operation until the conclusion of the event in mid-May.
The centerpiece of the many exhibits is a 98-foot high, four-sided painting titled "Reaching for Victory" by the French artist Catherine Feff.
It is thought to be the largest painting in America.


Knicks Try Wolves And Do Better
After taking almost three quarters to shake off the effects of an 0-3 West Coast trip, the Knicks finally shifted into forward gear yesterday and pulled away from the lowly Minnesota Timberwolves to gain a 103-87 victory.
Seven Knicks finished in double figures in scoring, led by Patrick Ewing with 19 points, Kiki Vandeweghe with 18 and John Starks with 16.
But the 17,368 spectators at Madison Square Garden focused their attention primarily on Xavier McDaniel.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  SPACE DEALS WITH RUSSIA BLOCKED


Glimpsing Treasures of the Last Emperor, Tarnish and All
In the Fall of 1988, the Palace Museum in Beijing opened an exhibition inspired by Bernard Bertolucci's epic 1987 film "The Last Emperor." This two-year show came about after Beijing tour guides were bombarded with questions by Western visitors who had seen the spectacular screen depiction of the life of Pu Yi, the Manchu ruler who became emperor of China at age 2 in 1908 and abdicated in 1912.
The objects displayed belonged to the Emperor and his family, which lived in the Forbidden City until 1924.
Now, a third of the items from the original show are on view in "The Treasures of the Last Emperor: Selections From the Palace Museum, Beijing," at the China Institute in America, 125 East 65th Street, through Saturday.
The 53 toys, robes, furnishings and scholars' tools belonged to Pu Yi, his wife, Elizabeth, and his secondary wife and consort, Wen Xiu.


Dorothea Israel, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Israel of Cape Girardeau, Mo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dorothea Anne Israel to Adam Wolfson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Wolfson of West Hartford, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Israel, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Chicago and is pursuing a doctorate in government from Cornell University.
Her father retired as a professor of political science at Southeast Missouri State University.
Her mother, Kilja Cho Israel, is a medical librarian at St.
Francis Medical Center in Cape Girardeau, Mo.


Faludi Lashes Back
To the Editor:
I'd like to respond to Barbara Lovenheim's letter (Feb. 9).
Ms.
Lovenheim takes issue with several points in my book, "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 15  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area 900,000
150 East 22d Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, brick town house; dining room, dressing room, fireplace, sun deck, 3 skylights, 1-car garage, 20- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Lewis &amp; Clark)  Greenwich Village 380,000
40-50 East 10th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, common roof-deck; maintenance $921, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Real Estate)  Upper East Side 1.02 million
1056 Fifth Avenue (87th St.)  4-bedroom, 5-bath, 2,800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, maid's room, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,688, 46% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  Upper West Side 134,000
180 West End Avenue  (Lincoln Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area; maintenance $784, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  West Midtown 175,000
415 West 55th Street  1,600-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; part-time concierge, elevator, 1 bath, 12-ft. ceilings, exposed brick walls, south exposure; maintenance $934, 39% tax-deductible (Broker: Nancy R. Sweetzer Real Estate)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area 155,000
3330 Wilson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 bath, single-family, attached, brick town house; dining room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle Realty)  Williamsbridge 190,000
3796 Bronx Boulevard  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 50- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 140,000
394 East 8th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished attic, 20- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $934 (Broker: Reliance Real Estate)  Park Slope 350,000
467 9th Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; original moldings, rear garden, 20- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty/Aguayo &amp; Knox)  Sheepshead Bay 258,500
2647 East 24th Street  8-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 40- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  QUEENS  Bayside 279,000
218-06 Peck Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Flushing 225,000
43-37 165th Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, dining room in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  STATEN ISLAND  Bay Terrace 153,000
151 Keegans Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached frame house; dining room, sunken living room, eat-in kitchen, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ Schlott Realtors)  St.
George 69,500
10 Bay Street Landing  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,340-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a renovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, circular staircase, sunken dining room, 16-ft. ceilings, health club; maintenance $597, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Real Estate)


Couples Is Beneficiary Of Bogey Play by Love
Fred Couples, although falling short of what he accomplished two years ago, profited from a disastrous triple bogey by Davis Love 3d and took the lead at the Nissan Los Angeles Open today with an explosive third-round 64.
Couples's 54-hole total of 14-under-par 199 over the par-71 Riviera Country Club course was a shot better than Tom Sieckmann, Sandy Lyle and Love, who led by four shots when he made a 7 on the 413-yard par-4 12th hole.
Another shot back at 201 is Rocco Mediate, who finished third in last year's tournament and sixth the year before.


Two Americans Converge on Whitman
Things are seldom what they seem.
Superficially, the shark and the dolphin, or the bat and the raven, appear to be nearly related.
Yet among these animals, it is in fact the dolphin and the bat, fellow mammals, which are the two most closely related.
Evolutionary biologists use the term convergence to describe this phenomenon, not uncommon, of two unrelated species responding to similar environmental conditions by developing similar genetic adaptations.
Convergence may also be found in the arts, which depend for their evolution on the imagination, a force hardly less quirky than genetics.
Environmental stimuli can elicit parallel artworks from artists whose temperaments are poles apart.
A remarkable instance of convergence in contemporary music has recently emerged in vocal pieces by two noted American composers, who have drawn upon almost identical texts by Walt Whitman.


Sports of The Times; Creating A New Standard
EVEN though the trial ended two weeks ago, the tremors created by Mike Tyson's rape conviction continue to reverberate.
Perhaps, as some suggest, this is because the former heavyweight champion made a lot of money for a lot of people and had so many more millions to make.
But there seems to be more to the sustained interest than that cynical assessment would suggest.
Clearly there is something more deeply troubling about the ordeal than a loss of money.


As the U.N.'s Armies Grow, The Talk Is of Preventing War
The United Nations has just presented the world with its biggest peacekeeping bill ever -- more than $3 billion for operations designed to still the guns and sheathe the knives in Yugoslavia and Cambodia.
Finding the money will not be easy, but the very decision to spend it reflects a new reality: With the cold war over, the major powers appear to have accepted the notion that peacekeeping in distant places is less costly than letting the fighting continue.
And there is also more interest in what might be the cheapest course of all -- preventing the fighting in the first place.
On Friday the Security Council voted to send Cambodia a 22,000-strong mixed military, civil and police force at a cost of some $1.9 billion with a further $850 million for resettling refugees.
Meanwhile, it has dispatched an advance guard to Yugoslavia while it tries to reduce a bill initially put at $634 million.


Ms. Friedman Has Wedding
Wendy Leigh Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Friedman of River Edge, N.J., was married last night in Spring Valley, N.Y., to Dr.
Matthew Laurence Galfund, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Galfund of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Neal Borovitz performed the ceremony at Singers Caterers.
Mrs.
Galfund, 29 years old, is a program executive with Travel Planners in New York.
She graduated from Rider College.
Her father is the layout supervisor at The Bergen Record in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Sheila Friedman, is a learning disability specialist in the Leonia (N.J.) public schools.


Adelphi Wants to Add 3,000 Resident Students
'Is Adelphi's Feisty Campaign to Upgrade Proving Successful?"  [ Jan. 26 ]  was fine as far as it went! You omit, however, all reference to the bitter controversy that Dr. Diamondopoulos's expansion plans have generated within the Village of Garden City, where Adelphi University is located. As one of the leading opponents of the Adelphi expansion, let me give you another side of the story.
Dr.
Diamondopoulos is on written and spoken record as planning to add between 3,000 and 5,000 resident student to replace his commuting students.
He currently has about 1,300 residents now.
In the process of expanding, the university will destroy the only ball fields and tennis courts on the campus.
Most open spaces become parking fields and new buildings.
Extremely minimal recreation facilities are planned, an action that will force the students to seek outlets in the village.


McKee, a Social Worker, Focuses on the Olympics
Harry McKee, a 28-year-old social worker from Cleveland, isn't exactly an experienced hand in big-time amateur boxing.
Although he won some notice in the Cleveland Golden Gloves back in the early 1980's and later as a military champion, he did not get serious about the spotlighted amateur competitions until this past year.


Motive Is Puzzle in Fatal Pool-Hall Rampage
Gary Moy and two friends went to the Le Q pool hall in lower Manhattan Friday night to play "Street Fighter," a video game that simulates violence among city youths.
He got a taste of the real thing when three men wearing black ski masks stepped through the doors about 11:30, approached one of the pool tables and opened fire.
"People started screaming," Mr.
Moy, 21 years old, said yesterday as he lay in a Beth Israel Hospital bed.
"I heard 'bang!' And people got down." Mr.
Moy also dropped to the floor, anxiously examining himself to see if he had been shot.
"I saw a hole in my pants," he said.
"And it hurt."


'A Cast To Dream About'
To the Editor:
The article about James P. Johnson, "A Pianist With Harlem on His Mind"  [ Feb. 16 ] , is a long-delayed recognition of an enormous talent and influence, one whom I knew personally.


New Rochelle Invites Comment On Latest Plan For Davids Island
A MODIFIED plan for the development of Davids Island will be the subject of intense scrutiny on March 9 when the New Rochelle City Council conducts a public hearing to consider extending the developer's exclusive contract to build a $1 billion residential project on the island.
At a special meeting last Tuesday night, Mayor Timothy C. Idoni announced that the Council had completed successful negotiations with the developer, Xanadu Properties Associates, which could lead the Council to extend the contract for five more years.


Charismatic Movement Gains Among Catholics
In the gilded nave of St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in the South Bronx, with statues of Jesus Christ and the Virgin Mary staring down at them, a group of congregants swayed back and forth, waving their arms above their heads to the rhythm of a fast-paced Caribbean tune.
"Bendito sea Dios," they said in raised voices, as the sounds of an amplified guitar and tambourine filled the crowded church.
"Blessed be God. Alleluia, Alleluia!"


Preservation Poets
QUILTING
Poems 1987-1990.
By Lucille Clifton. 89 pp.
Brockport, N.Y.: BOA Editions.
Cloth, $18.
Paper, $9.
HILL DAUGHTER
New &amp; Selected Poems.
By Louise McNeill.
Edited by Maggie Anderson. 140 pp.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $24.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Violence Takes Over a Colombian City
Human rights monitors say this sweltering central Colombian city has become an alarming focal point of violence, a place where leftist rebels, common criminals, paramilitary groups, the military and the police are killing people at an ever-increasing rate.
The monitors and residents say that many of the victims are innocent peasants indiscriminately slain by army and police forces in anti-insurgency operations.


Sunday Menu; A Touch of Chinese and a Bit of Mexico for Good Measure
Instead of wrapping this vegetable-laden version of lamb with peppers and oyster sauce in Chinese pancakes, I wrapped it in whole wheat flour tortillas.


O'Rourke Overrules Hospital Chief
THE County Commissioner of Hospitals, Mack L. Carter Jr., might have some concern about the planned affiliation agreement with financially troubled St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains, but he now knows he should keep those thoughts to himself.
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke made that quite clear last week when he contradicted Mr.
Carter and insisted that the agreement reached a year ago would go forward.
The affiliation will provide for a transfer of doctors and patients between St.
Agnes and the County Medical Center, sending more patients to the underused community hospital while allowing it to develop specialized services to relieve demands on the specialized units at the Medical Center.


Yanks Change Their Tune to 'I Love New York'
The brights lights, the big city, the crowds.
There is something about New York -- about the Yankees -- that can both entice and annoy players, that can excite them about the Bronx but also make them wish they had never been traded there.
There is controversy, occasional front-office lunacy, managerial hiring and firing, and constant upheaval of some sort.
Even way down here, in the relative peace of spring training, players wonder what the latest cloud will produce.


'Toto the Hero' Puts a Belgian Director on the Map
The telephone directory for this city of just under a million people lists 165 film production companies.
A further 102 individuals, perhaps too shy to incorporate, appear under the rubric "Cineaste." Would-be film makers roam the Rue Royale, the dowdy main drag of Belgium's movie industry, with computer printouts of their ideas.
And each year, Belgium's state-subsidized film schools turn out another crowd of hopefuls.
Yet so reduced is Belgium's film industry that when a Belgian strikes a hit, as Jaco Van Dormael has done with "Toto the Hero," it is almost as if a fellow worker has won the lottery.
A better comparison, one Belgian writer said, might be an escape from Devil's Island that lends hope to everyone still behind bars.


National Trials Make Olympics Seem Easy
Swimming people insist it is the best meet in the world, more exciting, more competitive, more cutthroat than even the Olympics or the world championships.
It is the United States Olympic trials, and when it begins a six-day run Sunday, it will move some swimmers closer to Olympic gold and leave other potential Olympic medalists with fantasies of what might have been.
The competition is so fierce because the United States is the world's strongest swimming nation.
Its men and women should take the largest share of glory in July and August in the Barcelona Olympics.


Presidential Aptitude
To the Editor:
I propose that in deciding whom to vote for we put aside the polls, primaries and politicking as usual and put our faith in the Educational Testing Service for a more dependable view of a candidate's fitness for the job.


Splashy, Flashy Miami
ON HALLOWEEN, on Calle Ocho, the heart of Miami's Little Havana, quite a few of the little girls are dressed as Carmen Miranda -- while over in South Miami Beach, quite a few of the guys are, too.
It seems right that a wide cross section of the local population should take to the streets in tiered ruffles, ear hoops, turbans and tropical fruit.
One feels the spirit of Carmen Miranda hovering over the "new" Miami, informing and reflecting the city's sense of itself: flashy, Latin, exotic, dangerous and sexy, self-mocking and ironically self-obsessed.
Even the smallest trick-or-treaters are constantly checking out their moves in this city where, it seems, one is rarely far from a mirror.
Mirrors are a happy element of Miami decor.
Etched with angelfish and flamingos in Miami Beach's restored Art Deco district, they flash throughout this neighborhood of treasures from the 1930's and 40's, buildings designed like steamships, rockets, radios, Egyptian temples, gems of architectural wit and wacky streamlined beauty.
Mirrors wink from the walls and windows of Little Havana's popular Versailles restaurant and line the heroic lobbies of the Eden Roc and the Fontainebleau, megahotels on Collins Avenue built by Morris Lapidus and, in recent years, returned to their guiltless, exhibitionist 50's glory.
On nearly every corner of Ocean Drive, some photographer's helper is rotating a silvered disk to redirect the already perfect light onto a swimsuited model posed against the sea, the palms, the glass bricks and pastel curves of the Depression Moderne facades.


Driver's Ed
People who itemize deductions may be able to take off something for use of their cars, but how much depends on the use.
Unreimbursed business expenses are deductible at the rate of 27.5 cents a mile (it will rise to 28 cents for 1992); use of the car as a volunteer for charity at 12 cents a mile, and driving to and from medical appointments at 9 cents a mile.
In addition tolls and parking fees are deductible.
Or in each case, actual costs may be deducted; for business that includes depreciation.


From the Desk Of the President
To Dave Anderson:
I read your letter ("Open Letter to the Planet of the Goons," The Times, Feb. 18).


The Storm Wars Redux
GOV.
JIM FLORIO has called for a truce in the longstanding battle of the beaches, which has pitted developers against environmentalists, and residents and politicians from the Jersey Shore against the rest of the state.
Twelve days ago, the Governor asked about 100 of the combatants, meeting at a so-called summit in Long Branch, to do something that has been impossible of late -- agree on a stable source of state funds for shore protection.
The alternative: loss of Federal aid to repair the storm-battered beaches and the continued erosion of a resource at the heart of the state's $13 billion tourism industry.


A Passage to Indian Food in New London
INDIAN restaurants are still so rare in Connecticut that those who love the cuisine are willing to travel miles to try a new one.
And Raj Mahal, a short distance from Interstate 95 in New London, is the kind of place (in quality and price) for which devotees may be willing to make such a journey.
From the outside Raj Mahal is simply a modest storefront.
Inside, the limited space has been made into two small dining areas separated by a divider with plants blossoming along the top.
Cream-color walls are hung with a few pictures of India.
Despite signs of undercapitalization, the tables look cheerful, with burgundy over tan cloths, burgundy cloth napkins to match and a red rose on each table.


On the Street; For Rare And Radiant Maidens
Black as ravens, some of these coats suggest a fashion cult from an Edgar Allan Poe story.
Others, with their slender lines, cast long shadows across Fifth Avenue on late-winter afternoons.
Perhaps they are a harbinger of the longer skirt lengths expected to arrive next winter.
Many wearers add dramatic hats, suggesting post-World War I elegance, when hems exposed the ankles of polite women for the first time in centuries and an era of great millinery was coming to a conclusion.
The women of that period looked not unlike the women seen on Fifth Avenue today in their long greatcoats.
Most of them extend the total drama of black with stockings, shoes and trousers.


From Monsters to Mainstream
Just a few years ago the rapidly advancing field of biotechnology aroused fears that scientists might inadvertently create monstrous life forms or unleash devastating new germs on an unprotected world.
The nation has gained experience and the fears have largely subsided.
Now, biotechnology is viewed as the next high-tech industry that can bring new energy to the economy, and the regulatory mood has rightly shifted from containment toward encouragement.
The latest manifestation came last week when the White House issued its policy on regulating the release of new biotechnology products into the environment.
Although developed by an Administration accused of knee-jerk assaults on regulation, the policy -- years in the making -- embodies a scientifically sound approach to the tricky business of deciding which products are worth strict regulation and which are not.


Alaska Highway Celebrations
The Alaska Highway, which stretches through Canada to Alaska, turns 50 years old this year, and communities along the route are celebrating in British Columbia, the Yukon and Alaska.
The highway, also known as the Alcan Highway and originally the Alaska Canada Military Highway, was built in 1942 in response to the Japanese threat in the Pacific after the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
The road was laid out in eight months and 12 days by seven regiments of the United States Corps of Engineers.
It runs 1,520 miles from Dawson Creek, British Columbia, to Fairbanks, Alaska.
Twenty-five miles of it remain unpaved.
At least 200 events are planned for the Rendezvous '92 anniversary, which is being co-ordinated by a joint committee.
Whitehorse in the Yukon will have 10 days of parades, concerts and dances from May 15 to 24 as well as a storytelling festival July 4 to 6 and an international air show on July 26.
Elsewhere in the Yukon, Haines Junction offers a two-hour guided historic tour along a section of the original United States Army pioneer road on the highway from May 24 to Sept. 6.
Storytelling by old-timers and American Indian elders at Marshall Creek will also be part of this event.
Retired veterans from the Army Corps of Engineer Regiments will attend a homecoming reunion at Watson Lake Sept. 11 to 13.
Among other events are dog sled races, a six-hole golf tournament on the frozen Bering Sea, a fiddling festival and concerts and fairs.


Transit Authority Demotes Executive In Sex Harassment
A senior administrator at the New York City Transit Authority has been demoted and his pay decreased after making lewd and sexually explicit comments to two female subordinates.
The administrator, Ronald Contino, who had earned $120,000 a year as senior vice president for surface transit, will be paid $110,000 a year developing proposals to increase worker productivity.


Caring for Wood-Floor Finishes
CARING for modern wood-floor finishes can be tricky, as procedures recommended for some floors can ruin others.
With all wood floors, frequent cleaning to remove dirt, and particularly grit, which causes scratches, is essential.
Go over the floor with a dry untreated dust mop every few days or more often, and vacuum floors with a brush attachment as frequently as you vacuum carpets.


Review/Opera; King Philip Stays Healthy in Illness-Battered 'Don Carlo'
When Jonathan Friend, the artistic administrator of the Metropolitan Opera, took the stage on Thursday evening before the second act of Verdi's "Don Carlo" and began, "As you might have gathered . . . ," it was obvious that a struggling singer was about to be excused for illness.
The pressing question was which one.
It turned out to be Aprile Millo, by no means the likeliest candidate.
Ms.
Millo, whose Elisabetta had indeed sounded worn in the first act, was said to be suffering from the after-effects of a cold.
She soldiered on ineffectually through the second act but, after another announcement, gave way to a cover, Andrea Gruber, for the third. (The Met's configuration of the uncut score divides the opera's five acts into three.)


A Sunday Featuring Chamber Ensembles
MARCH begins with a small flurry of activity today.
An all-Mozart brunch recital will be offered at Zenny's, in Storrs, at 11:30 A.M., with Duos and the E-Flat Divertimento following at 1:15; the music will be performed by the violinist Ida Kavafian, the violist Steven Tenenbom and the cellist Warren Lash. (For information, call 429-7510.)
"Colubus" by Jonathan Bolt and Doug Cohen, a musical based on the explorer's life, is a Theater Works USA production that is geared to youngsters but informative and entertaining for adults as well.
It can be seen at 1, 3 and 5 this afternoon in Jorgensen Auditorium in Storrs (486-4226).


Democrats See Their Chance, And Worry That They'll Miss It
Democrats are almost giddy as they watch the onetime Colossus of the Persian Gulf slog his way across Georgia in an ugly primary battle with Patrick J. Buchanan.
They can hardly believe the 45-point slide in President Bush's approval ratings since March 1991.
They are stunned at the shakiness of the once-legendary Republican political machine.
"He seems to me to be in even worse trouble than Carter in '80," says Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat.
"I can't remember the last time George Bush had a good day politically since the Soviet coup failed." In short, the zeitgeist has changed, and more and more Democrats are convinced that their party has been handed a historic opportunity to oust a President.
What is far less certain is whether this party, and these candidates, will be able to seize it.
The Democrats' gloating over Mr.
Bush's troubles is tempered by their own anxieties.


Amy Thornton to Wed in September
Mr. and Mrs.
John V. Thornton of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy McNiece Thornton to Kevin Michael Charlton, a son of James Charlton of New York and Patricia Charlton of Ballston Spa, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Thornton, 25 years old, is the manager of the financial analysis department of the National Cooperative Bank in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
Her father, a lawyer in New York, retired as an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of Columbia University.
He is a former vice chairman of the Consolidated Edison Company in New York.
Her mother, Edna Lawson Thornton, is a lawyer in Bronxville.


When the Need Grows
Yesterday's leap day marked the formal end of the 80th annual appeal for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
It also marked a notable leap in giving.
Despite tough times -- perhaps
because
of them -- the fund received $5,081,419, surpassing last year by more than $500,000.
This is the seventh consecutive year that the fund has topped the previous record.
This increase, during recession, reflects donors' conviction that no child is beyond rescue, that no adult has to live in desperation.
There's little doubt that giving has gained because the need has grown so clear.
Hard times have brought poverty to thousands of New Yorkers; it's a time when economic fears touch even the fortunate.


Official in Albania Sees Anarchy As Rioting and Looting Continue
Unable to quell a weeklong outburst of looting and violence, Albania's police chief said today that the shortage-stricken country was sliding out of control.
"The general situation in Albania is anarchic, and we lack the forces to control these angry masses," the police chief, Fadil Canaj, said in an interview.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; The 'Bubba' Stereotype Is Vanishing As a Region Becomes More Moderate
In theory, the battle for Southern voters revolves around the stereotypical white Southerner, usually known as "Bubba," who is partial to country music and conservative politics.
But as Presidential politics move into the states of the Confederacy, the biggest question about Bubba may not be how he will vote but how to find him.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; The Live-Aboard Life: Not for Everyone
SAILING off into the sunset on a boat that is also a year-round home comes under the same heading as chucking the urban rat-race to open a country inn.
It may be wonderful, but it's not for everyone.
While there are no statistics on the number of year-round houseboaters in Connecticut, nor even the number of marinas in the state, it is believed that there are several boats on which people live docked at most of some 200 coastal and upriver marinas.


Can Rossini Best Mozart Once Again?
"Napoleon is dead," the novelist Stendhal wrote in 1823, "but a new conqueror has already shown himself to the world; and from Moscow to Naples, from London to Vienna, from Paris to Calcutta, his name is constantly on every tongue. The fame of this hero knows no bounds save those of civilization itself; and he is not yet 32!"
That conqueror, whose bicentennial birthday was celebrated yesterday, was, of course, the Italian composer Gioacchino Rossini.
One of his conquests was Mozart's reputation: "It is only those whose courage lies beyond the fear of ridicule who dare openly prefer Mozart," Stendhal commented.
Now the situation is reversed.
The bicentennial of Mozart's death was celebrated to the point of excess.
Rossini is being given just a few nods in a concert world that sees him primarily as the composer of "The Barber of Seville," some lively overtures and assorted canary arias.


Mary Hannon To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles N. Hannon of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Louise Hannon, to Michael Shamus Fitzgibbons, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Fitzgibbons of Allentown, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hannon, 24 years old, is a district assistant in the affiliate relations department at CBS in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Providence College.
Her father is president of Marian D. Enterprises Inc., a food brokerage company in New York.
Her mother, Marian Hannon, is a substitute teacher in Scarsdale for the Archdiocese of New York.


Ms. Diggs Weds Dirck W. Goss
Elizabeth Cameron Diggs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Diggs of Southbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Dirck Waterhouse Goss, a son of Mrs.
George A. Goss Jr. of Middlebury, Conn., and the late Mr.
Goss.
The Rev.
Robert Hammett officiated at St.
George's Episcopal Church in Middlebury.
Mrs.
Goss, 31 years old, is a project manager at Pharmaco Inc., a pharmaceutical research company in Austin, Tex.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father, a radiologist, is the director of Hamden (Conn.) Medical Services.


The Junior League
You're sitting at a restaurant, about to order linguine with garlic and fresh tomatoes, when the waiter says: "Forget it. Go with the marinara sauce -- much blander." This is usually a clear signal to say you just remembered an important appointment and head for the nearest exit.
Unless, of course, you're dining outwith children.
In that case, stay put -- the waiter's no fool.
On the contrary, you are in the presence of genius.
One thing every parent who survives an offspring's first three years learns is that the child automatically rejects anything the parent suggests.
Nothing personal, you understand, it's reflexive.
So when it comes to a successful dining-out experience with the dear little ones -- a successful experience defined as one in which they do not demand to go to Burger King before the breadsticks arrive or wander off to tug on tablecloths just as the entree is served -- the waiter is key.
Him they might listen to.


Patriotic Fervor Is Genuine
To the Sports Editor:
There's "no us or them" anymore, wrote Dave Anderson ("The Olympics Don't Need Us vs. Them," The Times, Feb. 16).
This sounds like a sportswriter's version of the fantasy about the "end of history": no more patriotic nation-states, no more international rivalry, only the "world community of nations" and state-less "citizens of the world."


The Executive Life; Wall St. Dems Find Little to Like in 1992
On Wall Street, there are staunch, powerful, well-connected Democrats committed to the party and to influencing the political process, Democrats able to raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for a single Presidential candidate.
But some of them remain tantalizingly unattached.
Call them the Uncommitted Committeds.
Paul Carey, the Northeast fund-raising director for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, rattles off the current list of uncommitteds: "Let's see, Felix, we've met with him; Ace Greenberg, still searching; Jenrette, taking a pass; Larry, pass."


POSTINGS: $55 Million Renovation; From Lofts to Hotel Rooms
New York's newest hotel is also one of its most unusual, in location and origin.
The Hotel Maria opened two weeks ago at the corner of Lafayette and Howard Streets, in a 70-year-old, 11-story loft building that was once home to the Security Lock Company.
It is the most ambitious undertaking to date of Maria's Group, a Hong Kong bakery and restaurant concern that was founded and is headed by Maria Lee.


Pruning Takes Skill and the Right Tools
FOR those who have an acute case of cabin fever, there is a cure: pruning.
Not every plant in every garden will need pruning at this time of year.
But there may be woody plants on the grounds that need a trim or two to provide outdoor activity that may relieve indoor blues.
Several precautions should be taken before getting to work.
The most important is to tackle only those plants that can be safely pruned from the ground.


Perspectives: High-End Condominiums; Reaching for an Older Style of Apartment
WHATEVER Gerald Guterman had in mind, it was probably not what Jack C. Heller is doing at the former Adams Hotel on the south side of East 86th Street near Fifth Avenue.
Mr.
Guterman is the aggressive and overextended conversion specialist of the 80's who lost most of his property to his lenders.
Among these was the Adams, at 2 East 86th Street.
Mr.
Guterman had already started redevelopment work when the Fidelity Bank of New York, based in Garden City, L.I., foreclosed.


Sports of the Times; Never Take Your Eyes Off the Ball, Any Ball
CASEY used to tell us that in every baseball game you would see something you'd never seen before.
It's true; strange things are always happening.
Just in the first few years of the Mets, two opponents hit home runs into the bleachers at the Polo Grounds, Jim Piersall ran out his 100th home run backward, Marvelous Marv missed first and second to negate a triple.
Simply amazing.


BEST SELLERS: March 1, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
3
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
2
1
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
3
1
6
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
4
3
21
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
5
5
3
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
6
8
2
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other and themselves through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
7
4
10
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
8
7
4
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs, Calif.
9
12
20
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
10 *
11
15
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
11 *
9
6
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress.
12 *
6
6
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines during World War II.
13 *
14
3
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) A private eye probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
14
13
28
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
15
3
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
16 *
10
5
McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally pursues a stolen block of priceless stamps.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and other people's struggles to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
20
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
3
3
13
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
4
6
7
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
5
4
15
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6
5
24
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
7
7
13
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
8
8
9
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
9
10
16
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
10
9
11
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
11
12
3
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America faces in the newly changed world and what our country should do about them.
12
15
10
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
13
13
27
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces. (LP)
14 *
11
37
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
15 *
1
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his heritage through three generations, from southern Italy to Ocean City, N.J.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
4
13
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
3
2
13
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
4
3
8
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
5
4
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A shapely and powerful novel with a seafaring adventure in it, built around a triangle of husband, wife and her film-maker lover, suggesting that post-Vietnam disillusionment and skepticism may not after all be the whole end of life.
TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception, by William J. Broad. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) This accessible but heavily documented account of the Strategic Defense Initiative, by a reporter for The Times, argues that Mr.
Teller sold President Ronald Reagan an unworkable turkey.
POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS: America's Literary Community Viewed From the Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969, edited by Richard Gillman and Michael Paul Novak. (University Press of Kansas, $35.) The view as seen by a smart, honest poet who knew everybody and did not go in for malice.
MIGRATIONS TO SOLITUDE, by Sue Halpern. (Pantheon, $20.) A provocative book of essays, chiefly about privacy and independence and their rarity in our part of the 20th century.
CAMBRIDGE, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr.
Phillips's splendid and tragic novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and powerful slave.
THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng, by Harrison E. Salisbury. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of China's rulers for 40 years.
BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES, by William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly true yet wholly imagined, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer and editor, now in his 80's.


Susan-Margaret Pflugfelder to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Pflugfelder of Pelham Manor, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan-Margaret Allen Pflugfelder, to Robert Theodore Granfors, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Virgot Granfors of Easton, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pflugfelder, 33 years old, is a legal secretary at the law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts in Stamford, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, was a member of the American Stock Exchange.


With Stolen Treasures, Generosity Has Its Price
"It's not so different from paying ransom to buy back your baby," said Constance Lowenthal, executive director of the International Foundation for Art Research, an organization that specializes in tracking stolen art.
She was speaking of the out-of-court settlement made final last Tuesday in which the Government of Germany, acting in the name of a small Lutheran church in the medieval town of Quedlinburg, paid $2.75 million to a family in Texas for returning and relinquishing all claims to the glittering, thousand-year-old treasures stolen by an American soldier in the closing days of World War II.
Ms.
Lowenthal spoke for many who were shocked by the settlement since the heirs of Lieut.
Joe Tom Meador, who died in 1980, had admitted in court that he "inappropriately removed" the treasures.


Ready or Not,Here Comes Bird
He may be a bit rusty and there could still be some doubt about whether his back problem is behind him.
But when LARRY BIRD rejoins the Celtics for tonight's game against the Dallas Mavericks in Boston Garden, he should find some happy teammates.
After all, the Celtics were 19-10 with Bird and have now gone 12-16 without him.


Ms. Baer Weds B. H. Y. Chen
Susan James Baer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry P. Baer of New York was married in New York yesterday to Benjamin Hon Yue Chan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. H. Chan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard performed the ceremony at All Souls Unitarian Church.
Ms.
Baer, who is 28 years old and is retaining her name, graduated from Brown University, as did her husband.
She received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Her mother, Ellen D. Baer, is an associate professor of nursing at the University of Pennsylvania.


Convent Rejoices: The First Novice in 7 Years
BEHIND a wall, on the crest of a hill overlooking two of this city's busiest intersections, sits a majestic brick building where silence and tranquillity have dominion.
The building, the Monastery of Our Lady of the Rosary, is the home of a cloistered order of Dominican nuns.
This week, as the 21 sisters observe Ash Wednesdayand the start of the six-week period of Lent, they will have a special reason to rejoice.
They will be joined in their prayers by Sister Mary Catharine, their first novice in seven years.


In Health Care, Canada Beats U.S. and Britain
To the Editor:
"The Wrong Way to Health Care" by David A. Ridenour (Op-Ed, Feb. 7), like President Bush on the same subject, distorts the health care situation in Canada beyond recognition.


Proposed Changes in the Tax Code: The Administration vs. the House
Since President Bush proposed a number of tax breaks in his State of the Union address in January, the House has passed a Democratic alternative.
The Senate Finance Committee plans to work on its version this week, using the House bill as the starting point for many of of its provisions.
Under consideration are tax relief for the middle class and favorable treatment of capital gains, with a top tax bracket of 35 percent and a millionaires' surtax to pay for the new benefits.
The accounting and consulting firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand cites these as the key provisions that would affect individual taxpayers.
I.R.A.'s
BOTH
*
Permit penalty-free withdrawals from an existing I.R.A. for first-time home purchases, medical expenses and educational expenses.
The Administration wants priority for home buyers.
PRESIDENT BUSH
*
Allow contributions to a flexible I.R.A. to accumulate tax-free earnings if held at least seven years.
Contributions, to be capped at $2,500 annually per person, would not be tax deductible.
For 1992 only, permit rollover of current I.R.A. balances into a F.I.R.A.
Withdrawals made between three and seven years would be subject to income tax.
Withdrawals before three years would be subject to a 10 percent penalty and income tax.
F.I.R.A.'s would be available to single persons with adjusted gross income under $60,000 and to married couples filing jointly with A.G.I. under $120,000.
Tax Credits
PRESIDENT BUSH
*
Provide first-time home buyers with a tax credit equal to 10 percent of the purchase price, to be capped at $5,000 and spread evenly over two tax years.
To qualify, purchasers must not have owned a home in the three-year period prior to purchase.
The Administration gave priority to this proposal.
HOUSE
*
Provide a refundable credit for 20 percent of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes.
Credit is capped at $200 for individuals and $400 for couples.
*
Provide a tax credit equal to 15 percent of total annual student loan interest, capped at $300.
The credit, to be phased out for upper-income taxpayers, would be raised to $500 if the total interest exceeds 10 percent of A.G.I.
Capital Gains
PRESIDENT BUSH
*
Exclude 45 percent of gains on assets held three years or more, 30 percent on assets held two to three years, and 15 percent on assets held one to two years.
The full 45 percent exclusion would apply to gains on assets sold in 1992.
Alternative minimum tax preferences would apply.
In its priority package, the Administration extended the capital gains exclusion to the A.M.T. for gains on sales of closely held businesses and real estate.
HOUSE
* Index to inflation the basis of certain assets acquired after Feb. 1, 1992.
*
Exclude 50 percent of the gain realized on dispositions of certain small business stock held for more than five years.
Other Provisions
PRESIDENT BUSH
* Increase the personal exemption by $500 per child.
* Repeal the luxury tax on airplanes and boats.
* Allow a deduction when a personal residence is sold at a loss.
*
Permit the deduction of up to $3,000 of costs associated with the adoption of children with special needs.
* Permit deductions for certain student loan interest.
HOUSE
*
Beginning in 1993, add a 35 percent income tax rate for joint filers with income over $145,000 and single filers over $85,000.
* Impose a 10 percent surtax for incomes over $1 million.
*
Increase the A.M.T. rate to 25 percent from 24 percent with a 2.5 percent millionaires' surtax.
* Increase the number of miles moved to claim a moving expense deduction.
*
Repeal the luxury tax on boats, airplanes, jewelry and furs, and index the threshold for cars.
*
Delay the expiration date of rules requiring higher-income taxpayers to reduce itemized deductions by 3 percent and phase out personal exemptions.
*
Modify individual estimated tax rules to require taxpayers relying on amounts paid in the prior year to pay 115 percent of last year's liability.
*
Index $125,000 exclusion for capital gains upon the sale of a principal residence to inflation, and extend the exclusion to permanently and totally disabled persons.
BOTH
* Impose diesel tax on pleasure boats.
* Extend the exclusion for transit passes to $60 a month.
* Extend the health insurance deduction for the self-employed.
*
Repeal A.M.T. preference treatment for charitable contributions of appreciated property.


A Commissioner Done In By a Staff She Offended
It was not the pink leather sofa ($3,070), the trip with seven aides to Puerto Rico ($16,000), or the chartered helicopter to Atlantic City ($1,500) that precipitated Laura D. Blackburne's fall from the chairmanship of New York City's Housing Authority last week.
It was her abrupt, often harsh treatment of subordinates -- who then opened the door for reporters who had been tipped to what they would find.
Behind the news reports of Ms.
Blackburne's lavish public spending was a deliberate and skillful plot to unseat her by disgruntled staff members at the Housing Authority, which she headed, and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, whose board she served on.


Tarkanian and President Play a Nasty One on One
They each came to grow a garden in the desert.
But as the growth of both the University of Nevada-Las Vegas and its basketball program took place at a stunning rate, the achievements that Jerry Tarkanian enjoyed as coach and Robert Maxson constructed as president have come despite one area left undeveloped: a dual sense of trust.
Now, the future of Tarkanian's basketball program within Maxson's university has inspired a searing debate throughout the campus, the city and the state, and that absence of trust has developed into a state of political warfare at an alarming rate of intensity.


Student Aid


Susan Spencer Engaged to Wed Steven Cramer
Mr. and Mrs.
Davis Spencer of Weston, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Susan Crane Spencer, and Steven Campbell Cramer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwight M. Cramer of Bethesda, Md.


Make Non-College Jobs Respectable
To the Editor:
By overemphasizing college and neglecting and discriminating against young people who want to work, American education, business and government are committing suicide, wrecking the lives of young people and putting an increasingly unsupportable burden on our society.
"A New Track for Blue-Collar Workers" (Forum, Feb. 9) is far sounder than other alternatives.


Mary Kalisz and R. A. Boyle to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Kalisz of Williamstown, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Elizabeth Kalisz, to Robert Alexander Boyle, a son of Robert H. Boyle of Cold Spring, N.Y., and the late Jane Sanger Boyle.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kalisz, 27 years old, is an account executive at Donna Karan New York, the fashion company.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father teaches at Nessacus Middle School in Dalton, Mass., and her mother, Carole Kalisz, teaches at St.
Stanislaus School in Adams, Mass.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Dec. 91
Dec. 90
Change
New York
281.0
268.3
+ 5%
New Jersey
135.6
111.8
+21%
Connecticut
85.9
48.4
+78%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.02
8.95
9.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.00
6.02
7.61
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.86
8.82
9.43
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.88
5.84
7.45
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.94
8.86
9.40
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.99
5.82
7.38
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.08
9.79
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.50
6.50
7.82
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.37
4.19
6.30
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.25
8.25
9.54
(Source: HSH Associates) these indexes.  *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above


Review/Jazz; Bobby Hutcherson With Vibes and Friends
There comes a point at the highest levels of musical improvisation where forms are no longer a constraint.
They melt away, only to appear as part of the general improvised conversation of the group.
The vibraphonist Bobby Hutcherson has brought together an exceptional band, featuring the pianist Kenny Barron, the bassist Peter Washington and the drummer Victor Lewis, and on Tuesday night at Fat Tuesday's (190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street) they reveled in the sort of interplay that stole the attention usually paid to soloists.
Part of the freedom came from Mr.
Lewis's drumming, which was consistently interactive and expansive, regularly setting up varied internal structures for the tunes.
The material -- pieces by Cedar Walton and McCoy Tyner -- was ripe to be taken apart, with harmonies that allowed for all sorts of interpretations.
And the band was ready to interpret.
Mr.
Barron never seemed to play the same chord twice.
Mr.
Washington varied his lines from steady walking to jumps into the upper register to ostinatos.
And when the soloists were trading four-bar segments, the entire group mimicked rhythms and melodies and ideas.


Reporter's Notebook; Gotti on Law: Never Admit Fault or Mafia
Representing John Gotti is not easy in the best of times, and these are certainly not the best of times.
For his lawyer, Albert J. Krieger, the worst problem remains the voice of Mr.
Gotti himself, talking about several slayings in taped conversations played by the prosecution in his murder and racketeering trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
I had similar experiences, raising kids in Tokyo.
My husband worked in a Japanese law firm during the 1970's, and when we were first there, I took our 3-month-old son, Jack, to his office near the Diet building so we could eat lunch together.
The elevator in the lobby was crowded with Japanese businessmen.
I was running late, so I crowded in, holding my son on my shoulder as I maneuvered the stroller in among the briefcases.


Headliners; Paycheck Peeping
Through his column in Financial World magazine, Graef S. Crystal made it his business to tell top executives at big corporations when he thought they were being overpaid.
The executives tended not only to resent his nosiness, but to declare that his calculations of the value of their non-salary compensation were sometimes flat out wrong.
With such complaints echoing in their ears -- and ad revenues declining, though no one claims there is a direct connection -- the people who run Financial World agreed to a parting of the ways last week.
Geoffrey N. Smith, the editor, said the break-up was mutual and that he had "tremendous respect" for Mr.
Crystal's work at the University of California, where he is a professor.
Mr.
Crystal, who left Fortune in a dispute last year, said he was dismissed by Financial World.
"I can't find a niche in any American magazine that has advertising pages," he said, "because my enemies are going to be out there threatening to pull their advertising."


Laura Bartell, A Lawyer, Wed
Laura Beth Bartell, a lawyer, and Stanley Lucas Harr, a music teacher, were married yesterday in Madison, Wis.
The Rev.
Max D. Gaebler performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Society.
The bride is a daughter of Joyce Bartell of Madison, Wis., and the late Gerald A. Bartell.
The groom is the son of Juanita Harr of Naperville, Ill, and the late Dr.
Wilber Harr.


Refugees From Recession Fill Hotel's Payroll
A month ago, Bobby Vaughn was a sad casualty of the recession.
He had not worked full time in a year.
His construction business had failed with the collapse of the building industry.
He was trying to feed his two children on odd jobs here and there.
Nobody seemed to be hiring.
Then a new downtown Chicago hotel, the Sheraton, held a casting call for the unemployed, the promise of unskilled jobs at above minimum wage.


Ms. Wittlin Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Wittlin of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Carol Wittlin, to Shepard Gary Kay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kay of North Bellmore, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wittlin, 26 years old, is a pediatric nurse at Schneider Children's Hospital of Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She graduated from Curry College.
Mr.
Kay, 28, is a mechanical engineer in the acoustics department at the Grumman Corporation in Bethpage, L.I.
He graduated from the State University of New York at Buffalo.


Caring for Wood-Floor Finishes
CARING for modern wood-floor finishes can be tricky, as procedures recommended for some floors can ruin others.
With all wood floors, frequent cleaning to remove dirt, and particularly grit, which causes scratches, is essential.
Go over the floor with a dry untreated dust mop every few days or more often, and vacuum floors with a brush attachment as frequently as you vacuum carpets.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about preparations to send a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia made an incorrect comparison with previous United Nations forces.
The 14,400-member force is expected to be the second-largest deployed since the founding of the United Nations, not the largest, and it may soon be eclipsed by a larger force planned for Cambodia.
The 20,000-member force sent to Congo in 1960 was the largest.


Frances Moyles Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Moyles of Sewickley, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Frances Carroll Moyles to Matthew Paul Fisher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert James Fisher of Rumford, R.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Moyles, 28 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of MMC, a Pittsburgh investment company.


Ms. Schloss to Marry
Stuart and Gerri Schloss of Westport, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Marcie Beth Schloss and Bruce Stephen Lipsey, a son of Roslyn B. Lipsey and Howard I. Lipsey, both of Providence, R.I.
Ms.
Schloss, 23 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Boston University, from which she also received a master's degree in education of the deaf.
Mr.
Lipsey, 26, graduated from Brown University and is studying law at Suffolk University in Boston.


Mercedes Hit, Driver Is Shot, Car Is Stolen
A 28-year-old man was critically wounded yesterday when he was shot in the chest by one of two men who rear-ended his red Mercedes-Benz on a Queens expressway Friday night and then stole it.
The victim, Jeffrey Cintron, of Great Neck, L.I., was taken to the City Hospital Center at Elmhurst with a gunshot wound.
The police said Mr.
Cintron was driving east on Horace Harding Expressway, 150 feet west of Junction Boulevard, when his car was struck from behind by a vehicle believed to be a Toyota.


CRIME
Anna Lee is nobody's fool, knowing full well that "emotional outbursts were bad for work." But after a dozen years of maintaining her professional cool as the sharp London operative of Liza Cody's top-notch series of private-eye mysteries, Anna is feeling the pressure.
The climate at the office stifles her.
The eviction notice from her landlord worries her.
And her lover's hints about a more permanent relationship have her dreaming of spider webs.
Time to make a dash.
In BACKHAND (Perfect Crime/Doubleday, $18.50), Anna flies to the Florida Keys in pursuit of a slippery customer who has run off with a fashion designer's exclusive line of sweaters -- along with the designer's dopey teen-age daughter.
Too smart to be dazzled by fat Americans who dress "like Easter eggs" and play tennis with the ruthlessness of contract killers, she is more impressed with the quick and deadly nature of the American criminals she encounters.
In fact, "she felt out of her depth."


ROME
It is after about 6 P.M. that most Romans take their passeggiata, the stroll that eases afternoon's end toward the stirrings of suppertime.
But there are alternative rituals, and one -- in the green acres of the Villa Borghese overlooking the city -- appeals to those who like to justify the city's excesses with the merest smidgeon of exertion.
Biking in the park is cheap, fun, easy and as good a way as any to pretend that the fettuccine ai funghi for dinner will replace calories lost, not add to critical mass.
For around $6 an hour, and the production of some ID, the bike-hire shop near Casinao Valadier -- a short walk from the Spanish Steps -- rents mountain bikes, whose 18 gears assure ease of pedaling, or tandems, for a more companionable ride.


Flower Themes In Philadelphia
A 7,000-square-foot re-creation of a Santa Fe town square, with a cactus garden, open-air shops and a cantina will be among exhibits at the Philadelphia Flower Show from March 8 to 15.
The show, titled "Horizons for Discovery," will present diverse styles of American gardens on a six-acre site at the Philadelphia Civic Center.
In another display, "America Discovered," 18 flower arrangers, chosen out of a field of 600 entrants, will display creations, from traditional to abstract, depicting historical aspects of the arrangers' regions.
An arranger from Houston, using gray and silver cryptanthus flowers, will depict the 1969 landing on the moon by United States astronauts.
A New Jersey expert will represent the state's railroads, the nation's first, with blueberries, which grow along the tracks.


A Pragmatic, Not Partisan, Debate; Who Can Fix the Economy?
One issue above all defines the 1992 Presidential campaign: how to fix the economy.
The anguishingly slow recovery from recession is only the beginning.
Voters have suffered from stagnant wages for two decades and want a President who can turn the economy around.
The candidates know this, and ask to be judged accordingly.
Surprisingly, the differences between the leading candidates this year are pragmatic, not ideological.
Republicans and Democrats can be judged together.
President Bush
The consistent thread of his three years in office is a commitment to do very little.
The recession barely attracts his attention; stagnating productivity and wages not even that.
He rehearses his benighted call to cut the capital gains tax.
Yet even his chief economic adviser estimates the impact would be minuscule.


Bleeding Knicks Are Asked to Leave
Both Anthony Mason and Kiki Vandeweghe had to leave the Knicks game with the Timberwolves in the fourth quarter yesterday under a new league rule regarding bleeding cuts.
Under the rule, instituted after the All-Star Game break as a precaution against AIDS, any player who bleeds must come out at the next dead ball, and the player cannot return until the bleeding stops.
The trainers have to use rubber gloves treating the wound.
They must discard all material used to treat the wound afterward and wash their hands.


No Milk or Honey for Israel's Emigres
Tucked away in this tidy town set among the snow-dusted mountains of the Galilee is a small corner of gloom: a soup kitchen for needy immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
Every day before noon, they arrive at a makeshift dining room set up in a social club run by the local Russian immigrant association.
They eat quietly at several tables and leave quickly, ashamed of their poverty.


A U.N. Refugee Envoy Is Urged for Iraq
In a new attempt to increase international pressure on President Saddam Hussein, Britain and France are pushing for the United Nations Security Council to send a special envoy to Iraq to report on the situation of the Kurds and other groups who have accused the Hussein Government of oppressing them, diplomats said today.
Among the goals would be ending an economic blockade that Iraq has imposed on the Kurds, which has left them critically short of food and fuel during the winter, and ending the military pressure on Shiite Muslim groups in southern Iraq who, like the Kurds, rose up against Baghdad after the Persian Gulf war.


WELL-FED DINKINS LEAVES BROOKLYN
From bagels and lox in Mill Basin to rice and beans in Bushwick Gardens, Mayor David N. Dinkins feasted his way through Brooklyn on Saturday, stopping between bites of turkey to issue sound bites, kiss babies and shmooze with the borough folk.
At the end of a working week based at Brooklyn's Borough Hall, Mr.
Dinkins was determined this weekend to meet actual Brooklynites in their living rooms and banquet halls.
Alternately praised for his set-aside program for minority contractors and excoriated for his proposal to place homeless shelters near actual homes, the Mayor got an earful -- and a mouthful -- at every stop.


In Tijuana, Tacky Days and Velvet Nights
Some 25 million tourists visit Tijuana, Mexico, every year, most of them American.
They don't go there for the scenery -- Tijuana's an industrial city with a population approaching two million people, 60 percent of whom work in factories.
They go to shop, browse and have fun, as well as to indulge plain curiosity.
It's another country after all, and yet it's right there: less than 20 miles south of San Diego, in that long thin finger of Mexico called Baja California.
You can fly to Tijuana, but if you live in Southern California it's hardly worth the trouble getting to and from the airport.
I drove, and left my car in a parking lot on the United States side of the border.
Crossing was easy.
Nobody asked for a passport, nobody asked how long I would be in the country, nobody waved me by.
Mexican customs officers just stood there in their uniforms, looking bored.


McCarver Survives Olympic Task
The criticism piled upon Tim McCarver during his 16-day stint as co-host of CBS's prime-time Winter Olympics broadcasts was unlike anything the lauded baseball analyst had ever experienced.
The large chorus of disapproval said McCarver was miscast in Albertville, France, that without previous hosting and Olympic experience he lacked the right stuff for the job.
But CBS didn't let McCarver be McCarver.
His duties -- to read scripts off TelePrompTers, tell stories about athletes to fill time, manufacture immediate chemistry with his co-host, Paula Zahn, and work in fits and starts until 5 A.M. -- conspired against McCarver's talents for wit, analysis and spontaneity.


Cuttings; The Enemy's Enemy Is the Soldier Bug
A nondescript little brown insect called the spined soldier bug is poised to become the Hercules of the garden this year.
This bug, Podisus maculiventris, eats more than 100 kinds of destructive garden pests, including the gypsy moth caterpillar, the birch leafminer, the Colorado potato beetle, the Mexican bean beetle, the tomato fruitworm, the corn earworm, the onion maggot and the cabbage looper.
Are you jumping for joy yet?


New York Doctor Agrees to Stop Injecting Silicone
Norman Orentreich, a New York doctor, has agreed to end his 40-year practice of injecting liquid silicone into the bodies of patients to try to erase wrinkles.
The agreement came in a consent decree signed on Friday with the Food and Drug Administration.
It was the agency's first success in its effort to stop plastic surgeons and dermatologists from injecting silicone into patients.
The Government said the practice was illegal and sometimes caused catastrophic health problems.


Tax Battle in California Reaches Supreme Court
From her modest bungalow set back behind a lawn with a sycamore tree here, Stephanie Nordlinger is leading the counter-revolution against the great California tax revolt.
In 1978, California voters ignited a national anti-tax fever by passing a landslide amendment to the state Constitution known as Proposition 13.
The immediate result was to halt the rapid tax increases that were driving some Californians out of their houses.
But a long-term consequence has been enormous disparities between taxes paid by longtime residents and new buyers like Ms.
Nordlinger, who say they are shouldering a tax burden that is unfair and unconstitutional.


Russia's Ruble Gamble: A special report.; Russians Put Anxiety Aside And Eke Out a Living
Eight weeks into Russia's gamble with economic reform, after prices skyrocketed on everything from kindergartens to airplane tickets, from beef to bricks, most people have learned to cope with the Government's economic "shock therapy" in ways that surprise even them, not to mention the Government and its critics.
It is still too early to judge the success or failure of President Boris N. Yeltsin's policy of crash capitalism.
Besides, as the population is reminded almost daily, the worst is probably yet to come.
Since Jan. 2, when the price changes went into effect, production in industry and agriculture has dropped sharply across Russia, raising the specter of unemployment and new shortages.


A Leisurely Meandor Along the River Lot
The lot may be the world's least goal-oriented river.
It begins unpromisingly as a small spurt in the rugged uplands of south-central France, achieves creek status as it spills through limestone gorges and faults, and then, a full-fledged river, wanders in a tight series of loops before slowing down and strolling amiably toward the Garonne, late for the appointment and not even bothering to look at its watch.
Before reaching its destination near Aiguillon, a straight-line distance of perhaps 100 miles, the Lot somehow manages to wander 192 miles.
Virtually useless for navigation, regarded with condescension by fishermen, it offers a narrative line made up entirely of digressions.
From the outset, I used it as an excuse.
In the course of a week I would drive alongside the Lot from start to finish, always keeping the river in sight.
Occasional deviations would be allowed, but in general the river would define the journey.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
I enjoyed Barbara Kingsolver's thoughtful Hers column "Everybody's Somebody's Baby" (Feb. 9), which described the lovely way members of some cultures view children and how they nurture them.
This tendency was evidenced recently in the opening ceremonies of the Olympics: a young French boy assisted in lighting the Olympic flame and a young girl was chosen to sing the French national anthem.


The Sweet Science Takes to the Ice
To the Sports Editor:
I find it a little hypocritical of Dave Anderson to be so opposed to fighting in the N.H.L. when he is such a fervent fan of boxing.


Sex, Politics and Murder on the Potomac
THE CONGRESSMAN WHO GOT AWAY WITH MURDER
By Nat Brandt. 261 pp. Illustrated. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. $24.95.


Tex-Mex Specialties Deep in the Heart of Melville
GOODBYE New England and seafood!
Hello Tex-Mex and tortillas!
Lenny's and its clam shells and cocktail sauce have fled, and now the Laredo is jumping to a salsa beat at 512 Walt Whitman Road in Melville.
The Laredo Grill is a bright, clean, bustling diner-style restaurant with a Southwestern twist.
It is a far piece from Lenny's Clam Bar.


VIENNA
On a mild day in March, a stroller in Vienna's Volksgarten (People's Garden) notices that the ravens are suddenly missing from their posts in the trees.
Their departure to Russia anticipates the end of the gloomy Danubian winter.
Because of the ravens, some Viennese birdwatchers prefer to visit this small park in winter, but given its central location, the Volksgarten is truly a park for all hours and seasons.
Built in the 1820's on the spot where Napoleon's retreating army removed a fortification from the city's glacis, the Volksgarten is refined as parks go, holding nature at a distance.
The grass is off-limits, but visitors can walk along the maze of paths, admiring the rose garden, examining the neoclassical Temple of Theseus and pausing at the monument to the beloved Empress Elisabeth, who was assassinated in 1898 in Geneva.
In one corner is a small, octagon-shaped pavilion where coffee and cake are served outside once the weather is predictably nice.


At the Wheel, but Front-Row Center
Music keeps changing venues.
Once it was heard mostly in concert halls, opera houses, ballrooms and taverns.
Later, when radio and the phonograph edged out the parlor piano, professionally performed music settled into the living room.
But now, in the commuter age, music is heard mostly on the road.
Mobile music has gotten a big boost from the technical maturation of car stereo: today, a top-notch car rig can match the performance of a good home stereo system.
The American auto industry, variously ailing, seems determined to cure itself with intensive music therapy.


RECORD BRIEFS
Boogie Down Productions: 'Sex and Violence'
Jive/BMG 01-241-41470; cassette and CD.


Sunday Dining; Off 5th Ave., Chic Cafe Or Tex-Mex
Sunday strollers on Fifth Avenue will find that many restaurants on nearby side streets are open for brunch and dinner.
Here are three good choices.
Cafe Botanica
Essex House Hotel, 160 Central Park South; (212) 484-5120 -- This casual cousin of the splendid Les Celebrites in the hotel is a delightful spot for brunch.
It has plenty of elbow room and a sweeping view of Central Park and the animated thoroughfare that borders it.
The dining area is bright, cheerful and comfortable.


CAMPUS LIFE: Barnard; Student Leaders Learn Lessons From the 1960's
About 100 student leaders and journalists from 20 Northeastern colleges and universities met at Barnard College recently to exchange ideas about student activism on campus and to set up a network among student leaders.
The daylong conference to discuss possibilities for change on campus today was organized by a Barnard group, Students Tackling Issues of the New Generation, or Sting.


Sunday Outing; The Maple Tree Sap is Starting to Rise, and How Sweet It Is!
With warmer days and still-cold nights, a new maple-tapping season has arrived in upstate New York and Vermont, which together produce about two-thirds of the nation's syrup.
Most of the commercial maple syrup operations are deep in the woods, closed to the public.
But for those interested in seeing the age-old method of production -- from sap in the tree to syrup on the pancake -- the Shellbark Farm here in central Ulster County would be a good place to go on March 8.


Jill DeVincens to Marry in October
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. DeVincens of Toms River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Marie DeVincens to Robert Michael McKeon, a son of Robert M. McKeon of Grosse Ile, Mich., and Theresa McKeon of Toms River.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss DeVincens, 26 years old, is the office manager for the Phil Donahue Show in New York.
She graduated from Clemson University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Novins, York, DeVincens &amp; Pentony in Toms River.
Her mother, Kathleen DeVincens, owns Baskets By Design, a gift basket business in Toms Rivers.


Camera
One of the oddest couples in the arts is music and photography.
Music stimulates the mind as no other medium does.
Mozart sends abstract images racing through the brain; Benny Goodman's swing produces another set of mental collages, and Philip Glass, in the multimedia production "The Photographer," about Eadweard Muybridge, pushes his audience to new plateaus of light, form and pattern.
None of these sounds can ever be captured on film.
Giants like W. Eugene Smith and Gjon Mili spent hours photographing the effects of listening to music on the face and body.
William P. Gottlieb, a jazz historian, critic and photographer, concentrated on the performers.
He was an image maker who studied both the musician and the music.


Ms. Hurry Wed To G. A. Lalim
Elizabeth Mari Hurry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Hurry of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gregory Alexander Lalim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Archie T. Lalim of Madison, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein performed the ceremony at the Bedford (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Lalim, 29 years old, is the recruiting administrator at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, who is retired, was a program manager at I.B.M. in Somers, N.Y.
Her mother, Mari Hurry, is an owner of Armonk Travel in Armonk, N.Y.


Miss Murray Wed in Vermont
Elizabeth Gabriel Murray, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul B. Murray of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in East Dorset, Vt., to Brian Charles Schadt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Schadt of Ruxton, Md.
Revs.
Joseph C. Gengras and D. Bradley Murray performed the ceremony at St.
Jerome Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Schadt, 29 years old, is a securities trader for Train, Smith Counsel, a New York investment advisory firm.
She graduated from Loyola College in Baltimore.
Her father is the chairman of the First Empire State Corporation, a bank holding company in Buffalo.


Topics of The Times; Here Come the Euroheads
A "bicephalous" delegation from the European Community will visit President Bush in April.
A what?
This jaw-breaker is more common in zoology than in politics, but the Community has a problem.
Two heads.
"Cephalous" derives from the Greek for head; "bi" makes it two.


Donna Praiss to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Praiss of Haddon Heights, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Donna Marie Praiss and Christopher Eduard Pey, a son of Derek C. Pey of Paris and the late Joan Foster Pey.
Ms.
Praiss, 27 years old, is an associate at the Kenyon &amp; Kenyon law firm and Mr.
Pey, 28, is a law clerk to Judge R. Kenton Musgrave of the United States Court of International Trade, both in New York.


India Flirts With Hope, Despite Disasters
The curtain descended with some finality last week on the political era in which India emerged from colonialism.
For the first time in more than four decades, the country's dominant Congress Party -- the party of Jawaharlal Nehru, his daughter Indira Gandhi and her son Rajiv -- reconstituted itself outside the dynasty's shadow.
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, an elderly, achingly uncharismatic, life-long party loyalist was, not surprisingly, elected party president and, in the party's first semblance of democracy in decades, something approaching elections were held for senior party posts.
The transformation of the Congress Party mirrors broader changes at work in the country today, changes reflecting India's efforts to reorder its economy, find its place in a radically changed world and begin to address the welter of social problems the country faces.


RECORD BRIEFS
Various artists: 'The Wassoulou Sound: Women of Mali'
Stern's Africa STCD 1035; CD and cassette (available from Stern's Music, 598 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10012)
.


Maria Mayer, a Jeweler, Is Married
Maria Elizabeth Mayer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Erwin W. Mayer of New York, was married yesterday to Ray Fillmore Garman 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
R.
F.
Garman of Athens, Pa.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Garman is the founder and president of Mima, a New York jewelry design company.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is the president of Abel Reggio Inc., a Great Neck, L.I., company that imports nuts.


BUENOS AIRES
Few places in Buenos Aires are more popular with the citizenry -- or Portenos, as they call themselves -- than the Plaza San Martin, with its statue of the liberator of southern Latin America, Jose de San Martin.
Portenos respectfully sun themselves on the statue's pedestal.
Visiting dignitaries, accompanied by colorful honor guards,lay wreathes here.
In the plaza, or park, itself is the memorial honoring Argentines who died in the 1982 Falklands War, a monument remarkably similar to the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington.
But that conflict with Britain is mostly forgotten here.
Children play on swings, supervised by nannies and parents.
Lovers kiss passionately on benches.
Artists sell sketches of city architecture.
The park is bordered by the Plaza Hotel and sidewalk cafes, the mainstay of daily life.


Chamberlain Released
WILT CHAMBERLAIN was released from Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif., yesterday, three days after suffering a slightly irregular heartbeat. (AP)


Ms. Weisblat to Wed
October wedding plans have been announced for Heidi Jo Weisblat, an account executive at Golin/Harris Communications, and James Andrew Block, a financial analyst at American Express, both in New York.
Ms.
Weisblat, 24 years old, is a daughter of Howard Weisblat and Mrs.
Sidney Zilber, both of Beachwood, Ohio.
Mr.
Block, 25, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome N. Block of East Brunswick, N.J.
Both graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.


In Health Care, Canada Beats U.S. and Britain; Millions Go Without
To the Editor:
David A. Ridenour's assertion that Canadian-style nationalized health care is more expensive and less effective than what the United States has overlooks a major detail.
Canadian coverage is universal, while here some 37 million people have no health insurance at all, and 100 million more are badly underinsured -- mostly children and the working poor.


A Rush to Solve Problems That Confront the Disabled
Carol Sanford's problem with her teen-age daughter's telephone use was not the common one.
Mrs.
Sanford, of Jupiter, Fla., actually wanted her daughter, Jill, to spend more time on the phone, but Jill is deaf.
Though her daughter could speak on the phone to her friends, Mrs.
Sanford had to repeat the friends' responses so her daughter could lip-read.
So Mrs.
Sanford, a software engineer for the Photoelectrics Corporation, designed a device that allows Jill to see messages typed by her friends on their touch-tone phones.
The size of a pocket calculator, the device displays the message as the touch-tone signals are picked up through a small suction cup that can be affixed to any phone.
The person sending the message uses a two-button code for each letter of the alphabet.


SHOREHAM A-PLANT IS SOLD TO AGENCY
In a brief ceremony tonight, the Long Island Lighting Company signed over ownership of the company's $5.5 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant to the Long Island Power Authority for $1.
The transaction, which came only hours after the U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission gave final approval to the transfer, ended a 25-year battle over whether the completed and fully licensed plant would be allowed to operate.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's probably very nice to be Queen Elizabeth (or even the Princess of Wales), or the occupants of the White House, or a Rockefeller, an Astor or an Agnelli.
It's probably nice for 300 or 400 reasons, but one of them must be the ease of entertaining.
There are secretaries to do the guest lists and send out invitations, party planners or factotums of some kind to think about such things as flowers and decor, cooks and caterers to plan the meal or whatever refreshments are to be served, housekeepers and butlers to organize the staff, and even minions to press and lay out clothes.
But as lovely as all this service must be, it is not the principal advantage of being a person of top rank.
Less prestigious mortals can and do organize social events with comparatively little or no help, and many of them enjoy the creativity involved.
The most important advantage enjoyed by the Rockefellers of this world is that anyone who is asked to one of their get-togethers answers the invitation chop-chop.
People don't usually turn down such high-voltage invitations, but whether they reply affirmatively or negatively doesn't really matter.
The operative words are "they reply."


Style Makers; Patrick O'Neill, Wet Suit Designer
Patrick O'Neill, president of O'Neill Inc., grew up in the wet suit business founded by his father 40 years ago.
He started helping out at the company's headquarters at the age of 10, became a sales representative at 17 and took over the responsibilities of president at 32, in 1984.
So it is not surprising that Mr.
O'Neill, now 39, led the design team for what has become a breakthrough in his field.
Its name is The Animal, a top-of-the-line item that is 20 percent lighter and 27 percent more flexible than standard wet suits.


O'Rourke Sets a Brisk Course for '92
A SEEMINGLY invigorated County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, offered a full agenda last week for what may be his final year at Westchester's helm, asking the County Board of Legislators to assist him in building housing, promoting economic growth and holding property taxes at current levels.
The 58-year-old Republican, who is awaiting word on confirmation for a Federal judgeship, said his 10th State of the County address, delivered Monday to a packed legislative chamber, was "no valedictory, no hail and farewell." Indeed, he indicated that he intended to end his decadelong reign with a flourish.


High Notes and Low in Preserving the Ephemeral
Over the last 40 or so years, jazz has cranked out thousands of albums that live or die on performers' improvisational abilities.
Sometimes a musician has an exceptionally creative day.
But most end up slogging through the same material in the same way as thousands of other performers, and much of the music suffers from the lack of a live audience.
Few jazz producers and musicians have figured out that the naturalism of a band performing in a club doesn't translate well to the studio.
If improvisational ability were enough, Sonny Rollins's "Here's to the People" (Milestone 9194-2; CD and cassette) might just make it, as it's probably the consistently best improvising that Mr.
Rollins has done on record since he joined Milestone Records in 1972.
But the album's context, superficial and light, is its undoing.
Albums can be thought out, however, and "Lush Life: The Music of Billy Strayhorn" (Verve 314-511-779-2; CD and cassette), from the saxophonist Joe Henderson, shows how a perfect album can be made with a little forethought.


Borg Comeback II: A Passion Play Rewritten
The attack is coming from all sides.
There is a retinue of desert blackbirds, tame but predatory, diving and swooping and making their designs on his lunch quite clear.
And over by the tennis courts, there's a contingent of players, officials and journalists intent on dissecting the legitimacy of the comeback he's being so bold as to attempt after a virtual decade of abstinence.


Cooking at the Ritz
THE Rue Cambon in Paris is narrow and congested, a one-way street on the Right Bank linking the Rue de Rivoli with the Boulevard de la Madeleine.
Taxis stopping to discharge passengers cause instant and apoplectic bottlenecks.
For some reason Schiaparelli and Coco Chanel opened salons there in the 1920's, and still, at day's end, long-legged models from the fashion houses glide out into the street on their way home, or wherever models go at day's end.
Also off the Rue Cambon is the back entrance to the Ritz Hotel -- and the fastest route to the bar made famous by Ernest Hemingway.
I had visited the bar before and been astounded by the prices.
However, today I scuttle past the elegant doorway, continue southward a few steps and then dive out of the morning sunlight into the dark service entrance.
There, grouped a little forlornly in front of a closed glass door beside the security guard's cubicle, are six other people, of assorted nationalities, mostly as carefully dressed and vaguely apprehensive-looking as I feel.
Like me they are clutching camera and notebook.
Suddenly, on a signal, the security guard smiles and buzzes us through.
With a feeling of relief we pour through the open glass door and down a steep flight into the bowels of the Ritz.


Redmen Are in Good Company: Notre Dame's Victims
Notre Dame, looking very much the part of a March-madness contender, kept alive its hopes of earning an invitation to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament by defeating St.
John's, 79-70, today.
The Irish, despite a 13-12 record and inexcusable losses to teams like Butler and Detroit Mercy, have flexed sizable muscles in the strength-of-schedule department.


Moving Step by Step Through Form 1040
Studying an expertly prepared tax return can help taxpayers, both in personal financial planning and in getting paperwork organized for their preparers.
Do-it-yourselfers can use the return as a model.
Vincent D. Vaccaro, a partner in New York at the national accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, and James E. Velton, a senior tax mangaer at the firm, prepared this return for a two-income couple who were not liable for the alternative minimum tax.


A Blind Justice Serves Even Now in New York
To the Editor:
Further on "A Blind Judge?" (editorial, Feb. 6), about the recommendation by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of Richard C. Casey, who is blind, for a vacancy on the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York:


Redrawing the International Air Map
WITH the demise of three major United States airlines last year -- Eastern Airlines, Midway Airlines and Pan American World Airways -- and the recent filing for bankruptcy protection by Trans World Airlines, a new hierarchy is emerging in the volatile airline industry, particularly on routes between the United States and Latin America and the United States and Europe.
The events gave impetus to a process that has been going on for nearly a decade, and now Delta, American and United are steadily and sometimes dramatically expanding their reach into foreign skies once dominated by Pan Am and T.W.A.
The most recent airline to go under was Pan Am, a company that since its founding in 1927 had a seemingly unshakable association with world travel.
Unable to muster the financial strength to service its Latin American and Caribbean markets, which the airline had hoped to continue operating after giving up its trans-Atlantic routes, the airline died in December with little advance notice.
The shutdown disrupted the winter travel plans of thousands of passengers headed to the Caribbean and various points south, and made many people wonder what was becoming of the airline business.


How Big a Military Does A Superpower Need?
It took 40 years and more than $11 trillion to win the cold war.
Now that it's over, the question is, how much defense is enough?
It may be the most vexing public policy question of the decade because, in a real sense, the largest thing standing in the way of financing a new domestic agenda in America is the annual allocation for national defense.


Dickens Classic Brought to Life
IT is one of the best of tales, and it has the grandest of themes.
An orphan boy, wandering alone among the tombstones in the bleak marsh country of England, does a good turn for the runaway convict who accosts him.
Growing up impoverished, the young man declares, "I am disgusted with my calling, with my life."
Sustained by an allowance from a mysterious benefactor, he becomes a shallow London gentleman.
His name is Pip, and after a slew of plot intricacies involving an extraordinary gallery of characters, it becomes clear that his great expectations were mere presumptions, and Pip's original virtue is reclaimed.


Putting the Unimaginable to Imaginative Use
Artistic images of the Holocaust are typically ghastly and shattering: the mounds of bones, masses of shorn hair and haunted ovens of Auschwitz in the classic documentary film "Night and Fog." Or they are as glib and deceptive as the bright, pretty, red-bannered Nazi parade in the current World War II thriller "Shining Through."
But in recent years some of the most moving and evocative renderings of the Holocaust have been both deeply respectful and filled with fancy.
Artists too young to remember World War II are breaking the mold of documentary realism, infusing their work with fantasy and pop culture, and incorporating a sophisticated sense of how the mass media control images of the past.


Andrea Rizzo To Wed in May
Joan N. Rizzo of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Andrea Nichols Rizzo to Guillaume Cuvelier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominique Cuvelier of Paris.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rizzo, 25 years old, graduated from Georgetown University, and until recently was a special-events coordinator at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Her father, the late Dr.
Peter-Cyrus Rizzo 3d, was a chief of orthopedic surgery at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.


Suzette Hall To Wed in June
Dr.
Robert E. Hall and Mrs.
Francis M. Dymnicki, both of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzette Hall to Dr.
Vincent Durso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marcy Durso of Vincent, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Hall graduated from Boston University, and received a master's degree in education from the Massachusetts College of Art.
She is an art teacher at Wilmington (Mass.) High School and at the DeCordova Museum School in Lincoln, Mass.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Riverdale.
Her mother, Natalie Watson Dymnicki, is an artist and writer.


Congress Scrutinizes Peacekeeping Test Case
An international peacekeeping force sent to the Western Sahara in September to prepare for a referendum on the disputed region's future has been neglected by United Nations headquarters, hobbled by Morocco and forced to live for several months in unnecessarily harsh and sometimes dangerous conditions, a Senate Foreign Relations Committee report says.
The Bush Administration barred a United States Army colonel from testifying this week to a House Foreign Affairs African subcommittee investigating the functioning of the force, which includes American troops and is supported by a $43.3 million contribution from Washington.


Fewer Options for South Africa's Rightists
The political posters disparaging the right-wing Conservative Party said it sarcastically: "The C.P. Fights for a Better Past." But after the governing National Party, which plastered the posters around the western Transvaal town of Potchefstroom, still lost the local election, President F. W. de Klerk called a national referendum for March 17 to let whites decide whether they want him to continue to negotiate a better future, one not based on racism.
Mr. de Klerk promised to resign if he lost the referendum and then to fight a new election.
If Mr. de Klerk were then to lose, power would go to the Conservative Party, which has opposed his policy of dismantling apartheid.
But for all its nostalgia about the salad days of white supremacy, the Conservative Party has been remarkably vague about how it would turn back the clock.


Small Co-ops
To the Editor:
Your column on Jan. 5 entitled "Talking Small Co-ops -- Shopping Around to Refinance" stressed the difficulty in obtaining refinance mortgages for small co-ops.
During the interest-rate adjustment of the last six months we cultivated lenders willing and even anxious to place mortgages on small co-ops.
We contacted the many co-ops we represented and have refinanced many of their underlying mortgages with great success.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters In Two Regions With Primaries Tomorrow, the Primary Emotion is Anger; Baltimore Suburb Seems to Prefer Tsongas Appeal
Yes, many people in this Baltimore suburb aren't exactly sure what his name is.
And, yes, they aren't exactly sure what his policies are.
But they know one thing about Paul E. Tsongas: They're leaning toward voting for him.
"I like that guy with the funny name that has a 'G' in it," said Allan Cohn, a 39-year-old insurance salesman.
Tsongas? he was asked.


Anheuser Promotes Alternative to Bud
For the first time, Anheuser-Busch is pairing its non-alcoholic brew, O'Doul's, with the company's flagship brand, Budweiser.
The print advertisement is meant to show drinkers that Anheuser offers an option for those times when alcohol consumption is inappropriate, a company spokeswoman in St.
Louis said, adding that comments, including those from temperance groups, have been positive.


Corrections
A chart on the Education page on Wednesday ranking colleges and universities by alumni donations designated Scripps College in Claremont, Calif., incorrectly.
It is a women's college.


2 Rights Groups Indict Iraqis For Attacks on Kurds in 80's
Citing bullet wounds in exhumed bodies, accounts by Kurdish villagers and death lists found in Iraqi secret police records, two human rights groups conclude in a new report that there is strong evidence that President Saddam Hussein's Government engaged in crimes against humanity in killing large numbers of its Kurdish minority.
The report, prepared by Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights and issued Saturday, also raises the question whether these acts constituted genocide.
Middle East Watch called for a further investigation to make that determination.


Brilliant Comeback For Bird
Fantastic. Sensational."
There were hardly enough superlatives to describe the return of Larry Bird from a two-month layoff today after he led the Boston Celtics to a 101-91 victory over the Dallas Mavericks.


Books of The Times; How Culture Evolved, Tastes Changed and Brows Shrank
The Making of Middlebrow Culture By Joan Shelley Rubin Illustrated. 416 pages.
The University of North Carolina Press.
Hard cover, $34.95; paperback, $14.95.
Once, even as recently as the 19th-century, there was a highbrow literary culture in the United States, Joan Shelley Rubin observes in her stimulating quasi-scholarly study, "The Making of Middlebrow Culture." This culture could be defined by Matthew Arnold's famous phrase "the best that has been thought and said in the world," which became, in Ms.
Rubin's words, "a slogan for allegiance to 'standards,' reverence toward the classics and deference to critics skilled at sorting edifying books from the useless or harmful."


American Express Gold For Mexico
Betting on free trade in North America and a boom in the consumer credit market here, the American Express Company and Mexico's largest bank have joined in a new partnership to provide financial services in Mexico.
With considerable fanfare, American Express and Banco Nacional de Mexico S.A. on Friday announced a relatively modest first venture: the issuance through Banamex, as the bank is known, of American Express gold cards.


Shanghai Journal; Hotels With 5 Stars, Huge Staffs (and Few Guests)
The elegant wood paneling in the lobby of the Novotel hotel here has a freshly polished gleam to it, and an upside-down "fu" character hangs on a wall to bring good luck to guests.
The problem is that there hardly are any.
The Novotel, managed by the French, claimed an average occupancy rate last year of just 28 percent, at an average room rate of less than $20 -- both excluding villas the hotel offers for long-staying residents.
And the Novotel is not alone: throughout Shanghai, foreign-managed hotels are losing money and frantically scrounging for guests to overcome an enormous oversupply of rooms.


Another Downer For the Knicks As Nets Go Up
Tonight provided further evidence that the Nets are streaking and that the Knicks are slumping.
Winning their fourth consecutive game, the Nets outhustled and outmuscled the Knicks to prevail, 90-75, before a capacity crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The victory was an emotional one for the Nets, who ended their losing streak against New York at eight games.


Women's Work
There was an air of gimmickry about a gathering in Geneva last week of 70 wives of top government leaders.
But the purpose was a good one: to draw attention to the appalling lot of rural women in the poorest, most populous countries.
Though more females are born than males, a 1991 census in India found 92.9 females for every 100 males in the population.
In China: 93.8 females for every 100 males.


Coca-Cola Isolates The Lone Star State
It was no accident that Coca-Cola U.S.A. chose today for starting a Texas-only advertising campaign.
Those who know their Lone Star State lore know March 2 as Texas Independence Day.
The campaign, by GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, carries the theme "Coca-Cola, Texas, Home of the Real Thing." Television commercials feature cameo appearances by Texas celebrities like the actor Lou Diamond Phillips and the rock singer Selena Quintanilla.
The singer Jerry Jeff Walker serves as a voice-over announcer.


Robbers Kill Man In Bronx
Three robbers ransacked a building on a quiet northern Bronx street on Saturday, tying up a woman and her 7-year-old daughter in one apartment, then shooting two men -- one fatally -- as they looked for money, and drugs in another, the police said.
The men who were shot apparently were visiting the building, at 2958 Gunther Avenue, the police said.
The police were investigating yesterday whether one of the building's three apartments was used to sell drugs, a rarity in a neighborhood populated mostly by older residents and working families.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the Shoreham nuclear power plant misidentified the agency that is to decommission it.
The agency is the New York Power Authority, which operates two nuclear reactors, not the Long Island Power Authority, which is buying the plant.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
Jan.
Personal Income . . .
Jan.
Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
Feb.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Jan.
New-Home Sales . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
Jan.
Auto Sales . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Unemployment . . .
Feb.
Consumer Credit . . .
Jan.


Quotation of the Day
"I like that guy with the funny name that has a G in it." -- ALLAN COHN, considering a vote for Paul Tsongas in the Maryland primary.  [ A13:4. ]


Security and Schools
Is the violence at New York City schools increasing?
What can be done?
These questions haunt parents, educators and elected leaders.
Visits to four high schools provide a look at security, the culture of weapons, the proud academic atmosphere in some schools and tensions in others.
Article, page B3.


Dance in Review
Pi Dance Theater Washington Square Church
Whenever Toni Taylor and Barbara Mahler performed on Thursday night in a program called "Dances and Dancing" they commanded attention.
What made them effective was their stage presence, rather than the works they choreographed for themselves and the members of the Pi Dance Theater, a troupe founded by Ms.
Taylor in 1990.


Concerned Chapter Battles to Hang On
Thirteen years ago, when Eddie and Betty Schleifer followed their children to this lush suburb of San Francisco, they were spry retirees from the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
But after a few years, their retirement grew hollow, and they found, as Mrs.
Schleifer said, "We needed to be needed."
To fill the gap, the Schleifers have volunteered for seven years at a local charity organization, the Cambridge Community Center.


In 60's, They Missed Assassination Evidence; Zapruder Film
To the Editor:
There are elements of "agitprop docudrama" in Oliver Stone's movie "J.F.K.," as a Los Angeles newspaper called it.
But there is a factual part.
Most spectacular is the representation of the Zapruder film showing the effect of various shots on President Kennedy.
I do not know of any opportunity for wide audiences to see this film, or this crucial part, other than in Mr.
Stone's movie.


Stuart Nash Scott, Is Dead at 85; Studied New York City's Finances
Stuart Nash Scott, who headed a commission that warned New York City prior to its 1975 fiscal crisis that its finances were out of control, died Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old and died of a stroke, his family said.


Coming Back; Business Can Help the Homeless
New York's homeless, sleeping on sidewalks or panhandling on the subway, disrupt the city's commerce along with its spirit.
Business leaders have reason to complain -- and better reason to give political, technical and financial support.
For the first time in years, real progress on reducing homelessness appears possible.
A consensus has developed behind a solution: small shelters set up by nonprofit groups to provide the homeless with substance abuse treatment, mental health services, or training in basic skills before placing them in housing.
Corporations willing to help the city can now confidently endorse this approach.


In 60's, They Missed Assassination Evidence
To the Editor:
In "No Evidence for a Conspiracy to Kill Kennedy" (letter, Feb. 5), William Manchester calls Lee Harvey Oswald a "wretched waif"; in "The Death of the President," an "incoherent hater, nothing more."


Dinkins Striving to End Protests At Community Board's Meetings
Mayor David N. Dinkins has promised the leaders of Community Board 14 in Brooklyn that he would personally try to help end two years of disruptive, racially charged protests at the board's monthly meetings.
Mr.
Dinkins plans to meet this week with local elected officials and leaders of the board, which represents Flatbush and Midwood, said Michael Kharfen, director of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit.
Beyond that, neither the Mayor nor his aides have said what role he hoped to play in ending the protests, which have resulted in slurs, assaults and arrests.


SAUDI KING ISSUES DECREES TO REVISE GOVERNING SYSTEM
In a series of decrees speeding modernization, King Fahd announced a new Constitution today that begins to decentralize power in the kingdom and establishes a bill of rights for the first time.
The centerpiece of the new program, as expected, was the creation of a Consultative Council that is to confer with and advise the Cabinet and propose and review laws.
Within six months the King is to choose 60 Saudi citizens to be Council members.
They will advise the Cabinet, which passes laws.
Members of the Saudi royal family hold the most important Cabinet positions.


House Study Criticizes Big Bank Mergers
The current wave of bank mergers threatens to siphon money from local communities, denying them the loans needed to build businesses and neighborhoods, the head of the House Banking Committee said in remarks released today.
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, made the comments in releasing a Banking Committee report that shows the nation's 100 largest banks control 54 percent of American bank assets, or $2.3 trillion.
The amount controlled by the biggest banks has risen 18 percent in six years, the report said.


Longer School Hours and Terms Would Ease Day-Care Burden; Administrators in Favor
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 10 report on the Schools Chancellor's proposal to extend the New York City school day and school year:


A Town Links Its Fate With Doomed Hospital
The Willard Psychiatric Center stretches for hundreds of acres here, giving way gently to the rural streets and small houses perched on its edges.
It is hard to separate the hospital from the community: Willard is Romulus's employer, its social center, its soul.
But Willard, which houses some of the oldest and longest-term mental patients in the state system, was built more than 100 years ago, when the mentally ill were shunted off to live out their lives in vast state hospitals.
Now, as the state tries to replace its hospitals with new community-based treatment programs, Willard is being told, in effect, that it is superfluous.


New Jersey Is No Haven for Knicks
Knock knock.
Who's there?
The Knicks.
The Knicks who?
The Atlantic Division leaders came knock, knock, knocking on the Meadowlands door of their upstart cross-river rivals tonight, and the New Jersey Nets showed them absolutely no respect.


Dwight L. Bolinger, 84, Authority In English and Spanish Languages
Dwight L. Bolinger, a prominent English linguistic expert and scholar of the Spanish language, died Feb. 23 at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 84 years old and resided in Palo Alto.
Dr. Bolinger died of cancer, his family said.


Barbara Rosenthal and Robert Cumins Marry
Barbara Lynne Rosenthal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Kane of West Hampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday in Englewood, N.J., to Robert Alan Cumins, a son of Mildred Schurman of Cranbury, N.J., and the late Howard Cumins.
Rabbi Simon Glustrom performed the ceremony at the home of Dr.
Ken Youner, a family friend.


Political Slam-Dance; The New Jersey Powerful Call the Tune As Congressional Lines Are Redrawn
The decennial rite of Congressional redistricting is a curious dance, supposedly driven by the high motive of making every voter equal under the principle of one person one vote.
But it is really about raw political power, and little else.
That became increasingly clear this week as a special bipartisan commission appointed by legislative and party leaders concluded the last of three public hearings before going into the painful business of drawing a redistricting map that will eliminate one of the state's 14 members of the United States House of Representatives.
By all accounts, the leading candidate to draw the short straw is Representative Frank Pallone Jr., who represents the Third Congressional District, which curls like a sea horse along the Atlantic shore in Monmouth and Ocean Counties.


Dark Dates in Knicks History
Not to rub it in, but the Knicks' 81-68 loss to the Lakers last Wednesday night was more, or rather less, than the team's worst scoring performance since the 24-second shot clock was introduced in 1964.
As a matter of humiliating fact, individual players have scored 68 or more points in a game 11 times in National Basketball Association history, four times, as it happens, against the Knicks.
Here, for the record, is the list:


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The collapse of natural gas prices is delivering the worst jolt to the weakened oil and gas industry since oil prices fell by more than half in early 1986.
Many giant companies have announced layoffs or reduced spending.
Hundreds of smaller companies are going out of business.
And companies with foreign operations are raising their already substantial oil and gas investments overseas, increasing U.S. reliance on imported energy.  [ Page A1. ]


Citing Increased Bias and Crime, Jewish Militant Groups Live
In the New York City neighborhoods where Rabbi Meir Kahane got his start 24 years ago, ideological successors to the slain rabbi's Jewish Defense League are once again seeking recruits for what they describe as militant Jewish self-defense.
When a Soviet Jewish emigre was shot to death in January in a late night holdup in Brighton Beach, the Jewish Defense Organization was quickly at the side of his family.
It held demonstrations and promised to create street patrols in an effort to reach out to Jewish Soviet emigres, insular and uncertain how to organize in America.


Couples's Favorite Course Yields Victory in Playoff
Fred Couples took advantage of his favorite golf course to get back on the fast track for 1992 by defeating Davis Love 3d in sudden death today to win his second Nissan Los Angeles Open.
Couples, who hit his tee shot on the Riviera Country Club's first hole out of bounds, birdied the first sudden- death hole, the 311-yard par-4 10th, to stay alive.
On the second playoff hole, the 180-yard par-3 14th, he hit a 6-iron to 10 feet and holed the putt for his seventh career victory and $180,000.


COLLAPSE IN PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS SHAKES PRODUCERS
The collapse of natural gas prices in the last three months, to the lowest winter level in more than a decade, is giving the nation's weakened oil and gas industry its worst jolt since oil prices fell by more than half in early 1986.
Many giant companies have announced layoffs or reduced spending for new wells, and hundreds of smaller companies, many of them family-run, are going out of business.
As oil companies increase their investments overseas, where costs are lower and potential discoveries more promising, the nation's reliance on imported energy increases.


Dance in Review
Irondale Ensemble Project The House of Candles  Sometimes a production may be very well performed and still not wholly satisfactory.
The version of "Antigone" that the Irondale Ensemble Project presented Saturday night was a venture of this sort.


A Top 10 List For Ski Touring
You watched LYUBOV EGOROVA ski through the Alps to five Olympic medals, and now you, too, want to take up cross-country skiing.
Where to go?
Snow Country magazine has the answer, or rather 10 of them, in what the magazine calls the first systematic rating of 120 Nordic resorts.
Take your pick and pack. But hurry. Spring is just around the corner.


Bridge
Most authorities approve of third-hand openings that are slightly below a normal standard.
Slightly, in this context, means one point or perhaps two.
But on the diagramed deal from the Long Island Regional Flight A Stratified Pairs, played Thursday in Smithtown, L.I., Ken Cohen of Philadelphia went much further and opened the 9-point East hand, vulnerable, with one spade.
This almost required his partner, Mary Wolf, also of Philadelphia, to struggle in one no-trump.
But South came to the rescue with a bid of two clubs and landed in two no-trump.
This was a reasonable contract, which would make an overtrick on a good day, but the breaks were bad and the defense good.


INSIDE
Plowshares Into Dollars
Nurtured by local governments, new companies are trying to retool an economy that boomed with war and slumped with peace.
Page B8.
Inquiry on AIDS Researcher
The American co-discoverer of H.I.V., who is the subject of a Federal inquiry, is under investigation again, Government officials say.
Page B9.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of March1, 1992: MONDAY Albertsons Aluminum Co Amer Harnischfeger Inds


Fearing North Korea Too Fast
Is North Korea rushing to develop nuclear arms while deceitfully fending off international inspection with promises?
That suspicion gained a little altitude last week after testimony by Robert Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence.
It was possible to infer that the North Koreans are within a couple of months of nuclear pay dirt.
But that's not what Mr.
Gates said and that's not what the intelligence community judges to be the fact.
Even if North Korea bargains hard in the talks with South Korea to resume tomorrow, it is nowhere near building The Bomb.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Air and Water Technologies Corp., 1.3 million class A shares. Allen &amp; Co.
American Income Holdings Inc., 4.55 million shares. Morgan Stanley.


Death Toll Rises to 23 in Collapse Of Roof at Arab Cafe in Jerusalem
The death toll in an Arab cafe whose roof collapsed rose to 23 today as rescue teams pulled more bodies from the wreckage.
Officials called the incident on Saturday one of the worst disasters in this city's recent history.
In a rare moment of common purpose, Israelis and Palestinians worked side by side to find survivors and dig out the dead, but later said their cooperation was an anomaly that could not erase tensions in this ethnically divided city.


Israeli-Arab Shelling Ends Lull in Lebanon
A fresh outbreak of artillery exchanges in southern Lebanon shattered a weeklong lull today as the pro-Iranian Party of God vowed to step up its armed struggle against Israel.
But accounts of the fighting differed.
In a statement today the Party of God claimed responsibility for an attack against an Israeli Army outpost in southern Lebanon, saying three Israeli soldiers were killed and an unspecified number wounded.
Security officials here said that minutes after the statement was released, 40 shells struck the Shiite Muslim village of Kfar Rumman in the hills east of the port city of Sidon.


A Giacometti's Modesty Fosters a Legacy of Fakery
Compared with his more famous brother, Alberto, Diego Giacometti considered himself an unimportant sculptor, modestly refusing to number his bronze animals and pieces of furniture on the ground that his works were little more than interior decoration.
But since his death in 1985 at the age of 82, Diego Giacometti has been flattered by the worst form of imitation: whether because of the quality of his sculptures or the reflected fame of his brother, the art world has been flooded with illegal casts and fakes of his bronzes.


Studio Chief's Star Rises at Fox
Shortly before 9 A.M. last Monday, Joe Roth, the head of the 20th Century Fox movie studio, was called into the office of Rupert Murdoch, chairman of Fox's parent, the News Corporation.
Mr.
Murdoch told him that Barry Diller, who ran Fox's television and movie operations, was leaving.
"For how long?" Mr. Roth asked, facing his boss.


What's the Angle on Seles? She's Too Sharp for Martinez in Final
She hits the ball harder than anyone else, finds angles the mathematicians have yet to discover and shows an appetite for winning that is nothing short of insatiable.
There's been no scientific evidence that Monica Seles is of extraterrestrial extraction, but some of her chastened opponents are beginning to suspect it.
How did she celebrate her latest display of invincibility?
She hopped in an air balloon this afternoon and disappeared into the smoggy stratosphere above the Palm Springs desert.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 10 about Japan's largest Buddhist sect misstated the sect's attitude toward its largest lay organization.
The sect, Nichiren Shoshu, says it has excommunicated the lay group, Soka Gakkai, but not its leaders.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters In Two Regions With Primaries Tomorrow, the Primary Emotion is Anger; People in Denver Express Disdain for Candidates
A weed never stands a chance along Fenton Street, where manicured lawns and sculptured bushes surround tidy brick-and-shutter homes.
The sidewalks are clean and clear, except for a chalked outline for hopscotch.
And bumper stickers pledge allegiance to the flag and the Broncos football team.
Like most Americans, the people on Fenton Street, in the southwest Denver neighborhood of Bear Valley, consider themselves to be the bulwark of the great middle class, the taxpaying, law-abiding, family-centered voters being wooed by the Presidential contenders.
But with the Colorado primary set for Tuesday, the candidates of both parties seem about as popular in this neighborhood as crabgrass.


Key Points in Decree on Saudi Rule
Following, in unofficial translation from the Arabic, are key articles from the royal decree by King Fahd establishing a Consultative Council:  ARTICLE 1
. . .
A Consultative Council shall be established according to His law and in concordance with the Book of God and His Prophet, to retain ties of brotherhood, cooperation and faith. . . .
ARTICLE 3
The Council will consist of 60 members and a president, chosen by the King, from among people of knowledge and expertise and specialists.
The duties, obligations and rights of its members and all related matters will be set by a royal order.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about hunger in Somalia misstated the number of armed men guarding the port of Mogadishu, where food might be delivered.
The United Nations says it is 780, not "about 80."


The End of a San Francisco Cliffhanger


Black Question Is the Answer
Black Question, one of the leading candidates for the Kentucky Derby earlier this winter, may have revived his chances today when he won the Lord Avie Stakes by 1 1/2 lengths at Gulfstream Park.
The 3-year-old colt, owned by J. B. Tafel and trained by Carl Nafzger, appeared to have abdicated his chances for the Derby three weeks ago when he ran 10th in the Preview Stakes here.
But Nafzger switched him to the grass course in an experiment, and the horse responded with a solid victory over Conte di Savoya, who in turn led Binary Light by three lengths.
The winner went the mile and an eighth in 1:48 3/5 and paid $16.60 for $2 to win.


Slugger Has Yet to Put His Salary Out of Sight
Before he became manager of the Mets last fall, Jeff Torborg spent three years as manager of the Chicago White Sox.
His tenure in Chicago happened to parallel Frank Thomas's first three years in the White Sox organization.
"When we first got him, we heard he had big power, but we didn't really know what kind of hitter he was," Torborg said recently of Thomas.


Bolivian, Talking Kindly of U.S., Seeks Investment
He was an exiled revolutionary in the 1970's.
He had close ties with Willy Brandt of Germany and Olof Palme of Sweden, two leading Social Democrats.
His campaign oratory had distinct anti-American overtones.
And he placed a distant third in the 1989 national elections.
So when Jaime Paz Zamora emerged as Bolivia's President that August, many here wondered if his leadership would divert Bolivia from a three-year course of stability and low inflation.


Music Notes
Program Cancellations
The question "Is the classical music world healthy?" usually has people worrying about the median age of the audience or about the sales of concert tickets and recordings.
But lately the question has taken on a literal meaning, as an unusual number of performers have canceled their New York concerts because of illness.
The latest cancellation was that of Wolfgang Sawallisch, the 68-year-old German conductor who is to succeed Riccardo Muti as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra in 1993.
Mr.
Sawallisch was to conduct the orchestra from March 5 to 17, his only two weeks with the ensemble this season.
The schedule included a March 10 Carnegie Hall performance with the Russian pianist Yevgeny Kissin.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; In Expectations Game, Beating Odds Means All
When Gov.
Bill Clinton faced the television cameras the night of the New Hampshire primary smiling broadly, few in the crowd showed surprise.
The Arkansas Governor may have lost the primary to former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, but he had achieved another, perhaps more consequential victory: he had beaten the point spread.
If what matters in July is the delegate count at the party convention, in February and March what matters more is the impression of untapped strength.
A stronger-than-anticipated showing proves the candidate is picking up steam, and this in turn generates cash and coverage.
A weaker-than-expected showing, even if it is a victory, suggests a campaign in retreat.


Turnout in Bosnia Signals Independence
A large turnout of voters appeared today to have guaranteed a victory for independence in a referendum in the ethnically mixed central Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A vote in favor of independence would further the disintegration of Yugoslavia that began last summer with the secession of the republics of Slovenia and Croatia, touching off the first major war on the European continent since World War II.
A cease-fire took effect in early January.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Canucks Romp, 11-0  The Vancouver Canucks recorded the biggest margin of victory in their history and handed the Calgary Flames their worst loss ever, scoring six power-play goals on the way to an 11-0 victory yesterday in Vancouver.
Surprisingly, the Flames outshot the Canucks, 30-28.
Trevor Linden, Garry Valk and Sergio Momesso scored two goals each for Vancouver, which tied a team record for goals in a game. (AP)
Bruins 4, Capitals 1: Dave Poulin, who missed the first 58 games of the season because of an abdominal injury, scored the game-winning goal in the victory over Washington in Landover, Md. (AP)
Oilers 4, Jets 2: Norm Maciver's goal at 13 minutes 7 seconds of the second period snapped a tie as Edmonton beat host Winnipeg. (AP)
Maple Leafs 6, North Stars 2: A United States Olympian, Joe Sacco, had his first two National Hockey League goals as Toronto routed Minnesota.
Sacco played 20 games for the Leafs last season without scoring. (AP)
Flyers 1, Sharks 0: Ron Hextall made 30 saves and recorded his third shutout of the season as Philadelphia defeated San Jose in Daly City, Calif. (AP)
Blackhawks 3, Sabres 1: Jeremy Roenick set up a third-period goal that broke a scoreless tie, then added an insurance goal three minutes later as Chicago beat host Buffalo. (AP)
SKIING  Tomba Lags Behind  It had been two years since Alberto Tomba of Italy competed in a super giant slalom race.
And yesterday in Shizukuishi, Japan, it showed.
Tomba, just off his double-medal winning performance at the Winter Olympics, was 15th behind winner Paul Accola in the Super G. With the victory, Accola got 100 points and leads the second-place Tomba in the overall World Cup standing, 1,470-1,162. (AP)
BOXING  Nelson Keeps Title  Azumah Nelson of Ghana stopped Australian Jeff Fenech in the eighth round of a bout in Melbourne, Australia, yesterday to retain the World Boxing Council superfeatherweight title. (AP)
HORSE RACING  A.P.
Indy Victorious  A.P.
Indy, the favorite, charged in the final furlong to edge Treekster by three-fourths of a length in Saturday's $157,800 San Rafael Stakes at Santa Anita in Arcadia, Calif.
A.P.
Indy stayed just off the pace of Treekster, then rallied to finish in 1:352/5 in the one-mile course for 3-year-olds.
The winner, ridden by Eddie Delahoussaye, paid $3, $2.60 and $2.20 for $2 across the board. (AP)
GOLF  U.S.
Team Holds On  The United States won only two of eight matches in the final round of the Chrysler Cup Senior World Team Championship, but that was enough for a 54-46 victory over the international team yesterday in Sarasota, Fla. (AP)
AUTO RACING  Elliott Outlasts Allison  Bill Elliott won a battle of Fords, driving away from Davey Allison, the Daytona 500 winner, in the late stages to earn the victory yesterday in the Goodwrench 500 in Rockingham, N.C.
Elliott pulled away steadily over the final 100 miles, beating Allison to the finish line by a whopping 12.75 seconds.
The victory was Elliott's first for his team owner, Junior Johnson, whom he joined during the off season. (AP)
Mansell Wins in South Africa: Britain's Nigel Mansell led all the way and his Italian teammate, Riccardo Patrese, finished second as the new Williams-Renault cars dominated the South Africa Grand Prix in Johannesburg, the first race on the 1992 circuit. (AP)
MARATHON  Treacy Wins in L.A.
John Treacy of Ireland fought back leg cramps to win the Los Angeles Marathon yesterday in 2 hours 12 minutes 29 seconds.
A fatal shootout took place in an area where families were reuniting with competitors and vendors were selling food and drinks.
A 30-year-old Inglewood, Calif., area resident was shot to death in an altercation with two police officers.
Two runners from the Commonwealth of Independent States, Madina Biktagirova and Ramilia Burangulova, finished 1-2 in the women's competition, with both smashing the 2:29:38 course record set last year.
Biktagirova, from Belarus, was timed in 2:26:23, and Burangulova, from Russia, finished in 2:28:12. (AP)
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Holy Trinity Wins Title  Doug Benzenburg scored 17 points and grabbed 6 rebounds to lead Holy Trinity to a 43-41 victory over St.
Dominic's in the Nassau Suffolk Catholic High School Athletic Association championship game yesterday at Nassau Community College.
Holy Trinity (15-8) advances to play the city representative in a semifinal game for the Catholic Class B state championship.


Restoring Heritage and Raising Hopes for Future
IN the 81 years since Andrew Carnegie's money built a library here, prosperity has come and gone in this blue-collar community of small stores, empty factories and modest houses packed closely on narrow streets.
What remained largely intact was the library, as squat and staunch as so many municipal structures of its era, a massive piece of brick and masonry that once stood out for its grandeur and now barely stands out at all, its Georgian facade obscured by a boxy brick addition.


Brock Adams Quits Senate Race Amid Sex Misconduct Allegations
Senator Brock Adams of Washington gave up his campaign for a second term today after a newspaper quoted eight unidentified women who accused him of sexual misconduct over a period of years.
Denying the accusations at an emotional news conference here, the 65-year-old Senator, a liberal Democrat who was Secretary of Transportation under President Jimmy Carter, said his decision to drop out of the race was "not an admission of anything." And he urged the press to "begin to police yourselves."


With Varying Degrees of Openness, More Companies Lure Gay Dollars
Christopher Huizenga's recipe for a perfect Bloody Mary calls for Absolut vodka, a brand that is widely advertised in gay newspapers.
He buys underwear with the Calvin Klein label because of what he calls the company's "gay sensitive" ads in mainstream magazines.
He drives a Jaguar, but after reading about a pioneering ad campaign in Australia, halfway around the world from his New Jersey home, he says his next car may be a top-of-the-line Toyota.


Longer School Hours and Terms Would Ease Day-Care Burden; 'Blood Money'
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 10 report on the Schools Chancellor's plan to lengthen the New York City school year erroneously states that "summer school assignments are regarded as plums."


Sending a Giant Message to Albany


Investors Hurt When Trades Shift
Unbeknownst to most investors, many brokers complete trades of stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange at other exchanges or in the over-the-counter market at terms slightly less favorable to investors.
In return for shifting the trades, the brokers receive payments -- in effect, bounties -- for diverting the business.


Suspend, or Undermine, the Rules?
In the month since President Bush declared a moratorium on Government regulations, the volume of new rules and proposals has shrunk to 25 per week, versus a weekly average of 149 last year, with no visible harm to the public.
But the operative word is "visible." Mr.
Bush's penchant for invisible manipulation invites mistrust.
On Jan. 28, Mr.
Bush ordered a 90-day review of regulations with an eye to modifying or eliminating whatever the law allows.
Meanwhile, work is suspended on all new regulations except those affecting health and safety, those with statutory deadlines and any that stimulate growth.


Charities See Opportunity in Troubles at United Way
The forced resignation last week of the longtime president of United Way of America could be the opening wedge for competing charitable federations to break United Way's near-monopoly on giving in the workplace and could change how United Way itself does business.
The competing federations, representing women and minorities, advocates of social change and environmentalists, have been grumbling for years that they have been frozen out of United Way fund raising.
Some now contemplate the prospect of getting a share of employees' payroll deductions.
In the last United Way drive, 14 million employees gave $1.5 billion in campaigns at 141,000 offices and factories.


Congress Can Right High Court's Errors
To the Editor:
The Rehnquist Court is threatening a major step backward.
Almost 40 years ago, the Supreme Court ruled that those convicted in a state court could have full review of their Federal constitutional claims in a Federal court by the use of the ancient writ of habeas corpus.
Not until then did state court criminal proceedings effectively become governed by the Federal Constitution.


In 60's, They Missed Assassination Evidence; Cheap, Unreliable Rifle
To the Editor:
William Manchester (letter, Feb. 5) announces: "I needed no authority to assess Lee Harvey Oswald's marksmanship. As a World War II Marine, I had qualified as an expert rifleman on the Parris Island, S.C., range. Oswald, a former Marine, had also qualified."


Differing Styles Bring Winning Results
Chris Byrd gave a boxing clinic.
Robert Allen ignored the subtleties for sledgehammer power.
Their approaches, and styles, differed.
But Byrd, in the 165-pound class, and Allen, in the 156-pound class, were the hits in the finals of the United States boxing championships Saturday night at the Broadmoor World Arena.


Officers' Assault Trial Nears Opening
Over the last month, lawyers have sifted through a pool of 2,000 people, searching for an impartial jury to hear the case of a videotaped police beating that almost everyone here has seen over and over again.
The final cut of 141 prospects is being questioned now, and opening arguments are expected this week in the suburb of Simi Valley before 12 jurors and 6 alternates, who by viewing the videotape have in effect become witnesses to the incident.
The case was moved to Simi Valley, 35 miles northeast of Los Angeles, after defense lawyers won a change of venue.


Shooting at Finish Line of Los Angeles Marathon


Review/Music; Mahler's 'Raging Sea of Sound' in Maazel's Hands
For about 70 minutes on Friday night in Carnegie Hall, it seemed as if Lorin Maazel and the Vienna Philharmonic had been put on this earth for no other purpose than to bring Mahler's Fifth Symphony to life.
All doubts about Mr.
Maazel's sense of structure and style raised during Mozart's Symphony No. 40 earlier in the evening were dissolved; all speculation about whether the Vienna was losing its distinctive string timbre (also in the Mozart work) seemed misguided.
The previous night, as part of this international tour celebrating the orchestra's 150th anniversary, the organization's tradition deserved more celebration than the concert.
But this time, at concert's end, when Mr.
Maazel and the orchestra applauded each other, accompanied by the audience's ovation, the parties risked only understatement.


Textron Buys Cessna
Textron Inc., has completed its acquisition of the Cessna Aircraft Company from the General Dynamics Corporation.
Cessna will become a division of Textron's Aerospace Technology sector, James F. Hardymon, Textron's president and chief executive, said on Friday.
In January Textron and General Dynamics announced Textron's intention to buy Cessna for $600 million in cash.
Cessna, based in Wichita, Kan., employed about 5,400 people and recorded sales of approximately $820 million in 1991.
Cessna designs and manufactures business jets and utility turboprop aircraft.


Caver Leads Seton Hall To Victory
Throughout the early part of this season, Jerry Walker and Gordon Winchester tried, with limited success, to give Bryan Caver a piece of ageless advice: Don't look back, something might be gaining on you.
"Bryan wasn't playing his game, he wasn't playing on instinct," Winchester said.
"He was always looking over his shoulder, waiting to see if he was going to be yelled at or pulled out of the game."


Review/Music; For Rossini's 200th Birthday, His Own Music as Best Tribute
Rossini and Haydn, the most famous composers of their respective times, are celebrated more marginally in our own.
Indeed, the 200th anniversary of Rossini's birth on Saturday seemed a brief seismic anomaly next to the continuous earthquakes of the Mozart bicentennial.
What awaits Haydn in the year 2009 is not known, but one expects that, even beyond the grave, he will exercise enough good sense to sidestep the current phenomenon of a great man battered and wrung dry from relentless hospitality.
Yet for one day at least, Gioacchino Rossini fever attacked New York -- as if an entire bicentennial leap year had been squeezed into five hours.
Early on a cold, bright and windy Saturday morning, Rossini fans had formed a line reaching a block and a half around Alice Tully Hall, hoping for seats at Marilyn Horne's free midday concert.
At 3 o'clock, across the street at Avery Fisher Hall, 14 singers, the Concert Chorale of New York and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's conducted by Roger Norrington appeared before a giant portrait of the master draped with Italy's national colors, and gave a large audience about as much Rossini as the ear could handle.


Jay F. Sharbutt, 51, Longtime A.P. Writer
Jay F. Sharbutt, a correspondent, theater critic and most recently senior television writer for The Associated Press, died on Wednesday at his apartment in Brooklyn.
He was 51 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his former wife, Jeanne Drewsen, said.


Dov Scherzer Weds Ann Ehrenpreis
Ann Ehrenpreis, a daughter of Dr.
Leon Ehrenpreis of Brooklyn and Dr.
Ruth Shapiro of New York, was married last night in Long Island City, Queens, to Dov Scherzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Scherzer of Hillcrest, Queens.
The bride's father, a rabbi, performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge restaurant.
Mrs.
Scherzer, 29 years old, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, and she and her husband received law degrees from Boston University.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Has Bush Allies Anxious in Georgia
Struggling to hold the line against Patrick J. Buchanan, President Bush swept through Georgia this weekend urging Republican primary voters to reject the politics of protest and "send this President back for four more years."
The President's anxious courtship signified the stakes in Tuesday's primary here and the clear concern among the President's allies over the outcome.
Georgia marks the first head-to-head contest between Mr.
Bush and the conservative commentator since New Hampshire.
Mr.
Buchanan's attack commercials have turned it into a bitter affair and helped produce the extraordinary spectacle of a President encamped for the weekend in a primary state.


The Yankee Clipping: An Article Opens a Door
If spring training is a time for hopes and dreams, then perhaps Daryl Smith is in the right place.
Five days ago, in the heat of another Yankee workout, Smith stood in the stands at Fort Lauderdale Stadium clutching a worn newspaper clipping and holding tightly to one last chance to be a big league pitcher.
Today, he has an offer to join the team and perhaps to win a job on the roster.


Rivals Say the Heat Is Off; Top Fox Executives Bristle
In the wake of Barry Diller's stunning decision to resign as chairman of Fox Inc., many television industry executives are openly questioning whether the Fox Broadcasting Company can continue to thrive without its chief visionary.
But Fox's senior executives say the company will not be drastically affected.
Mr.
Diller built Fox Broadcasting into the fourth national television network in just five years, defying predictions that it would be a costly flop.
In the last year alone, Fox Broadcasting grew by 25 percent and generated $40 million in profits.


With Cuts and Uncertainty, L.I. Police Work Is No Longer a Plum Assignment
Being a police officer on Long Island, home to some of the nation's wealthiest suburbs, has long been regarded by law-enforcement professionals as a choice assignment.
The wages were among the highest in the nation and the crime rate was among the lowest.
But the troubled economy is rapidly changing things for officers in both the Nassau and Suffolk County departments, causing staff cuts, wage freezes and low morale just as the crime rate is on the rise.


As Students Learn Amid Violence, Parents Cope With Fear
With every bloodstain in New York City's public schools, Theresa Phillips grows more worried.
She says routine questioning of her 14-year-old son about his day at Sheepshead Bay High School in Brooklyn can now easily take the tone of a cross-examination.
She quizzes her son, Dario, about his choices of schoolmates and wants to know where he spends his time.
When her son is not looking, she said, she peeks through his belongings in search of signs of a more dangerous life style.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  MORE RIGHTS IN SAUDI ARABIA
Sweeping decrees touching everything from royal succession to personal privacy were announced by King Fahd.
The changes, including the country's first Constitution, exceeded expectations.
A1  A HUSH IN THE JEWISH LOBBY
The blizzard of letters and faxes by Jewish organizations on the issue of loan guarantees to Israel has slowed to a light flurry as the problem becomes more fraught with political complications.
A1


Ex-Soviet Force Is to Leave Caucasus Area
Dozens of military vehicles roared toward Nagorno-Karabakh today, apparently to organize the withdrawal of former Soviet troops from the disputed enclave after a week of intense fighting.
Two large convoys, including tanks, troop carriers and missile trucks, drove through Agdam, on the border of the area, toward Stepanakert, capital of the Caucasus territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
The territory, which lies entirely within Azerbaijan, has an Armenian majority.


Uneasy Debate For Jews in U.S. On Loans Issue
When the issue of new loan guarantees for Israel first came before Congress last September, American Jewish groups organized a national lobbying campaign replete with faxes, letter-writing and thousands of volunteers bused into Washington to press the Israeli case with lawmakers.
But when the issue came up again recently after being postponed for four months, lobbying by Jewish organizations on Israel's behalf was so low-key it was almost invisible.


Tsongkerclintkinbro Wins
With primaries, caucuses, a glut of rules on eligibility, incessant polling, media watches and reams of punditry, the Democratic candidates' spin doctors have ample material from which to fashion an argument that their man is the front runner.
Further evidence for this came over the weekend in the balloting that took place in Nebrarkamassacalowa.


Essay; Humiliating Israel
The depth of James Baker's anti-Israel animus was displayed last week when he complained to Congress, "Nobody else is asking us for $10 billion in addition to the $3 billion to $4 billion we give every year with no strings attached."
That was a lie twice over.
Secretary Baker is a lawyer who weighs his every word.
He knows that Israel asks only for a cosigner on a loan from private banks, has offered to pay the 2 or 3 percent set-aside costs and is by no means "asking us for $10 billion."


Longer School Hours and Terms Would Ease Day-Care Burden
To the Editor:
I applaud New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez for his proposal to lengthen the school day and school term (news article, Feb. 10).
Indeed, I believe his plan does not go far enough: A schedule that mirrors business (say, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.) would not only promote greater educational productivity, but also alleviate a family's day care burden and make a genuine contribution toward reshaping the value of an American education.


Medio Tiempo, American-Style
It's not that they didn't take to American football, but what seemed to delight fans in Barcelona, Spain, the most when the Dragons began play with the World League of American Football last year was the halftime festivities.
That's not surprising.
In contrast to American-style exravaganzas, the intermissions of European soccer games tend to be downright austere.


The Most for The Money
Rating baseball's bargains. A Steal
At a salary of Thomas of the White Sox was the best buy in baseball last year.
Overpriced?
With a $3.8 million salary last year, the Dodgers' Darryl Strawberry was no bargain at all, ranking 175th out of 181 players rated.
SportsMonday, page C1


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; Blacks Feel Like Wallflowers As No Candidates Woo Them
With only days to go before the Georgia Presidential primary, Marvin E. Lewis, who is black and is the superintendent of schools in rural Hancock County, had seen and felt little indication that there was a campaign going on.
Hardly any campaign signs have sprouted along the lonely, bumpy roads of this central Georgia county, which has a population that is 80 percent black.


Dance in Review
Walk Around the Block Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue (at 10th Street) Through March 15
Gail Conrad's new "Walk Around the Block," presented on Saturday night, is an oddly anomalous work.
The eveninglong tap piece is ambitious, but not ambitious enough.
It is full of ideas, yet surprisingly unthoughtful for the most part.
It is also, however, a brave and loving attempt to reinvent and extend the idiom of tap-dancing.


Leo Blank, 69, Builder With Diverse Ventures
Leo Blank, a real-estate developer and entrepreneur, died Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Jacksonville, Fla., with a second home in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


50 Years of Crime, and Stereotypes
DR.
FREDERICK K. GOODWIN, who resigned on Friday as the Bush Administration's top mental health official, recently likened aggressive instincts of male monkeys to violence in urban ghettos.
He might have had in mind the young killer from East New York, whom prosecutors described this way:
"He had a round face, thick lips, a flat nose and small ears, stuck close to his kinky hair. His arms had not waited for the rest of him. They dangled to his knees, completing a generally gorilla-like figure." He was, investigators concluded, "an animal in human guise."


Scientist Said to Assert Fraud in 'Star Wars'
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has been ordered by a special counsel to investigate assertions made by a Pentagon scientist that officials of the "Star Wars" anti-missile defense program had violated the law and engaged in "gross waste of funds," The Washington Post reported in Monday's issue.
The Post said the order to the Defense Secretary was made by the United States Office of Special Counsel, which was established by Congress to protect employees making such accusations against Government agencies.


Ophthalmologists To the Stars, And the Brewers
Since batters can't hit what they can't see, what they need in the ROGER CLEMENS fireball era isn't batting practice but seeing practice.
That's long been the word from DONALD TEIG and ALAN BERMAN, eye doctors to the athletic stars, who maintain that even the best hitters with the sharpest vision can benefit from their array of strobe lights and other electronic training techniques.
The specialists, whose equipment includes devices to measure 16 separate components of visual acuity from hand-eye and foot-eye coordination to peripheral awareness, visual concentration and depth perception, have something new this year.
They've crammed their $80,000 worth of testing and training equipment into a brand new, $20,000 van that can travel from one spring training site to another.
The doctors run an eye clinic in Connecticut.


POLAND IS SEEKING LATITUDE ON LOANS
Prime Minister Jan Olszewski has called on the International Monetary Fund to permit Poland greater latitude in navigating the treacherous path from a centrally planned economy to the free market.
In an interview on Friday, Mr.
Olszewski argued that the fund's established prescriptions for stabilizing ailing economies -- which include budgetary and monetary austerity -- are proving less relevant, sometimes even counterproductive, for former Communist nations.


San Diego State for Tarkanian?
Two days before what is expected to be his last game as coach of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, Jerry Tarkanian remains a candidate to become the coach at San Diego State.
A person familiar with Tarkanian's thinking said that Fred Miller, the San Diego State athletic director, who hired the coach while athletic director at Long Beach State, has not ruled out the possibility and told Tarkanian to wait until the end of the season.


3 Palestinians in Gaza Killed by Israeli Troops
Three Palestinians were shot to death by Israeli soldiers over the weekend as Arabs and troops clashed fiercely in the Gaza Strip.
Two men, one of them a teen-ager, were killed on Saturday in the Rafa refugee camp on the southern tip of the strip, prompting protest demonstrations and battles with Israeli soldiers today in which a third Palestinian was fatally shot.
He was identified as Ahmed Sarafandi, 18 years old.


Hurley Is Back in Form As Are the Blue Devils
A game that might have better captivated the nation back around New Year's Eve turned out to be rather regular Sunday fare here this afternoon as top-ranked Duke ended up toying with fourth-ranked and indecisive U.C.L.A.
As soon as Christian Laettner and Bobby Hurley began hoisting 3-pointers, the Blue Devils gained control of what had been a close game, and Duke went on to win, 75-65.


Airport Site Selected to Ease Congestion at O'Hare
Eight years after it began work on choosing a location for a new airport, a committee of business and political leaders from Indiana and Illinois finally agreed last week on an 8,200-acre site that stretches from Chicago's Southeast Side into Indiana.
The vote, which divided along state lines, marks a milestone in the years-long effort to ease congestion at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago.
But the proposed airport still faces major hurdles, among them Federal approval to develop the section of the site that is now wetlands, Federal money to help clean up toxic waste dumps at the site and an agreement with the thousands of people whose houses would have to be razed.


People
*
Nick Bothfeld was named executive vice president and director of strategic planning at Griswold Inc., Cleveland.
He was an executive vice president at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago.


Profane Mystery in Youth's Slaying; What Happened in the Folds of a Teen-Age Prayer Group
They grew up in this suburb 12 miles west of midtown Manhattan as untouched by mean streets as Kansas corn.
At 17, both were petty officers in a Navy cadet corps, seriously considering joining the real Navy after high school.
Both wore varsity letters, played the piano, went to church and worked part time.
Little wonder they were best friends.
Now one is dead -- garroted from behind in his car with an electrical cord that had been rigged at the ends with shoelaces looped as handles.
The other is charged with committing the murder in a conspiracy with four other teen-agers that sounds both like a deadly imitation of movie mobsters and a religious cult.


Computer Rankings Big on the Big Eight
When the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball committee meets a week from Sunday to announce the 64 teams for its Division I tournament, it will draw on information from a computer that gathers facts on strength of schedule and other pertinent data.
The New York Times has run the same Division I teams' information through a computer.
What The Times's data indicate, as many basketball insiders have been saying for much of the season, is that the strongest conference in the nation is the Big Eight.


A Taxi Man's Innovative Plan
The way ANDREW MURSTEIN figures it, if the Government will lend you money to buy a New York City taxi medallion, why not a National Basketball Association franchise?
Murstein comes by his figuring naturally.
He's a Knicks fan whose family's Medallion Funding Corporation, a Government-chartered Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company, has been lending Government money (and some of its own investors' funds) to black taxi owners for years.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS INCREASES SCHOOL SECURITY
Mayor Dinkins announced a $28 million program that would enhance security at the 40 most dangerous public high schools and middle schools in New York City.
Speaking from the pulpit of a Baptist church in Brooklyn four days after two students were shot dead in a hallway at Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York, the Mayor said that the use of metal detectors would be expanded from a weekly to a daily basis at that school and that security would be tightened at 35 other schools.
A1.


Foreign Affairs; Vance: A Nobel Life
Cyrus Vance guards himself with smiles, manners and friendliness.
So the warlords of Serbia and Croatia were surely disarmed into believing they could stare down his efforts to arrange a cease-fire between them -- as they had done many times before with other mediators.
But like so many committed to conflict and killing, the warlords had misjudged and underestimated this deeply tenacious, deeply moral man.


American Co-discoverer of H.I.V. Is Investigated Anew
Dr.
Robert Gallo, the American co-discoverer of the virus that causes AIDS and the subject of a Federal inquiry in connection with that discovery, is being investigated once again, Federal officials say, this time on charges of perjury and patent fraud.
At issue is the patent covering the test for detecting the human immunodeficiency virus, as well as the scientific glory for the remarkable research effort by which the virus was discovered and the detection test created.


Philadelphia Journal; Coat for the Homeless Is a Mobile Shelter, Too
An apparel design professor whose students have produced stuffed caterpillars for children with cerebral palsy and cloth blocks with Braille characters for blind toddlers has come up with an elegant robe that would move well on a runway with pieces designed by Giorgio Armani or Issey Miyake.
But the latest project was designed for the homeless and can double as a sleeping bag.
In this project, form is secondary to function, said the professor, David L. Wilson, who is director of fashion and apparel programs at the Philadelphia College of Textiles and Science, a four-year independent college.
"We wanted to provide moveable shelters for the hard-core homeless who don't have a place to go in severe weather," he said.


Choosing to Die at Home: Dignity Has Its Burdens
When the end finally came for Kay Maguire, she lay propped on pillows in the living room of her home here, holding the hands of her husband and her daughter.
"She gave a deep sigh and then she was gone," said Donald Maguire of his wife's death last summer after eight years of living with breast cancer.
"Just the way we wanted. No tubes. No machines. Just us and her."


In 60's, They Missed Assassination Evidence; The Postal Inspector
To the Editor:
In "Fueling the Conspiracy" (letter, Feb. 19), Edward Early questions the interrogation of Lee Harvey Oswald by Harry Holmes, a postal inspector: "It's hard to fathom that a civilian with no apparent involvement would be allowed to question a man who was in custody for the assassination of the President." Mr.
Early thus suspects that Harry Holmes may have deliberately delayed the transfer of Oswald to another jail, providing Jack Ruby with the opportunity to murder Oswald.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Warner Chief Moves to Lift Time Morale
GERALD M. LEVIN, who abruptly replaced N. J. Nicolas Jr. as president of Time Warner Inc. 10 days ago, has moved rapidly to shore up the sagging morale at the company's magazines.
The gloom has been particularly thick at Time, where layoffs and other cost-cutting measures have created a perception among many insiders that, as a priority, journalism had become a distant second to profit.


DINKINS PROMISES MONEY FOR SAFETY IN VIOLENT SCHOOLS
From the pulpit of a Brooklyn Baptist church yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a $28 million program to identify the 40 most dangerous public high schools and middle schools in New York City and to bolster security at them.
Less than a week after two students were shot dead in a hallway at Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York, the Mayor responded to a plea from Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, who had asked on Thursday to expand the use of metal detectors at the city's 21 most troubled schools.


Tax Lobbyists Scrambling To Catch Up on Capitol Holl
In the dark of Monday night, long after gaggles of schoolchildren have clambered back onto tour buses and the last Congressional aide has disappeared into the subway, a scraggly line will form outside the Dirksen Senate office building for a pre-dawn vigil.
Clad in sneakers, racing tights and zippered jackets, bicycle messengers will bide their time for hours, holding places in line for tax lobbyists in pinstripes and lawyers in tasseled leather shoes.
The goal of this ritual, which will cost the lawyer-lobbyists $20 an hour for each messenger, will be a coveted seat in the Senate Finance Committee's cramped hearing room on Tuesday, when the panel begins drafting tax legislation.


Stocks Firmer in Tokyo
Stock prices rose in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 21,487.82, up 149.01 points, or less than 1 percent.
At midday, the index was up 181.48 points.
On Friday, the Nikkei gained 5.11 points.


Tani R. Perez, Lawyer, Weds
Tani R. Perez, the daughter of Consuelo A. Rosas of New York and the late Juan Perez-Cruz, was married yesterday in Stowe, Vt., to Michael Charles Mauer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Charles Mauer of Scranton, Pa.
Leighton C. Detora, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Topnotch Hotel.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Candidates Go on Attack, Mostly Gently, in 3 Debates
For the second straight day, Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas, front-runners in the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination, came under attack today in a pair of televised debates in primary states, one in Georgia and the other in Maryland.
In Atlanta this morning, Mr.
Clinton, the Governor of Arkansas, and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California criticized Mr.
Tsongas's tax proposals, which include cuts in capital gains taxes.
Mr.
Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, did not counterattack.
But Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska again raised the touchy issue of the military draft with Mr.
Clinton and accused him of giving "a baloney answer" on health care.


World Economies


Neilson Milestone Is an Easy Mark
It was not a bad night to be Roger Neilson, unassuming coach of the very best National Hockey League team that ever saw March 1, 1992.
The Rangers won again, 9-4, playing tic-tac-toe all over the woeful Hartford Whalers for their fourth straight victory and their 11th straight game at Madison Square Garden without a loss.
The Washington Capitals lost, so the Rangers moved six points atop the Patrick Division with 15 games left to play.


With Help From Local Governments, U.S. Industry Tries to Remake Itself
The nondescript gray building behind a macadamia nut tree looks like most other industrial plants at the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains east of Los Angeles.
But inside, 19 workers are drawing a vision of a brave new economic world that will not depend on producing weapons of war.
They work for a tiny new company that is designing a prototype electric car, part of a new technology that many leaders in Southern California see as their main hope for retooling an economy that has long boomed with war and slumped with peace.
In an age of peace, the challenge for this and many other regions is to find something to replace missiles, bombers and fighter jets.


Grenade Thrown in Istanbul Injures Beggar at Synagogue
Two unidentified attackers threw hand grenades at Neve Shalom synagogue in Istanbul today, wounding a blind beggar, the police said.
The Anatolian news agency said only one grenade exploded in the assault, at 4:50 A.M., and passers-by seized one of the attackers near the synagogue, close to the Galata Tower.


Review/Dance; The Score From a Robbins Ballet Adds Freight to a New Feld Work
Choreography is not a bed of roses, Eliot Feld appears to be saying lately.
He makes things particularly hard for himself and the viewer in "To the Naked Eye," his newest ballet.
An artist like Mr.
Feld, who is always prepared to take creative risks, is nothing short of admirable, but the question here is whether the risk is worth taking.


Chips and Technologies Is Target of Suit by Intel
The Intel Corporation has filed a patent infringement lawsuit against Chips and Technologies Inc., the latest company to clone Intel's 386 microprocessor.
In a suit filed Friday in Federal District Court for Northern California, Intel asked for unspecified damages and for injunctions to prevent Chips and Technologies from selling its versions of both the 386 microprocessor and the 387, a chip that specializes in mathematical operations.
Intel has also asked for unspecified damages.


Torborg Needs Some Repair
Mets Manager Jeff Torborg is scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee Monday to remove damaged cartilage.
Torborg, whose leg has been bothering him for months, is expected to miss only one day of spring training.
The procedure will be performed in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., by Dr.
Dan Kanell, the team physician for the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times Dunston Reminded of Old School
TWO days after the shootings, Shawon Dunston, busy on his own, still hadn't heard the news.
Two students had been killed by a fellow student bearing a grudge and a .38-caliber pistol in a hallway between classes last week at Thomas Jefferson High School in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
"Oh man," said Dunston, the Chicago Cubs shortstop, by telephone from Mesa, Ariz.
"Oh man. In the hallways."
Dunston is in spring training with the Cubs, entering his eighth major league season.
That is a long way from where I first saw him, in 1982, when he was an 18-year-old infielder playing in a game for Jefferson.
He would soon become the No. 1 draft pick in the nation.


The Very Model of Efficiency
In a drab suburb of this prosperous city stands a squat red-brick building that might pass for a high school.
It is as unremarkable as the train station opposite.
Yet recently, top executives of I.B.M. have been taking a keen interest in the place as they seek to reorganize the world's largest computer business.
The five-story building is the world headquarters of the Asea Brown Boveri Group, an electrical engineering conglomerate with sales last year of about $28 billion.
But in the offices lining the ghostly corridors of its headquarters, a mere 140 people work.
If lean and mean is the corporate watchword of the 90's, then Asea is the exemplar.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 21 about Gov.
Bill Clinton and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts challenging each other's right to appear on the primary ballot in New York misstated a provision of the state's election laws.
To appear on the ballot, a candidate must get at least 100 signatures from enrolled members of his party from each of 17 of the 34 Congressional districts, in addition to 10,000 signatures over all.


Moroccan King, a Friend of U.S., Rejects Hard Line Toward Libya
King Hassan II of Morocco, one of the Arab world's most pro-Western rulers, has proposed the establishment of an international court for terrorism cases, perhaps under United Nations auspices, to give two Libyans accused of blowing up Western airliners a fair trial "on neutral ground."
"If the accused were judged in Libya, that would not be credible," King Hassan said.
"If they were judged by an American or English court, that, too, might not seem credible. Let's find a median solution."


In Debate Over Security in Schools, System's Diversity Keeps Solutions Elusive
The student stood outside Wingate High School in Brooklyn's Crown Heights and talked about violence, about the fights every day and the guns.
He nodded at six young thugs on the steps.
"They all have guns," he said.
He gave no name but spoke with candor about weaponry.
"The smallest, a .25, is the best gun to have in school. It's protection. You live in Brooklyn, you got to have a gun."
At Forest Hills High School in an attractive part of Queens, students spoke of academic excellence and discipline in a setting where fights are rare and drugs and guns seemingly nonexistent.
"I've been here three years, and nothing has happened involving weapons," said Sandra Flechas, a 16-year-old junior.


Accounts
*
Levelor Corp., Sunnyvale, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, for the window product manufacturer's account, previously in-house.
A review also included the San Francisco offices of McCann-Erickson, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Pacific and Young &amp; Rubicam.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Mini-bonds Draw Small Investors
Despite a gloomy economic outlook and a four-year financial plan that ratings agencies and New York State officials say is based on shaky revenue assumptions, this week thousands of small investors are expected to give New York City a big vote of confidence.
As part of a $950 million offering of tax-exempt and taxable securities expected by midweek, the city is set to reserve a portion of the securities for small investors.
The city will designate $100 million worth of the offering for sale at prices as low as $1,200 for a $5,000 bond due in 20 years, far less than the $25,000 minimum purchase at most securities firms.


U.S. Woman Sets 100 Freestyle Mark
The United States Olympic swimming trials got off to a spectacular start today.
Jenny Thompson broke the world record for the women's 100-meter freestyle, the first time an American had done that in 61 years.
Nelson Diebel twice shattered the American record for the men's 100-meter breast-stroke and Janet Evans failed to qualify for the Olympic team in an event in which she won a gold medal in 1988.
No performances were more startling than the two by Thompson, a 19-year-old Stanford freshman from Dover, N.H.
In the morning, she won her qualifying heat in 54.48 seconds.
After a fitful nap, she won the evening final by 3 feet in 54.63 seconds, the second fastest time ever.
That drew a rousing ovation from the 4,000 spectators at the Indiana University Natatorium's 50-meter championship pool.


Take It From Someone Who Plays an Expert on TV
IF, as it is said, life imitates art, then advertising imitates both.
Nowhere is that more evident than when actors and actresses appear in ad campaigns as the characters they play in popular television series or hit movies.
The comedian Tim Allen, star of the ABC television sitcom "Home Improvement," is entering that intersection of popular culture and commerce.
Beginning next Monday, Mr.
Allen, who on his series portrays the host of a cable-television home-improvement program called "Tool Time," will appear as a fix-it aficionado in advertising for Builders Square, a chain of home-improvement warehouse stores.
The ads were created by the Ross Roy Retail division of Ross Roy Inc.


BASEBALL: The Best Buys In Baseball; Or, Who Produced the Most for the Least
Based on a combination of his performance and his salary, Frank Thomas of the Chicago White Sox was the biggest bargain in baseball last season.
Thomas, playing his first full season in the major leagues, clearly provided the most production for the least pay, pairing a penchant for getting on base with power production while earning only $120,000.
Using a formula that combines on-base percentage, slugging percentage and salary, Thomas emerges with a dollars-per-production point rating of 119 (the lower rating the better).
That put him well ahead of the ratings of players who earned millions more than the White Sox first baseman.


Quebec's Albatross Headed for Gulls?
A furniture-store owner has offered a two-year contract to ERIC LINDROS, the Canadian hockey star, that would pay the player $500,000 a year to join the San Diego Gulls of the International Hockey League.
"I've made the offer to Eric and his family, through his agent," FRED COMRIE, a Canadian who owns Arnold's Furniture in San Diego, said this weekend.
"I've invited all of them to San Diego next week."


Protest in Tokyo as a New Anti-Gangster Law Takes Effect


Review/Television; Some 'Today' Segments Bigger Than Bite-Size
"Today" is showing signs of life.
One week last month the NBC fixture narrowly beat out ABC's "Good Morning America" for first place among network morning programs for the first time in more than two years.
Although it has since slipped back, the program's new executive producer, Jeff Zucker, predicts a winning record by the end of the year.
The most noticeable of Mr.
Zucker's innovations is a readiness to let the topical segments of the two-hour program run on longer than the customary three to five minutes.
All the early-morning shows carry extended reports on exceptional occasions, but most of the time they stick safely with bits-and-pieces programming that puts little strain on viewers' attention spans.
Can it be that the audience has been underestimated?
That remains to be seen, but one can already glimpse what the team of Jeff Zucker, Bryant Gumbel and Katherine Couric are up to.


CHRONICLE
BERNADETTE CASTRO has been known to open a couch or two in her day, so if the bidding on a Castro convertible that she is to auction tomorrow does not go high enough, "I will offer to deliver it and open it up and show the bidder how to do it myself," she said the other day.
Ms.
Castro will be auctioneer at a benefit for a program at Fordham Law School that will enable 25 students to do pro-bono work in the summer.
The convertible couch she will try to sell (she made convertibles famous when she appeared in television commercials for her father, Bernard, 44 years ago) is one of 140 goods or services to go on the block.


Ethiopia Unable to Get U.S. Aid Despite Reforms
After encouraging the new Ethiopian Government to embark on the country's first effort at democracy and offering economic aid if it went ahead with political liberalization, the United States finds itself unable to deliver the promised assistance.
Economic aid to Ethiopia, which was allied with the Soviet Union for more than a decade but with which the United States previously had close ties, has become a victim of the American Presidential campaign, say American officials here and in Washington.


Treasury's Auctions to Include 1-Year Bills
The Treasury plans to hold its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today and will offer 1-year bills on Wednesday.
Late on Friday, the three-month bills were bid at a price to yield 3.92 percent, and the six-month bills were bid at 3.97.


Gay, Lesbian Press Is Starting to Emerge Into the Mainstream
Led by a new generation of lesbians and gay men who view their homosexuality as a matter of pride rather than privacy, the gay press is emerging from the shadows to claim a place in the mainstream.
After years of being distributed without charge in bars and being dependent on sexually oriented advertisements for revenues, gay publications are changing their images and aspirations.


CHRONICLE
Another note from Fordham: ARTHUR R. TAYLOR, dean of the Fordham University Graduate School of Business Administration who is also dean of the faculty there, has been named president of Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa.
Mr.
Taylor, who was president of CBS from 1972 to 1976, will take over at the 1,700-student undergraduate liberal arts school in August, succeeding JONATHAN C. MESSERLI, who is retiring.
"We have made remarkable progress in these six years at Fordham," Mr.
Taylor said returning from Allentown the other day.
"We have moved to one of the highest positions in the country, in terms of quality, number of students and faculty, jobs and average salaries for our graduates. It has been a high point in my life.


Corrections
The "Pulse" chart in The Metro Section last Monday, comparing rents on two-bedroom apartments around the region, labeled the figures incompletely.
They were average rents for apartments that became available during the years shown, not for all apartments.


U.N. Seeks Third-World Ecology Aid
A proposal to give poor countries billions of dollars to help development without damaging the environment will be made on Monday at the opening of a major conference here.
Industrialized countries would provide such "earth increments" through existing aid-giving institutions.


Northgate Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Legendary Flop for Clashers
Mark down Feb. 28, 1992.
It was the day pay-per-view TV sank into the bog of virtual fraud, when viewers we were asked to pay $19.95 for the dubious privilege of watching Julius Erving, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and four other National Basketball Association retirees perpetrate a one-on-one "show."
The promoters' dream to make this an annual event (coming soon: Bird vs. Magic!) should be tossed aside immediately.
David Stern, the National Basketball Association commissioner, has no power over former players, but he should still pronounce such ignominy a taint on the game.


Review/Television; 'Frontline' Investigates the Real David Duke
All those "Frontline" viewers who were about to rush out and vote for David Duke for President because they thought he was a do-gooder will be stunned by "Who Is David Duke?" tonight at 9 on Channel 13.
Others will not be knocked off their couches by evidence that he is still a Ku Kluxer and a Nazi at heart.
Through interviews with sometime colleagues and acquaintances, bolstered by years of quotes from the man himself (Mr. Duke declined to participate), the hour demonstrates that although he has shed his mustache and some of his language about white power, black pickaninnies and Jewish control of everything, his opinions remain much what they were before he decided to go mainstream.


Europeans Worry About Ozone-Eating Chemicals
Concern over a possible depletion of the protective ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere as early as this spring has jolted politicians and commentators from Britain to Russia and prompted calls for more stringent environmental laws.
In recent weeks scientists and environmentalists have debated the startling message that a weakening ozone shield is no longer just a problem in far-off Antarctica: it could be about to occur overhead, above densely populated zones.


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Welcomes 9 New Members, 8 From the Former Soviet Union


A New Season: Strawberry Throws Out the First Book
You've watched him at bat, you've seen him in the field and you've undoubtedly read more about him than any other athlete of the last decade.
Now it's Darryl Strawberry's turn to tell his own story his own way, and if his new book, "Darryl," which is being delivered to bookstores this week, seems little more than a bitter rehash of what you thought you already knew, Strawberry will be surprised.


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Yankees Trying to Fit Barfield in Right Role
Every day, it's the same thing.
Jesse Barfield comes to camp, changes into his uniform, catches some fly balls in the outfield, takes his swings in the batting cage and then waits to see if this is the day he gets traded.
It has been like this since he arrived last week.
Work and wait.
And wonder.
But six days into workouts, Barfield is still a Yankee.


AnnTaylor Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


IHOP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BMR Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jacksonville Journal; Confederate Bastion Lowers the Flag
It is already spring in this northeast Alabama college town.
The tulip trees along Highway 21 have filled with fleshy pink blossoms, and the daffodils are up in the busy town square, where the statue of a Confederate soldier stands above the following inscription: "Times change, men often change with them. Principles never."
Times have changed in Jacksonville.
Just down the street from the Confederate monument, in a gray frame house with a cannon out front, a surrender took place the other day in the war over Southern memory.


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Nets Find Winning Is a Problem Solver
Following a light, almost giddy, hour of practice this afternoon, the New Jersey Nets retreated to the locker room for a brief celebration of trainer Fritz Massmann's 65th birthday.
The cake was cut.
The Nets sang "Happy birthday to Fritz." Bill Fitch excused himself.
"Now I know we can't sing," said the coach.


Central Newspapers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


International Law Won't Shield Libyan Agents; Air Hijacking
To the Editor:
Contrary to your report on the brouhaha in France stirred by medical aid for George Habash (news article, Jan. 31), Mr.
Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine was not "the first group to hijack aircraft in the late 1960's." Israel originated the practice in 1954.


Prince to Compose Score for Joffrey Ballet
Prince, the songwriter and performer, will compose the score for a Joffrey Ballet, "Billboards," which is to have its world premiere in January.
The four-part ballet will be choreographed by Laura Dean, Charles Moulton, Peter Pucci and Margo Sappington.
Prince offered to create a work for the Joffrey -- his first ballet score -- after he saw the company perform in 1991.
Some of the music will be based on "Thunder," a song from his latest album, "Diamonds and Pearls."
In announcing the new work, Gerald Arpino, director of the Joffrey, said: "Billboards represent our time, and I consider them an American folk art. I want to thank Prince for his generosity and his interest in the Joffrey."


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Sprinkler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Seneca Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


EDAC Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Under the Union Jack
What is now known as the United Kingdom is made up of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The union took place over three centuries, beginning in 1536 when King Henry VIII, the son of Henry VII, a Welsh prince, merged England and Wales under a single government.
Scotland was joined to England in the early 17th century by King James I, who was the first to refer to the union as the United Kingdom.
James had become King James VI of Scotland in 1567 when his mother, Mary Queen of Scots, gave up the throne; he became King James I of England after his cousin, Queen Elizabeth, died in 1603.


Nassau Sheriff Challenges Cuts in the County Budget
With catcalls from hundreds of correction officers sounding from the street below, the Nassau County Sheriff testified today that a $4.6 million budget cut imposed at the county jail to avert tax increases would actually increase costs by as much as $20 million.
"What I am trying to tell you is that I can't live under the current budget," Sheriff Joseph P. Jablonsky told the county's Board of Supervisors at a tense meeting punctuated by shouting matches between Democrats and Republicans.


Purchasers Report a Return to Expansion
The nation's purchasing managers said yesterday that the overall economy expanded sharply in February, pushed by surges in both production and the level of new orders.
It was the first time since November that the purchasing managers' index of economic activity showed the economy was expanding.
The National Association of Purchasing Management's index climbed to 52.4 percent, from 47.4 percent in January.
The five-percentage-point gain was the largest since a similar increase in June 1991 and ended a string of month-to-month declines stretching back to October, when the index fell 1.1 percentage points, to 53.2 percent.


Chalco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Department Stores Remain in Grave Condition
To the Editor:
"Department Stores' Fate" states: "Yet the traditional department store's share of the general merchandise market has declined much less than the highly visible bankruptcies of major stores would seem to indicate" (news analysis, Feb. 3).


Republic Pictures Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ad Director At Calvin Klein
Neil Kraft, one of the best-known figures in fashion retail advertising, has joined Calvin Klein Inc. in New York as senior vice president and director of advertising and creative services.
Mr.
Kraft, whose position at Calvin Klein's apparel and design company is new, will report to Mr.
Klein, a spokesman said yesterday.


Evidence of a Massacre Emerges in Azerbaijan


Ecolab reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Dismisses Libyan Offer on Neutral Trial Site for Bomb Suspects
The State Department said today that a Libyan offer to turn over to a neutral country for trial the two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet was nothing more than a delaying tactic.
But the department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the offer, made on Sunday in Cairo by Libya's Foreign Minister, did appear to be an admission that Libya "recognizes that it does have mechanisms for surrendering Libyan nationals."


Paris Journal; Coffee With Roll, Garcon, and Hold Your Tongue
Only a generation or two ago, snooty Parisian waiters would reserve their most disdainful looks for American tourists who were so evidently lacking in culture that they had to order their coffee and croissant in, mon Dieu, English.
But even then, far from the sidewalk cafe battlefront, English was already pushing French aside as the language of international diplomacy and commerce.
Soon afterward it began infiltrating the French language itself with words like "le weekend," "le blue-jean" and "le sandwich."


Market Place; Offering Looms For Wellcome
THE charitable foundation that owns 74 percent of Wellcome P.L.C., the British drug company, said yesterday that it planned to lower its stake to as little as 25 percent through an international offering that could raise more than $7.9 billion.
Wellcome's stock price fell in reaction, closing in London at $:10.66 ($18.72), down 60 pence ($1.05).
But analysts predicted that the shares would recover and resume their climb.
"In the long term, the offering is good news," said Jacquelyne Cantle of Smith New Court Securities Ltd.


Spec's Music reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Radiation in Smoking Can Damage Genes
To the Editor:


Careers; Investing In Skilled Work Force
A NEW center related to the University of Pennsylvania poses the challenge of how "to revitalize the economy by making long-term investments in a skilled work force."
Named the National Center on the Education Quality of the Work Force, it is part of the university's Institute f0r Research on Higher Education, in Philadelphia, and is financed by the Pew Charitable Trusts.


CML Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pistons Beat Bullets  Orlando Woolridge scored 13 of his 19 points in the second half as the Detroit Pistons rallied to beat the Washington Bullets, 99-89, last night in Auburn Hills, Mich.
The Bullets lost their sixth game in a row.
Detroit trailed by as many as 15 points in the first half and was down by 56-45 after the Bullets scored the first basket of the second half.
But Woolridge then scored 9 points in just over four minutes, fueling a 15-2 run that gave the Pistons a 60-58 lead.
Detroit led, 71-67, late in the third period, but the Bullets rallied to cut the margin to 73-72 with 12 minutes left.
The lead was still 1 point with 7 minutes 34 seconds left, but the Pistons went on an 8-2 spurt to make it 88-81. (AP) TENNIS  Upset for Rubin  Chanda Rubin, a 16-year-old American ranked 94th in the world, defeated 13th-seeded Natalya Zvereva of Belarus, 1-6, 6-4, 6-0, yesterday in the first round of the Virginia Slims of Florida, being played in Boca Raton.
After a two-year layoff, Carling Bassett-Seguso, now a mother of two, began her comeback with a loss.
She fell to 11th-seeded Kimiko Date of Japan, 6-2, 6-1.
The 24-year-old Bassett-Seguso, who was ranked No. 11 at the end of 1984, said her nerves and the hard-hitting strokes of the 25th-ranked Date were too much for her.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf and third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez are scheduled to play their opening matches today. (AP)


A Pro-Drug Ruling Stirs the Pot in Germany
A German judge has set off a national debate by ruling that laws against possession of marijuana and hashish are unconstitutional.
Leaders of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's governing coalition have condemned the decision, but many senior opposition figures have endorsed it.
A final ruling from Germany's highest court is expected later in the year.


Stocks Edge Ahead, With Dow Up 7.60
Stocks notched light gains in lackluster trading yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 7.60 points, to 3,275.27.
The Dow dropped to its low for the day in the first hour of trading, and floated to its high in the final hour, with the two extremes separated by only 17 points, an unusually narrow trading range.


College Construction Loan reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Expeditors International of Washington reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stock prices slumped in Tokyo today in what brokers described as quiet trading.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 436.11 points, or 2.03 percent, to 21,051.71.
About 240 million shares were traded.
On Monday, the index rose 149.01 points.


An Incentive for Saddam Hussein
Saddam Hussein now provokes a new showdown with the United Nations.
He refuses to cooperate in destroying Scud missile plants and other weapons facilities covered by the Persian Gulf war cease-fire resolution.
The Security Council is right to warn of serious consequences -- read military force -- and set an early deadline for compliance.
But the U.N. also needs to make clear that an end to the 18-month economic embargo depends solely on Iraq complying fully with all relevant Security Council resolutions, not on the removal of Saddam Hussein.
His departure would be widely applauded, in and out of Iraq.
But while he remains in control, there's no harm in providing him some incentive to comply with U.N. demands.


From Government Records to Folk Records
Government is the art of the merely possible, and that is one of the reasons John R. Weingart, New Jersey's top environmental regulator, so looks forward to his weekly descent into the dingy warrens of the Holder Hall basement to make some perfection.
There, in the muffled studios of WPRB (103.3), Princeton's student FM radio station, Mr.
Weingart, who is New Jersey's Assistant Commissioner for Environmental Regulation during the week, becomes John Weingart, disk jockey for the state's longest-running folk music radio program, which is aimed at people who like their folk music laced with rock-and roll or march music or country or anything else that Mr.
Weingart can find that will create and maintain an appropriate theme.


Graham Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cimco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Pigeons Are Sweet, Loving and Don't Bite
To the Editor:
I am dismayed by "There's a Law Against Feeding Those Filthy, Greedy Pigeons," Frances Goldstein's unkind Feb. 17 letter.
Having read one hate letter, you have read them all.
People with full stomachs shouldn't judge hunger.


New Housing Director Named in Newark
The city's director of development, Harold Lucas, was chosen today to be the new executive director of the troubled Newark Housing Authority, according to the authority's board of commissioners.
Mr.
Lucas succeeds Daniel W. Blue Jr., who was dismissed last year amid criticism over delays in construction of new federally financed housing.


Sandberg Becomes Highest-Paid Player, for Now
Bobby Bonilla never got to play a game as baseball's highest-paid player.
Bonilla has a contract with the Mets that will pay him $29 million over the next five years, but Ryne Sandberg and the Chicago Cubs reached agreement today on a contract extension that guarantees the perennial All-Star second baseman $28.4 million for four additional years.
Sandberg has one year remaining on his existing three-year contract at a $2.1 million salary.


Binks Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Navigating The World Of Sports Trivia
EVERYONE knows who the Sultan of Swat was, but you could probably win a bet on the Rabbi of Swat.
According to Sports Adventure, a vast database of sports from Knowledge Adventure of La Crescenta, Calif., he was Moses Solomon, who played for the New York Giants toward the end of the 1923 season.
Sports Adventure comes from the same people who brought us Knowledge Adventure, a collection of (one hesitates to say it) trivia, in history, art, science, literature, architecture, music and nature.
As with the earlier program, you mosey around the screen with the keyboard or, preferably, mouse around the screen, exploring for information, making unexpected connections, seeing pictures and hearing sounds.
It looks like a CD-ROM program, but it isn't, although it does take up six megabytes of hard disk space and require 7.5 megabytes for the initial installation.


New Funds Fuel Magnet Power For Trains
COULD trains floating on invisible magnetic cushions one day carry people from New York City to Los Angeles in one hour, or is magnetic-levitation transportation, even in some less ambitious form, a mere fantasy?
While a definitive answer to the question is not in sight, a new $700 million Federal fund has strongly freshened the wind in the "maglev" sails.
During the six-year life of the maglev demonstration program authorized by Congress last November and signed by President Bush, scientists, engineers and transportation experts are to create the prototype of a commercial maglev train.
The train would have no locomotive, but would be lofted above its track by a magnetic cushion and propelled by a magnetic wave.


Unbeaten Team Is Almost Unnoticed
The women's basketball team at the University of Vermont has won every one of its games this season, 25 of them.
The team's unblemished record makes U.V.M. the only undefeated team in Division I of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, men's or women's.
There are 579 teams, 295 men's and 284 women's.
Yet the Catamounts -- the university eschews the Lady prefix, as in Lady Catamounts -- have little recognition or renown outside of New England.


Service Academies Grapple With Cold War Thaw
When Carlos Flores entered the United States Naval Academy here four years ago, he and his first-year classmates spent six weeks memorizing details of Soviet ships and aircraft, and even the speeds of Moscow's missiles.
"We learned how the Soviet psyche would think," Midshipman Flores said.
"But that emphasis is gone now." The 21-year-old native of Fort Worth leaves for training in nuclear submarine propulsion after he graduates in May, wondering what the future holds.


BC Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Hach Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Global Group Approves Plan For New Satellite Services
An international assembly representing more than 120 governments has agreed on a treaty that would allocate global radio frequencies for fleets of low-orbiting satellites serving portable-telephone and message services, the head of the American delegation said today.
A draft of the agreement was worked out today at a gathering of the World Administrative Radio Conference in Torremolinos, Spain.
Jan W. Baran, the United States Ambassador to the meeting, said he expected the agreement to be signed on Tuesday.
The agreement marks a big victory for Motorola Inc.'s ambitious Iridium project, a proposal to launch a fleet of 77 small satellites that would each circle the earth.


2 Exchanges' Merger Talk
The fourth- and fifth-largest futures exchanges in the United States said yesterday that they were considering a merger.
The Commodity Exchange and the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, both of New York, have set up a seven-member committee to explore the merger.
No deadline for a decision from the committee has been set.


Holyfield-Holmes Is On
EVANDER HOLYFIELD will defend his heavyweight title on June 19 against LARRY HOLMES at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
A news conference to announce the bout is scheduled for Thursday in New York.
But is that the fight the public really wants to see?
Not according to an unscientific poll taken last week by the USA Network.
According to ROB CORREA of USA, 54 percent of the 7,882 people who phoned a 900 number that was flashed on the screen during a replay of Holmes's fight against RAY MERCER said they would most prefer to see GEORGE FOREMAN fight Holmes, 30 percent said they would choose a match between Holyfield and RIDDICK BOWE and only 16 percent voted for Holyfield-Holmes. . . . .
MELDRICK TAYLOR, the World Boxing Association welterweight champion, steps up in class when he challenges TERRY NORRIS, the World Boxing Council super-welterweight champion, May 9 at the Mirage in Las Vegas.


Lynch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Out of Obscurity
For FREDDIE WILLIAMS, winning the Mobil Indoor Grand Prix overall track title last Friday at Madison Square Garden was a way of letting people know he was still around.


Hard Work for Some Brings Small Returns
To the Editor:
I sympathize with the plight Christopher H. Stephens describes in "Cuomo Misdirects His Aim at 'the Rich' for Heavier Taxes" (letter, Feb. 12).
Mr.
Stephens and his wife find themselves working long hours, including weekends and holidays, for two of New York City's largest law firms.
Why, he asks, should their hard work mean more taxes?


Action Auto Rental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Yardstick Urged On U.S.-Japan Rivalry
RESPONDING to reports that Japan has surged ahead of the United States as the world's top patron of industrial research, a Democratic Senator has called on the Federal Government to overhaul its way of comparing such investments to gauge Japan's growing scientific might more accurately.
The proposal was made by Senator Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico, chairman of the technology and national security subcommittee of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee.


Loan America Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  ONCERN OVER OZONE HEIGHTENED
Concern that a depletion of the protective ozone layer may develop over the Northern Hemisphere this spring has jolted politicians and opinion-makers from Britain to Russia and prompted calls for more stringent environmental laws.
A1
Europe backed helping poor countries protect the environment.
A11  A DEAL FOR RUSSIAN KNOW-HOW
A Silicon Valley company has hired the Russian scientist who created the supercomputers used by the Soviet space program and by its military to design nuclear weapons.
A1  MASSACRE REPORTED IN CAUCASUS
Fresh evidence emerged of a massacre of civilians by Armenian militants in the Caucasus enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh as the last of the former Soviet troops began pulling out today.
A3  RUSSIA HUNTS MISSING BILLIONS
Russia has hired a New York investigative company to help it track down and reclaim billions of dollars thought to have been siphoned out of the country by corrupt officials in recent years.
A6  BATTLE IN ISRAELI PREMIER'S PARTY
Israel's governing Likud Party, whose name in Hebrew means "unity," found itself badly splintered as it put together its lineup of candidates for elections to be held in June.
A3  DEBATE OVER GERMAN DRUG LAWS
A German judge has set off a national debate by ruling that laws against possession of marijuana and hashish are unconstitutional.
A5  DO THE JAPANESE WORK TOO HARD?
Despite recent official comments, the legendary willingness of Japanese workers to toil long and hard without complaining is giving way to a new debate over whether they are working too hard.
A8  BUSH VETOES CHINA TRADE CURB
President Bush vetoed legislation that would have put conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade access to the United States.A7  U.S.
REJECTS LIBYAN PROPOSAL
The State Department said a Libyan offer to turn over the two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet to a neutral country for trial was merely a delaying tactic.
A10
A new mood of Scottish nationalism is on the rise.  A10
Paris Journal: The English language gains in an unlikely city.  A4
Armed Serbs blocked the routes to the Bosnian capital.
A9  National A12-20  THE BIG 'MO' FOR TSONGAS
Poll takers and politicians said Paul Tsongas was gaining support in the seven states scheduled to hold primaries and caucuses today.
A1  VOTERS IN A FRUSTRATED MOOD
Americans entered the busiest stretch of the primary season dissatisfied with President Bush but convinced that none of the candidates for President really understand their lives, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
A1  JACKSON TOURS TRIUMPHANT
Though Jesse Jackson went to South Carolina to help Senator Tom Harkin, he looked like a man campaigning for the role as the eminence grise of the 1992 campaign.
A19
The South has seen the campaign, and it is not pretty.  A19
Forget whether he's Presidential.
Is he pronounceable?
A19  U.S.
SUES KEATING'S LAW FIRM
The Federal Government sued a leading New York law firm and its former managing partner for $275 million for its role in representing Charles H. Keating Jr., the convicted savings and loan executive.
A1  QUESTIONS ABOUT ADAMS'S POST
A day after Senator Brock Adams's bid for re-election collapsed under the weight of published accusations that he had sexually harassed or abused eight women, Washington residents turned to the questions of who would succeed him and whether he should resign.
A14
The thorny ethical issue of using anonymous sources.  A14  CASEY'S VISIT TO NORIEGA
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega supplied the Central Intelligence Agency with information about Fidel Castro from 1971 to 1986, an agency official testified, adding that the information was so useful that the agency's director, William Casey, visited the general in Panama.
A12  COURT ACCEPTS THERAPY CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether sex offenders can be required to undergo therapy as a condition of staying out of jail if the therapy requires the offender to acknowledge guilt denied at trial.
A15  REINVIGORATING JUSTICE DEPT.
The new Attorney General, William Barr, appears to be trying to move the Justice Department back to the center of legal authority in the Government.
A17  SERVICE ACADEMIES DIG IN
The end of the Soviet threat brought new worries to the nation's military service academies: fears that careers may be lost before they have barely begun.
A12
Virginia lottery officials sought to thwart Australian investors.  A13
Jacksonville Journal: Southern sons change their appearance.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 A CONFESSED MOBSTER TESTIFIES
The man who says he was the underboss of the reputed Mafia leader John Gotti for years, took the witness stand to testify against him, painting a picture of violence inside the Gambino crime family.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  The new white-collar epidemic of repetitive stress injuries.
C1  Teaching emotional literacy in public school systems.
C1  The latest wrinkles in magnetic levitation for high-speed trains.
C1  Experiments toward retarding the progress of H.I.V. in infants.
C3  Sports B10-15  Baseball: Sandberg signs record contract.
B11  Yanks try to fit Barfield into role.
B12  Basketball: St.
John's shuts down Georgetown.
B11  A lot of winning solves a lot of Nets' problems.
B13  Hockey: Rangers rout Devils.
B15  Swimming: 15-year-old breaks breast-stroke record.
B11  Obituaries B8  Fashion Page B9  Galanos for Spring.
Patterns  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  A "Star Trek" exhibition.
C13  Theater: A London writer's three-show coup.
C13  Photography: A debate over negatives.
C13  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The Willie Horton of 1992.
Incentive for Hussein.
Sensitivity about Asians.
Topics: History's pickpocket.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: Just regular guys.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: The President's job.
A23  David H. Sawyer: A loser's guide to the primaries.
A23  Jeffrey Bell: The wrong man on the right.
A23


Patterns
Hemline Prophecies
The transition from knee-baring skirts to ankle-grazing styles promises to be seamless.
Designers, most of whom believe a change is in sight, are refusing to be dogmatic.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Consonant Clusters; Tsongas or Chungus? Simply a Matter of Who Is Pronouncing It
Never mind character flaws.
Is America ready for a President with a peculiar consonant cluster?
When Paul E. Tsongas was a little boy, he hated it when the other kids would make fun of his name and he dreamed that, someday, his consonants would be reversed.


Autozone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 15


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Wisconsin Central Transportation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Hopefuls Turn South, Taking the Low Road
The Presidential campaign has moved south, and it is not a pretty sight on either side.
The battle between President Bush and Patrick J. Buchanan is a mean-spirited, low-road contest featuring, in Mr.
Buchanan's attacks on "quota bills" and the 1965 Voting Rights Act, the most forthright appeals to white racial animosities seen in Georgia since Lester Maddox's 1966 campaign for governor.


Judge Orders Quaker State To Withdraw Commercials
A Federal judge in Manhattan upheld a false-advertising claim yesterday by Castrol Inc. against a rival motor-oil maufacturer, Quaker State.
Castrol had complained that a Quaker State television commercial falsely implied that its oil offered better engine protection at start-up.


Lintas Creative Chief Rising To Mastercard's Challenge
SINCE arriving at Lintas New York 14 months ago to become executive creative director, Tony DeGregorio has supervised the introduction of reformulated advertising for Diet Coke, as well as Lintas's first work for a new client, Maybelline.
And he helped the shop land the Bacardi Imports account after a lengthy and competitive review.
Now, Mr.
DeGregorio confronts his most challenging task to date, defending Lintas's estimated $60 million Mastercard International account in a long-expected review announced last week.


Fight Looms Over School Safety Funds
The New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, pressed Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to pay for a $28 million weapons-detection program in the schools without taking the money from elsewhere in the school budget.
But aides to the Mayor said they could not make that guarantee.
With the city's attention still focused on the fatal shootings last week at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, Mr.
Fernandez made public a letter to Mayor Dinkins laying out his understanding of their fragile weekend agreement on the $28 million effort to purge the city's high schools of deadly weapons.
He took pains in the letter to emphasize that the money he had requested was "above and beyond" the amount City Hall has already budgeted for the rest of this fiscal year and for the new fiscal year beginning on July 1.


Lawson Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reuter Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Genetic Therapy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cerner Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"John was the boss. I was the underboss." -- SALVATORE GRAVANO, testifying against John Gotti.  [ A1:2. ]


Centercore Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
The sports/leisure division of The New York Times Company Magazine Group has agreed in principle to acquire Ski Business, a trade publication, and Ski New England, an annual guide, from Nick Hock Associates Inc. in Darien, Conn.
Terms were not disclosed.


Q&amp;A
Chlorinated Water
Q.
Does the chlorine in chlorinated water contribute to the destruction of the earth's protective ozone layer?
A.
No, said Dr.
F.
Sherwood Rowland, the Donald Bren Professor of chemistry at the University of California at Irvine, because it does not last long enough to get a chance to do so.


Boston Digital reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Grace Loses On Asbestos
A building owner in suburban St.
Louis has won a $17.9 million asbestos property damage suit against W. R. Grace &amp; Company, the largest reported verdict to date against any company that sold asbestos fireproofing to the construction industry before it was banned in 1973.
The verdict, which was reached late Friday night by a St.
Louis jury, included $2.5 million in punitive damages.
Attorneys for Clayton Center Associates, the owner of the Chromalloy Plaze Building in Clayton, Mo., argued that Grace knew at the time it sold Clayton Center the fireproofing that the Environmental Protection Agency was about to impose the ban.
Grace was also accused of deciding to dump the product in the St.
Louis market because there was less knowledge about the dangers of asbestos and opposition to it than in other regions.


Knicks Trying to Recall The Fine Points of Scoring
Finding a remedy for their anemic offense was the Knicks' top priority at today's practice.
On Sunday, New York stumbled to its second-lowest point total of the season in losing, 90-75, to the Nets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Last Wednesday, the Knicks were even more pathetic, with a 68-point performance in a loss to the Los Angeles Lakers.
That was the Knicks' lowest total since adoption of the 24-second clock in 1964.


Appliance Recycling Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Horsehead Resource Development Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Correspondents for Times Among Polk Award Winners
Two foreign correspondents for The New York Times are among the winners of George Polk Awards for 1991 announced yesterday by Long Island University.
Francis X. Clines, The Times's bureau chief in Moscow, was honored for his coverage of the breakup of the Soviet Union and the fall of Communism.
Barbara Crossette, who headed the Times bureau in New Delhi, won for her coverage of the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, former Prime Minister of India.


Business and Health; Single Coverage On the Job and Off
OFFICIALS in at least eight states are considering proposals for health coverage that would combine workers' compensation, disability and general medical insurance.
Injuries and illnesses contracted on or off the job would be covered in the same program, and workplace injuries would come under cost-saving rules that are common in general health plans but rare in workers' compensation.
Health-care costs have grown to about 40 percent of some $60 billion a year spent on workers' compensation.
Some proponents see the plan for such 24-hour coverage as a way of extending health insurance to 20 million working adults who are uninsured.
At least 90 percent of employees are covered by workers' compensation.


Allied Research reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imperial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quaker Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Owners Gain Edge
It may not tilt the balance of payments, but foreign money is lining the road to the Kentucky Derby as never before.
With two months to go, the solid favorite to win the Derby on May 2 is Arazi, who raced seven times in France last year and once in the United States and won seven times.
But he made financial headlines last autumn when $7 million was paid to Allen E. Paulson for a half-interest in the colt by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum of the royal family of Dubai.
So now Arazi is racing under two flags and wintering in France.


Newpark Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IPSCO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Craig Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whistleblower Wins Study of 'Star Wars' Program
A Federal office that assists whistleblowers has ordered the Pentagon to review assertions of mismanagement in the "Star Wars" program.
The accusations were made by an Army scientist whom the military tried to dismiss after he repeatedly criticized the program.
The scientist, Aldric Saucier, has been engaged in disputes with Pentagon officials since 1987, when he complained about what he called wasteful and biased research in the Star Wars program to develop a shield against a missile attack.
Mr.
Saucier, a physical scientist with decades of experience in space research, was shifted in 1987 from a senior management position in the organization's office to a less significant job with the Army.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about parties for the Grammy Awards referred incorrectly to the decorator of the party given by the Warner Music Group and Elektra Records at Rockefeller Center.
It was Anthony Ferraz Design Ltd.


Loewen Ondaatje reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Kaye, Scholer and its former managing partner were sued by the U.S. for their role in representing Charles Keating.
The suit is the largest ever brought against an adviser to a failed saving institution by the Government, which also moved to freeze the New York law firm's assets.  [ Page A1. ]  Until his affiliation with Keating and Lincoln Savings, Peter M. Fishbein led a very charmed legal career as head of Kaye, Scholer.  [ D8. ]
Sun Microsystems has hired the Russian scientist who created the supercomputers used by the Soviet space program and by its military to design nuclear weapons.  [ A1. ]


Laurentian to Buy Small Stock Stakes
The Laurentian Capital Corporation, a Philadelphia insurance holding company, has offered to purchase, at an above-market price, the shares of those owning fewer than 100 shares.
The price will be the greater of $5 a share, or 75 cents a share above the average closing prices for the stock on the American Stock Exchange in May, the month of the tender offer.
The offer expires at midnight on May 31 unless extended.
The most recent trade was $4.125.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Amerian League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jody Hurst and Riccardo Ingram, outfielders; Rico Brogna, first baseman; and John Kiely, Dan Gakeler and John Doherty, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Erickson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Gene Harris and Mike Remlingudriguez, catcher, and Dean Palmer, third baseman, on one-year contracts.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Ryne Sandberg, second baseman, on a four-year contract extension through 1996.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Extended the contract of Bob Quinn, general manager, through Oct. 1.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Rudy Seanez, pitcher; Henry Rodriguez, outfielder; and Eric Karros, Jose Offerman and Dave Hansen, infielders, on one-year contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Cris Carpenter and Rheal Cormier , pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Sacramento guard Dennis Hopson $3,000 and New York guard John Starks $2,000 for their altercaton during a game in Sacramento last Thursday.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Placed Rickey Green, guard, on the injured list.


Albertson's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Davstar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Utley Shows Progress
MIKE UTLEY is simply one of the guys this week, trading stories with 27 other National Football League players who will receive awards for their courage on and off the field.
The former Detroit Lions guard, who was paralyzed from the chest down in a game against the Rams on Nov. 17 and has been hospitalized in Denver, went to Baltimore yesterday for his first public appearance since the injury.


Logistec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Day of Records for 15-Year-Old
At 11:23 A.M. on a normal Monday, 15-year-old Anita Nall would be eating lunch at Towson Catholic High School in Towson, Md.
Probably spaghetti, she said, or leftovers from dinner the night before.
Today, at 11:23 A.M., she shattered the world record for the women's 200-meter breast-stroke, and tonight she did it again.
That made her one of the youngest world-record-breaking swimmers, male or female.
In 1978 and 1979, four girls, including the Americans Mary T. Meagher and Sippy Woodhead, broke world records at 14, and in 1964, Patty Caretto, an American, broke one at 13.


Altai Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


United Inns Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Curtails Fare Increase
United Airlines took a small step back today from a proposed nationwide 2 percent fare increase, saying it would raise only the price of tickets for excursion fares.
The higher fares will take effect on Friday.
Delta Air Lines and American Airlines said they too would raise fares for the discounted tickets only.


Greiner Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dominguez Services Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


International Law Won't Shield Libyan Agents
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis incorrectly states an important point of international law in his "Alarm in Cairo" (column, Feb. 9), regarding the two Libyan agents suspected of planting the bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
He refers to unnamed international lawyers who assert that "there is no basis in international law for the demand that Libya turn over citizens suspected of crimes to another country." But iternational terrorism -- especially involving unlawful acts against the safety of civil aviation -- is now a recognized crime under international customary law.


Chempower Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


XOMA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; The Many Questions of Taste, Without Answers
Taste  The Secret Meaning of Things  By Stephen Bayley Illustrated. 237 pages.
Pantheon Books. $24.
Carefully bleached and torn blue jeans and an artfully faded work shirt, or an immaculately hand-tailored Savile Row suit.
Angular Scandinavian furniture in pale wood, or an overstuffed sofa and chairs covered in brightly colored chintz.
A burger and fries with ketchup, or an imposing four-course French meal with a selection of expensive wines.
An austerely modern skyscraper of glass and steel, or a magisterial Georgian country house.


Homeless Man Has Deal In 2d Suit in Morristown
Richard R. Kreimer, the most noteworthy and litigious homeless citizen of Morristown, N.J., has reached a financial settlement in the second of his two lawsuits that have brought him a measure of fame and fortune.
Four months after accepting $150,000 from the town government to drop a civil rights harassment suit against the police department and several government officials and police officers, Mr.
Kreimer and his lawyer disclosed today that they had agreed to a payment to settle his claim for compensatory damages against his other major legal target, the town library.


Applied Bioscience International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Recycling Deadline Is Extended
A judge has extended by a year the deadlines for New York City to comply with its mandatory recycling law, which Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Sanitation Department have violated by not collecting the required amount of recyclable materials like newspapers, metal and glass containers.
Justice Irma Vidal Santaella of the State Supreme Court for New York County ruled late Friday that the city must collect 2,100 tons of recyclable materials a day by April 1993.
Under the 1989 recycling law, the city was required to collect that amount by April 1992.
The Sanitation Department currently collects 1,000 tons of recyclables a day.


Classical Music in Review
Brooklyn Philharmonic  Brooklyn Academy of Music
Friday night's Brooklyn Philharmonic program caused some before-the-fact puzzlement when it listed Heinz Holliger as the composer in two Liszt transcriptions for orchestra.
A few minutes into the music -- after Mr.
Holliger himself had played the originals on the piano -- the correctness of this attribution became clear.





Sense, and Sensitivity, About Asians
Asian-Americans suffer from two equally unfair stereotypes.
They're considered a "model minority," industrious and resourceful.
They're also seen as insular and threatening -- and not quite American.
They lose on both counts.
The "model minority" myth holds them to an unreasonable standard.
The hypercompetitive stereotype exposes them to abuse and bigotry.
That's the basic conclusion of a report released last week by the United States Commission on Civil Rights.
The report adds a sane and welcome counterweight to recent oversimplifications, even hysteria, about Asians and the United States.


Mexico Bank Sold
The Mexican Government sold Banco Mexicano Somex, the country's sixth-largest bank, to an investor group for $860,000, or 4.6 times its book value, the Finance Ministry said today.
The investor that submitted the winning bid for Somex -- the 11th bank to be spun off in the Government's privatization -- is headed by Eduardo Creel Cobian, Vicente Aristegui and Eduardo Castillo.


European Pledge at U.N.
European nations said they would offer money to help poor countries protect the environment.
They urged Washington to do the same.
Page A11.


K-Tron International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Arbor Drugs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Top Housing Authority Aide Is Dismissed
The chief aide to Laura D. Blackburne, the former New York City Housing Authority chairwoman, was dismissed from the agency on Friday as part of a shakeup by the new chairwoman, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, agency officials said yesterday.
The aide, Edwin Martinez, 43 years old, was dismissed because his services were no longer required, said Tim Sullivan, a Housing Authority spokesman.
Mr.
Martinez, who received $85,000 as executive assistant to the chairwoman, was hired by Ms.
Blackburne when she was appointed in 1990.


Review/Theater; In London, a Writer's Three-Show Coup
While Broadway is flush with the promise of the spring's new plays and musicals, the West End seems trapped in a wintry past.
The hottest ticket is a revival of the earliest Andrew Lloyd Webber hit, the 1972 "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," even as eight other brand-name musicals, some nearly as old and half of them also by Mr.
Lloyd Webber, continue their immortal runs.
These permanent fixtures are surrounded by no fewer than four other shows that anthologize American pop or rock-and-roll (from "A Swell Party" to "Good Rockin' Tonight") and three more that merchandise vintage Harlem jazz and dance (or the British idea of it) to almost exclusively white audiences.
"The Mousetrap," anyone?


Accel International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Weighing the Thorny Issue of Anonymous Charges
Did The Seattle Times act properly on Sunday when it published a report in which eight unidentified women accused Senator Brock Adams of sexual misconduct, in one case, rape?
Or was the Senator a victim of the press, as he angrily asserted at a news conference on Sunday when he also announced that he would not seek re-election?


BASF Operation To Move Overseas
The BASF Corporation announced that it would lay off 170 people and move its audiotape manufacturing operation to Europe as part of a worldwide restructuring.
Audiotape production at the BASF Corporation-Information Systems plant in Bedford will end in April and manufacturing will be moved to plants in Europe, company officials said.
Severance packages and continued health coverage will be offered to the affected workers.


Kewaunee Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Medical Imaging Centers of America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in the Business People column on Saturday about the appointment of Henry C. (Ric) Duques to be chairman and chief executive of the First Data Corporation misstated the number of his children.
In addition to 12-year-old triplets, he has a 20-year-old son in college.


International Law Won't Shield Libyan Agents; No Maltese Suitcase
To the Editor:
Rational writing on the subject of Libya such as Anthony Lewis's constructive and interesting "Alarm in Cairo" (column, Feb. 9) is rare and welcome.
But Mr.
Lewis is perhaps unaware that the Maltese conducted an investigation and found that on Dec. 21, 1988, there was no unaccompanied suitcase on Air Malta Flight KM-180 to Frankfurt (The Times of Malta, Nov. 16, 1991).


Biscayne Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aileen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Derlan Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Software Virus Found at Intel
The Intel Corporation said yesterday that it had stopped shipping a computer network software program because some units were found to be infected with the "Michelangelo" virus, a program that infects I.B.M. and compatible personal computers and can potentially destroy data.
A division of Intel in Hillsboro, Ore., said it had shipped more than 800 copies of the program, called LANSpool 3.01, which inadvertently contained the virus.
The virus is designed to activate on March 6, Michelangelo's birthday, and can erase data.


Beman's Star Dulled By Equipment Lawsuit
Deane Beman's leadership as commissioner of the PGA Tour appears to be under more critical scrutiny by his membership than at any other time in his 18-year tenure.
Several players on the Tour said that 1992 would be a crucial year in determining Beman's future as commissioner, and that his future might hinge on the outcome of a $100 million lawsuit against the Tour by Karsten Manufacturing Corporation, the makers of Ping Eye2 irons with U-shaped grooves, which is scheduled to go to trial on Nov. 3.


Sports of The Times; Why Ranger Fans Aren't Celebrating
AFTER 52 years of charitable contributions to the rest of the National Hockey League, the Rangers know enough to sell hope rather than faith.
Newspaper advertisements ask, "What if this is the year and you're not here?" Between periods at Madison Square Garden, a public-address voice and the message board warn, "Don't lock yourself out of what could be hockey history in the making."


Topics of The Times; Growing Old Disgracefully
Americans on the "wrong" side of 50 can only welcome a new magazine in Britain called The Oldie.
Today's trendy magazines treat aging as a felony; few gray hairs ever grace their covers.
But the 54-year-old editor of The Oldie, Richard Ingrams, says his biweekly will engage in full frontal battle with the cult of youth.
His first issue has already provoked squeals of protest about such features as a guide to movies "safe for oldies to see" and "Still With Us," profiling seniors everyone mistakenly believes to be dead.


Middleby Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


An '800' Number for Gun Reports
In response to the rising number of crimes involving guns, the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the New York City Police Department yesterday established a hot line for callers to report people with guns.
The number, 800-ATF-GUNS, can be dialed toll free anywhere in New York State, officials said.
Similar hot lines, staffed by agents of the bureau, were established simultaneously throughout the country, a spokesman for the agency said.


Critic's Notebook; Just How Sacred Should Photo Negatives Be?
The story sent shock waves through the world of photography.
In mid-December Brett Weston, son of the modernist photographer Edward Weston and himself long renowned for his richly detailed black-and-white landscape images, fulfilled a decade-old pledge by destroying all but 12 of his negatives.
Surrounded by almost 100 friends and associates at his home in Carmel Valley, Calif., the 80-year-old Mr.
Weston sat in front of his fireplace, threw in 75 of his negatives, one by one, and watched as they caught fire, curled up and burned.
Word circulated later that Mr.
Weston had burned or defaced all but a dozen of the rest of his negatives as well.
His act touched a nerve at the core of many people's ideas about photography, and news of it was met with protest.
Many photographers, after all, regard the negative as almost sacrosanct.
One of the medium's central characteristics has always been the possibility of making a more or less unlimited number of prints from a given negative.
In the 19th century that trait helped give photography its democratic quality, as cheap stereograph cards and cartes de visite, the small portraits that became popular in the 1860's, flooded the world.


Bridge
A former president of the Greater New York Bridge Association made one of his rare tournament appearances at the Long Island Regional Championships in Smithtown, L.I., on Sunday and came away with a victory.
Josh Parker of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., who nowadays puts work and family ahead of bridge-playing, captured the Flight A Swiss Team title together with Jeff Aker, of Briarcliff, N.Y., Adam Wildavsky of Jackson Heights, Queens, and Bruce Rogoff of Oradell, N.J.


Kudos for Richter, and Only Misery for the Devils' Goaltenders
The Rangers were superior in every way in their 7-1 trouncing of the Devils tonight, but nowhere was the domination more evident than in goal, where Mike Richter excelled for the Rangers and Chris Terreri was mediocre for the Devils.
Terreri had plenty of misfortune on at least two of the goals by the Rangers and wasn't around for the end.
He was replaced by Craig Billington right after the Rangers scored their sixth goal, 9 minutes 42 seconds into the last period.


In Search of Interim Digs and Parking Spots
It is that time of year: Paul E. Tsongas and Bill Clinton and the other would-be Democratic presidential nominees are out crisscrossing primary states in search of delegates.
Tina R. Flournoy has been out crisscrossing Manhattan in search of an apartment to live in between now and July, when the Democratic National Convention comes to New York.
And Niall Vignoles has been trying to reserve hundreds of parking spaces in traffic-choked midtown Manhattan.
Ms.
Flournoy and Mr.
Vignoles are helping to plan the convention -- she is the lawyer for the Democratic National Convention Committee, he is the deputy transportation director assigned to figure out where to stow the fleet of cars that will carry V.I.P.'s around town.
She is from Washington, he is from San Francisco.


Bentsen to Seek Top Tax Rate of 36%
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, will ask the committee on Tuesday to approve a maximum income tax rate of 36 percent to pay the $31 billion cost of a $300-per-child tax credit that he is proposing, senior Democratic Senate aides said tonight.
The rate is higher than the 35 percent voted last week by the House, but it would kick in at substantially higher income levels than the House's version.
Each proposal, however, is inviting a veto, because President Bush has insisted he will not sign legislation that raises tax rates.


Secret Is Out On Dolphins' Hitchhiking
SEA-GOING people have long enjoyed the company of dolphins, which swim in the wakes and waves of their vessels.
Scientists have now confirmed a long-held suspicion that the dolphins are not just making a friendly visit but are saving energy while they swim, hitchhiking just below the turbulence created by the moving boat.
"The dolphins look almost like a soaring eagle or some gliding bird because they look almost motionless with their pectoral fins extended," said Dr.
Terrie Williams, research physiologist at the Naval Ocean Systems Center Hawaii Laboratory in Kailua, Hawaii, the principal author of the study published in the current issue of Nature.


Autofinance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; 3 Debates in 30 Hours: Political Instant Replay
Participating in three debates in 30 hours, as the Democratic Presidential candidates did last weekend, deserves to be classified as an act of public service.
Televising three debates in 30 hours, however, can only be classified as an act of malice.
C-Span, the station that has effectively dispelled the myth that television must be entertaining, broadcast the debates in their entirety, all between 9:30 P.M.
Saturday and 11 P.M.
Sunday.
By watching a single debate, viewers could learn something substantive about the candidates' positions on the issues.


A Call for an End to Violence
Mayor David N. Dinkins was joined by Bill Cosby yesterday outside Thomas Jefferson High School in calling for an anti-violence crusade.
Nearly 800 people demonstrated outside the East New York school, where two students were killed last week.
Page B1. (Photographs by John Sotomayor/The New York Times)


Observer; Just Regular Guys
Issues, issues, issues!
Has there ever been a political campaign with so many issues?
Issues out in the open.
Issues on the table.
Issues under the bed.
Tired old issues.
New improved issues as well as new miracle issues with twice as many mind- glazing compounds.
And what of the issue that dare not speak its nickname?
Yes, you have been subconsciously aware of it.
You have probably even asked yourself, "Why do I have this feeling that there's something wrong with Bush and Tsongas?" You couldn't explain that uneasy suspicion, could you?


Safety in Virus Season
TWO computer viruses are programmed to awaken in the next 10 days, harbingers of a threat expected to increase in the future.
On Friday, the Michelangelo virus is expected to emerge from dormancy to destroy all the data on the hard disks of infected computers.
Estimates of infected computers range wildly from as few as 100 to as many as 2 million, but it is believed to be a very small percentage of the total.


Duties Set On Honda Over Parts
The Bush Administration ruled today that Honda owed millions of dollars in tariffs because Civic autos imported from Canada did not contain enough North American parts to qualify for duty-free treatment.
The move is likely to intensify the nation's trade tensions with both Canada and Japan.
The United States Customs Service did not disclose the amount of money owed or the number of cars involved.
But Honda said the United States was trying to collect $16.5 million in duties on 90,000 vehicles imported into the United States from Jan. 1, 1989, through March 31, 1990.


Ferraro Pledges to Release Tax Forms in Senate Race
In 1984, Geraldine A. Ferraro's Vice-Presidential quest was sidetracked for weeks by controversy over whether she would release her family's income-tax records.
Now it is 1992, and Ms.
Ferraro, responding to a thinly veiled gibe today from one of her fellow aspirants for the Senate, says she has "learned a lesson" from the ordeal.
Acting after one of the Senate candidates, Elizabeth Holtzman, who is the New York City Comptroller, released her tax returns and challenged other candidates to do the same, Ms.
Ferraro pledged today to release her and her husband's Federal, state and local tax filings for the last several years.
She said she would have been glad to do it today, in fact, except that their accountant was on vacation until Friday.
The records will be made available then, she said.


Acme United Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Josef Alexander, 84, A Composer, Is Dead
Josef Alexander, a composer and professor emeritus of music at Brooklyn College, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his wife, Hannah.


Sidney Shemel, Writer And Music Lawyer, 79
Sidney Shemel, a lawyer who specialized in the various aspects of the music business, died on Feb. 22 at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Flushing, Queens.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Bush Vetoes Conditions on Trade Status of China
President Bush vetoed legislation today that would have put conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade access to the United States market, contending that changes in China's arms proliferation and human rights record would be best accomplished through diplomatic pressure.
The House is likely to override the veto, possibly as early as next week, members of Congress and aides said.
But unless new disclosures of missile exports or human rights abuses further damage China's image, the Senate is likely to fall several votes short of the needed two-thirds majority when it votes this spring, they said.


Rebel Serbs Disrupt Travel Into Yugoslav Republic
Gangs of masked and armed Serbs, angered by the results of a weekend referendum on independence for the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, set up barricades today and blocked all transportation routes leading to this mountain capital.
But by late tonight, television reports said the Serbian guerrillas had agreed to lift the seige and that some of the barriers were being dismantled.
At the same time, bursts of gunfire continued to echo off the mountains that surround this city, where four people had been reported killed and at least seven wounded in clashes near the barricades.


Farah Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 7


Komag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


New Attorney General Shifts Department's Focus
Almost everybody heard of Edwin Meese 3d.
He was President Ronald Reagan's longtime political sidekick.
A lot of people knew something about Dick Thornburgh.
He was the former Governor of Pennsylvania.
But William P. Barr?
As the new Attorney General, the conservative 41-year-old from Manhattan is the youngest and one of the least-known members of the Bush Cabinet, a Beltway lawyer who lacks close personal ties to the President and was named to office last year lacking a high-profile reputation in legal or political circles.


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Compania ee Telefonos de Chile reports earnings for Year Dec 31


EXECUTIVES
*
Consolidated Natural Gas Co., Pittsburgh, promoted Lester D. Johnson, chief financial officer, to executive vice president.
He had been senior vice president. *
El Paso Natural Gas Co., El Paso, a unit of Burlington Resources Inc., named H. Brent Austin senior vice president and chief financial officer.
He succeeds Francis J. Boyle, who resigned.


Lifetime Hoan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reliability Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Cornell Chorale and Symphony Orchestra  Alice Tully Hall
Even the severest critics of the Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center have had to grant that much good has come of the celebration.
And by any reckoning, the Masses-in-Concert series, which neared its conclusion on Friday evening, must rank among its more praiseworthy achievements.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; In Poll, Voters Are Unhappy With All the Choices
Americans enter the busiest stretch of the primary season in a frustrated mood, dissatisfied with President Bush but overwhelmingly convinced that none of the candidates for President really understand their lives, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Mr.
Bush's approval rating stands at 40 percent, a new low for him in the Times/CBS News poll, although it was unchanged from his reading last month when the poll's margin of sampling error is taken into account.


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Communications Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baker (Michael) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Clemens Checks In
Roger Clemens, who created a week of headlines by not reporting along with other players to the Boston Red Sox spring training camp, arrived in Winter Haven, Fla., yesterday and said he had stayed away to avoid the attention of the news media.
Clemens, unflinching as he addressed about 30 reporters and photographers, said, "The reason I was at home for two weeks -- doing what I needed to get ready to pitch down here -- is so I didn't have to do what I'm doing with you all right now."


Central Reserve Life reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Likud Is Split by Levy's Downgrading
The governing Likud Party, whose name in Hebrew means "unity" but whose internal politics is fractured all the same, found itself badly splintered today as it put together its lineup of candidates for June parliamentary elections.
The main source of friction was a central committee vote on Sunday that dropped Foreign Minister David Levy from second place on the party's parliamentary list, just behind Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, to the No. 4 spot.


Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Giant Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; Sweater Sets
Twin sets -- cardigan sweaters paired with matching short-sleeve pullovers -- suddenly seem irresistible.
They feel just right when worn with a flared skirt that ends above the knee, or with a skirt that stretches like a stem toward the feet.
They also look great topping a pair of leggings.
Perhaps this has something to do with the desire for timeless style that is wafting into fashion this spring.
At any rate, the simpler and more familiar the shapes of these sweaters, the better.


Busch to Handle Its Media Buying
Anheuser-Busch Inc. in St.
Louis has consolidated the media buying and planning for all its beer brands at its in-house agency, Busch Media Group, in the latest and one of the largest moves by a giant advertiser to separate the media portion of its account from the creative work.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, had previously handled the estimated $140 million in media buying for the beers, which include Budweiser, Bud Light and Michelob.
That shop and DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, were responsible for the media planning for the brands they handled creatively.
Both will continue to work on the creative portions of their accounts.


Florida East Coast Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vencor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Witness at Trial of Noriega Tells of Visit by C.I.A. Chief
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega supplied Washington with information about Fidel Castro from 1971 to 1986, a former head of the Central Intelligence Agency's operations in Panama testified today, and the information was so useful that in 1984 William J. Casey, then Director of Central Intelligence, traveled to Panama for a briefing on Mr.
Castro.
Donald H. Winters, who was the C.I.A.'s station chief in Panama from June 1984 to July 1986, also testified at General Noriega's trial on drug-trafficking charges that he met with the former Panamanian leader "every 10 to 15 days," often at the general's home, to discuss "political events."


Realty Refund Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about Senator Brock Adams's announcement that he would not seek re-election referred incorrectly in some copies to his response to allegations of inappropriate sexual advances.
Mr.
Adams said the accusations were "absolutely false."
In some copies, the article also misstated the background of Washington's other Senator, Slade Gorton.
He is not a former astronaut.


Cambior Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Halton Reinsurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court Roundup; Legality of Therapy Requirements to Be Addressed
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether sex offenders can be required to undergo therapy as a condition of staying out of jail if the therapy requires the offender to acknowledge guilt denied at trial.
Therapy programs as conditions of probation are widely used alternatives to prison sentences.
Many therapists view acceptance of responsibility as an essential part of the treatment.
In an appeal brought by the State of Montana, the Justices will decide whether requiring such acceptance of responsibility can violate the constitutional right against compelled self-incrimination.


NCH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Intelogic Trace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Cousins Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A.L. Van Houtte reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Swift Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Granges Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Goal Systems International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Surgery Reattaches Healy's Fingertip
Islander goalie GLENN HEALY severed the tip of his right index finger in practice yesterday, then underwent microsurgery to have the piece reattached.
Healy suffered the injury during a shooting drill when a puck got under his blocker.
He was taken to a hand specialist in New York City, where the tip was reattached.


ATTENTION SHIFTS TO ADAMS'S SEAT
A day after Senator Brock Adams's bid for re-election collapsed under the weight of published accusations that he had engaged in sexual misconduct with eight women, the initial shock turned today to the questions of who would succeed him and whether he should resign.
The 65-year-old Democrat ended his campaign Sunday afternoon after The Seattle Times quoted the women as saying the Senator had sexually harassed them at various times from the early 1970's until a few years ago.
One woman said he had raped her.
Several of the women said he had fondled them or kissed them against their will, and four of them said he had used or tried to use drugs to knock them out.


ITT Hartford Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hellwood Energy Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Moves to Freeze Assets Of Law Firm for S.&amp; L. Role
The Federal Government sued a leading New York law firm and its former managing partner for $275 million today and moved to freeze their assets for their role in representing Charles H. Keating Jr., the convicted savings and loan executive.
The lawsuit is the largest ever to be brought by the Government against an adviser to a failed saving institution.
It is the first time the authorities, who are stepping up their prosecution of lawyers and accountants linked to the savings and loan scandal, have tried to freeze a firm's assets before going to trial.


U.N. Opens Environment Talks; Europe Spurs U.S. to Act Urgently
European nations said today that they were prepared to offer more money to help developing countries comply with proposed new treaties on the environment, and they urged the United States to do the same.
The Europeans called attention to another major difference between the United States and others in the industrial world by reaffirming their commitment to hold emissions of gases that warm the atmosphere in the year 2000 to 1990 levels -- a pledge that the Bush Administration has so far refused to make.


With a New Fervor, the Scots Eye Independence
Each morning, when Alastair Mac Innes arrives at the Scottish National Party's cramped office here, he finds a bundle of cards pushed through the postal slot, sometimes as many as 20, mailed by people who want to join the cause of an independent Scotland.
"Suddenly people are realizing they are Scots, first and foremost," said Mr.
MacInnes, a longtime party stalwart, as he stuffed envelopes beneath a banner displaying the blue and white St.
Andrew's cross, the ancient emblem of Scotland.
"Something powerful is changing in Scotland, and it is more than just sentiment."


Tsongas Petitions Upheld
The New York State Board of Elections ruled that Paul E. Tsongas had collected enough petitions to remain on the primary ballot, but a court appeal is expected.
Page B1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; He's Not Running, but Everybody Is Following Jackson Through the South
He chided the other Democrats for having a "message gap." He accused the Republicans of stoking racism in their television commercials.
And all over his native state today, exuberant crowds greeted him like somebody on his way to the White House.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson had reason to come here triumphant: He won the South Carolina caucuses in 1988.
Though he is not a candidate this time, Mr.
Jackson could have fooled a lot of people today into thinking that he was.


Jay F. Sharbutt A.P. Writer, 51
Jay F. Sharbutt, a correspondent, theater critic and most recently senior television writer for The Associated Press, died on Wednesday at his apartment in Brooklyn.
He was 51 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his former wife, Jeanne Drewsen, said.


Pioneering Schools Teach Lessons of Emotional Life
WHILE the lagging test scores of American schoolchildren in mathematics and reading have troubled educators, a new kind of deficit, in many ways equally alarming, is becoming all too apparent: emotional illiteracy.
America's children seem desperately in need of lessons in how to handle their emotions, how to settle disagreements, in caring and just plain getting along.
The signs of this deficiency are perhaps most obvious in incidents like the shooting deaths of two students at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn last week.
But they can also be read in statistics showing sharp rises in the numbers of teen-age suicides, homicides and pregnancies in the last decade.


Digital Equipment Sets Early Retirement Plan
The Digital Equipment Corporation today offered early retirement to 7,000 workers.
Under the program, employees as young as 50 can retire with benefits if they have worked at Digital for at least five years.
Previously, employees had to be 55 to qualify for early retirement.


CHRONICLE
When SUZIE FRANKFURT, the New York interior designer, moved to Sandisfield, Mass., in the Berkshires in October, she had to dispose of some extra furniture.
On Friday some of the contents of her former home on Central Park West will be sold.
But it is to be no ordinary tag sale.
Rather, some 20 pieces from her collection of northern European neoclassical furniture are to be auctioned at Christie's, which expects some pieces to fetch as much as $60,000.


INSIDE
Tariff Ruling Against Honda
Honda owes millions of dollars in tariffs, the U.S. ruled, because Civics from Canada did not contain enough North American parts Page D1.
Do Japanese Work Too Hard?
The legendary willingness of Japanese to toil without complaining is giving way to a debate over whether they are working too hard.
Page A8.
Reclaiming Broken Lives
On a side street in the South Bronx, Franciscan friars minister to those who live in poverty.
Page B1.
Baseball's $7 Million Man
The Cubs' Ryne Sandberg became baseball's highest-paid player with a four-year contract extension averaging $7.1 million annually.
Page B11.


CHRONICLE
JAMES BROWN plans to appear at a benefit to raise money for the schoolchildren of New York City.
The "godfather of soul" said at a news conference at the New York Hilton on Saturday that he hoped other performers would join him for a "Stop the Violence" festival, The Associated Press reported.
The festival, tentatively planned for June, was proposed after two students were fatally shot on Wednesday in Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Brown said he was planning a visit to Thomas Jefferson.
"First, I'll tell them to do something with their minds," he said.
"Then the guns won't be around. Their minds are very important."


Review/Fashion; Galanos for Spring: Winning Simplicity
James Galanos flew out of the West last week with trunks bearing his spring and summer collection, his appointment book filled with the names of prominent retailers.
Last year, this Los Angeles designer celebrated his 40th anniversary, but there was no celebration.
"I have more important things to spend my money on," he said in a the suite in the Plaza hotel that served as his East Coast showroom.
Then his manner softened.
"I'm very happy I have been in business these 40 years," he said.
"That is something of an accomplishment."


Sylvan Foods Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 29


The Hoyas Run Into A Destroyer: St. John's
The critics said Lamont Middleton would never make it in the Big East, that he lacked the size at 6 feet 6 inches to play center and that he lacked the finesse to play forward.
But Middleton has proved throughout this season that you can't scout heart and desire and he proved it again last night as he helped St.
John's defeat Georgetown, 65-49, at Madison Square Garden.
Middleton, who sat out last season after transferring from the University of Hartford, scored 9 points, grabbed 6 rebounds and played strong defense against the Hoyas' standout center, Alonzo Mourning, as St.
John's put itself in position to win the regular-season Big East championship.


BRIEFS
*
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., signed an agreement with Banyan Systems, to sell Banyan's Vines network operating system software products. *
Child World Inc., Avon, Mass., said its banks had agreed to amend and and grant a limited waiver of its existing credit agreement.
The company said it would delay paying its trade creditors and landlords, as talks proceeded for new sources of equity financing.


Topics of The Times; History's Pickpocket
Late in January, someone swiped George Washington's wallet -- yes,
the
George Washington.
It had been on display at the Old Barracks Museum in Trenton, N.J., well known for the Revolutionary collection it maintains in the only British colonial barracks still standing in America. (Hessian troops were quartered there when Washington crossed the Delaware on Christmas night in 1776.)
The wallet resembles a purse more than a modern billfold.
Made of leather, it closes with a clasp that's engraved "G.W. 1776." When it disappeared, $1.67 in Continental currency went with it -- a 1779 dollar bill and a two-thirds dollar bill from 1776.


Mercantile Stores Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Blame as Well as Credit for Reaganomics
To the Editor:
Milton Friedman credits the Reagan Administration's economic policies with the expansion of the 1980's in "Oovood Economics" (Op-Ed, Feb. 2), but he neglects some consequences of those policies.
Mr.
Friedman's "four planks" of Reaganomics -- lower tax rates, restraint in Government spending, deregulation and a strict monetary policy -- must bear a responsibility for the recession.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.37
4.00
6.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
3.92
6.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
3.97
6.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.05
6.91
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.79
8.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.73
6.76
7.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Progress Is Reported In Cutting AIDS Link From Mother to Child
RESEARCHERS around the country are reporting advances in combating AIDS in children that offer hope for blocking transmission of the disease from mother to child and for earlier diagnosis and more effective treatment of the condition.
Promising animal tests that involved using high concentrations of antibodies that attack the virus that causes AIDS may offer a way to sever the pathway leading from an infected mother to her infant.


Russian Computer Scientists Hired by American Company
A Silicon Valley company has hired the Russian scientist who created the supercomputers used by the Soviet space program and by the Soviet military to design nuclear weapons.
The contract is one of the first examples of an American business tapping the wealth of scientific talent that until recently was dedicated to the Soviet Union's vast military program.


Angeles reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Years Away, Friends Return to the Hudson
DENNIS MILDNER did not look like a hunter as he stepped from his car into the predawn darkness that morning.
The wan winter sun was still somewhere over the Atlantic.
Bitter winds whipped the rock outcropping overlooking the Hudson River, violently moving litter about.
He pulled the green parka close around his bearded face.
"Like I said," he said, "no guarantee. But at least nowadays we have a chance of seeing them."


Columbus Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gotti Confidant Tells Courtroom Of Mafia Family's Violent Reign
Salvatore Gravano, the man who says he was John Gotti's underboss, took the witness stand against him yesterday to paint a violent portrait of loan-sharking, armed robberies and murders inside the Gambino crime family.
As Mr.
Gotti sat at the defense table 20 feet away with a tight smile on his face, Mr.
Gravano told of his early days as a Brooklyn mobster, admitted to participating in 19 murders and described the plot to kill Paul Castellano, the Gambino boss Mr.
Gotti is alleged to have succeeded.


Canadian Energy Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mitek Surgical Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ramada's Gamble in Times Sq.
Anyone hoping to succeed in New York's crowded hotel market had better find a way to stand out.
The 26-story Ramada Renaissance Hotel that opens today in Times Square offers white-coated butlers on most floors, ready to serve breakfast in bed, secure theater tickets or even unpack guests' suitcases.
"We're betting that by introducing an Asian level of service to North America, we can keep guests coming back," said Allan C. Federer, the hotel's general manager.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TESTIFYING AGAINST GOTTI
For several years, Salvatore Gravano was John Gotti's closest, most trusted aide, his right hand man.
But yesterday he took the witness stand to testify against him, giving an inside account of murderous activities in the Gambino crime family.
With tension crackling across the crowded courtroom, Mr.
Gotti sat at the defense table some 20 feet away, a tight smile on his face, as Mr.
Gravano glanced at him quickly and began testifying publicly for the first time.
A1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; TSONGAS APPEARS TO GAIN IN STATES WITH VOTING TODAY
On the eve of the most important day so far in the 1992 Presidential campaign, Paul E. Tsongas's bid for the Democratic nomination was reported tonight by politicians and poll takers to be gaining rapidly in the seven states scheduled to hold primaries and caucuses.
Polls in three states show the former Massachusetts Senator, whose campaign was derided by many a month ago as an impossible dream, in the lead.
Those are Maryland and Colorado, with primaries on Tuesday, and Utah, which has a caucus.
In two other caucus states, Minnesota and Washington, Mr.
Tsongas is described by local politicians and journalists as the strongest candidate; in a fourth, Idaho, officials said no contender had caught fire.


Detecting Salmonella
Worried about the presence of salmonella bacteria in your store-bought eggs?
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico suggest that you do a sound check.
"The bottom line is the salmonella bacteria affects how the egg sounds," said Dr.
Dipen Sinha of the laboratory's Electronics Research Group.
"If you had a sensitive enough ear, in principle you could tap the egg with your finger and tell what's going on inside the egg."


On My Mind; The President's Job
Once again, George Bush is being given the greatest of all political opportunities -- to act like a President of the United States.
This time the donor of the gift is Patrick Buchanan.
Consider some of the charges against Mr.
Buchanan.
He stands accused of being bigoted against blacks, contemptuous of women, derisive of democracy, divisive of America, anti-Semitic, a political jingoist who will march the United States straight into an economic war against the world we do not need and cannot win, a bully who argues by insult and epithet, and a demagogue whose slogans about America First, Second and Third come out of the past and would cripple its future.


U.N.L.V. Season to Close Amid Constant Infighting
University of Nevada-Las Vegas Coach Jerry Tarkanian and Robert Maxson, the school's president, confirmed today that they share a dedication to find the truth about the troubled university and guarantee future success for its basketball team.
They also confirmed that they don't share much else.


Public Likes Tax Cut but Not Motive
The American public overwhelmingly supports the kind of middle- class tax cut Democrats in Congress propose, but does not give the Democrats much credit for the idea, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Sixty percent of the public said the Democrats proposed the cut more because they felt it would win them votes than because they thought it would help the economy.
That skepticism is all the more striking because 56 percent of the public said they thought the economy would benefit from a cut like the Democrats' $400 credit for working couples passed by the House last week.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Stanley Interiors Corp., Stanleytown, Va., a manufacturer of furniture and related products, said it planned to negotiate with holders of its subordinated notes and preferred stock to convert the issues into common shares, as part of a restructuring.
Common  *
Cummins Engine Company, Columbus, Ind., the diesel-engine maker, said it had filed for 2 million shares to be sold through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The proceeds will be used mainly to reduce debt. *
Nationsbank, Charlotte, N.C., completed the sale of 8.05 million shares of common stock through Merrill Lynch at a price of $45 a share.
Proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes.
Ratings  *
Owens-Illinois's shelf registration, covering $850 million of subordinated debt securities, has received a B+ rating from Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company, based in Toledo, Ohio, is the world's leading maker of glass bottles.
S.&amp; P. said the company had a strong cash flow but had used debt aggressively. *
Textron Inc., Providence, R.I., the conglomerate that recently acquired Cessna Aircraft from General Dynamics for $600 million, has had its debt ratings affirmed by Moody's Investors Service, based on what the ratings agency called long-term benefits from the acquisition and the ability of Textron to strengthen its balance sheet through "stable internal cash generation." Its senior debt is rated A3.


S.E.C. to Review 2 Studies On Rebates Paid to Brokers
A Securities and Exchange Commission official said yesterday that as much as 30 to 40 percent of trading in American stocks "appears to be subject to some sort of inducement to order flow," including the payment of rebates to brokers for trading in particular markets.
William Heyman, the director of the S.E.C.'s division of market regulation, said he intended to review two new studies that concluded that investors might be losing millions of dollars as a result of the diversion of orders away from the New York Stock Exchange.


Gooden Provides Some Pop Music
The date for Dwight Gooden's first fully meaningful appearance remains unscheduled.
Today, however, Gooden's fastball made an impromptu appearance on the mound.
It looked good.
It felt good.
It signified nothing more than modest encouragement.


CHRONICLE
There is usually little love lost between television stations, but WPIX-TV, Channel 11, is demonstrating that it is possible to extend hands across the dial.
Beginning on Thursday, it will broadcast two 30-second spots urging viewers to contribute to Channel 13's annual pledge drive, which starts Saturday and ends March 22.
"Commercial and public television are not competitors, and we ought to help one another," said DR.
BILL BAKER, president and chief executive of Channel 13, WNET.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Clinton's Coalition Proves Effective at Raising Money
As the political season moves into a series of crucial primaries, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas remains the undisputed leader among the Democrats in campaign contributions, even though he has yet to win an election.
Mr.
Clinton is continuing to succeed in raising money largely because he has put together a coalition of old-time Washington lobbyists and younger lawyers who joined him early because they believed he had the best chance to defeat President Bush.


Chess
Television producers rarely broadcast chess tournaments, but chess sponsors are getting ready to adapt to the medium just in case they are asked to present programs.
More and more tournaments around the world are being organized with a time limit of 30 minutes for each player for all moves, the so-called "action" format.
The idea is to quicken the play so that spectators do not have to wait long for a move.
The most recent such event was the Melody Amber Tournament at the Vista Palace Hotel in Roquebrune/ Cap Martin, Monaco. (The tourney name is that of the infant daughter of the sponsor, J. J. van Oosterom, the former director of Volmac Software Group.) Twelve of the world's best players (but not the world champion, Gary Kasparov) came for the double-round competition, which took place from Feb. 3 to 12.


Talks Seek to Prevent Huge Loss of Species
AS the world approaches the day of decision on a treaty to deal with the threat of global warming, separate negotiations on another overarching environmental question, maintaining biological diversity, are moving toward their own denouement.
The object of these less prominent but nevertheless high-stakes talks is to forge a binding agreement among the world's nations to slow or halt a steady loss of plant, animal and microbial species that many biologists fear will result in a mass extinction of epic proportions in mere decades.


Treasuries Off Sharply on Report
A report showing that the manufacturing sector was far stronger last month than previously thought took credit market participants by surprise yesterday, and traders responded by sharply pushing down prices of Treasury securities.
According to a survey of the nation's purchasing managers, business activity among manufacturing companies improved for the first time in five months during February.
An index used in the survey to measure activity rose to its highest level since October.


U.S. Company to Help Russia Track Billions
The Russian Government has hired a New York investigative company to help it track down and reclaim billions of dollars thought to have been siphoned out of the country by corrupt Government and Communist Party officials in recent years.
In an interview on Russian television on Sunday night, First Deputy Prime Minster Yegor T. Gaidar said the Government was prepared now to begin "a vigorous search" for state-owned capital that flowed abroad virtually unchecked ever since the Soviet Union's Communist bosses understood that their power and the old system were coming to an end.


New York Board of Elections Rules to Keep Tsongas on Ballot
After five days of tedious legal scrutiny, the New York State Board of Elections ruled tonight that Paul E. Tsongas had gathered enough valid signatures to enter New York State's Democratic primary on April 7.
The decision, which came hours before the deadline for ballot certification, was immediately denounced by representatives of the New Alliance Party, who said that the challenge would now move to State Supreme Court where the party filed a suit last week to block Mr.
Tsongas from appearing on the ballot.


The Willie Horton of 1992
One Willie Horton was too many.
In 1988 the Bush campaign broadcast an attack ad about a black murderer to inflame voters crudely and unfairly against Michael Dukakis.
Now the Bush campaign is trying to demonize Democrats again, but this time much more ambitiously.
To judge by current evidence, the new Willie Horton is New York City.
As before, the President remains mostly above any such sordid politics.
He sniped at welfare in his State of the Union address.
Now his surrogates, Vice President Dan Quayle and Representative Newt Gingrich, have taken to denouncing and deriding New York in terms so callous that their only readily imaginable purpose is divisive gain.


Rebuilding in Lebanon By Party of God Teams
An Iranian-linked engineering group has begun rebuilding two Shiite Muslim villages in southern Lebanon that were attacked by Israeli troops a week and a half ago, and the new leader of the militant Shiite Muslim Party of God is seeking further help in meetings with Iranian leaders.
An announcement by the Party of God, a hard-line militia coalition guided from Teheran, said a group called the Jihad Foundation for Reconstruction had sent 20 working teams to Kafra and Yater to rebuild and repair dozens of houses that were demolished when an Israeli armored force raided the villages in search of Shiite guerrillas who had fired rockets into northern Israel.


Jews Protest Planned Mall Over Cemetery


Dinkins Leads A Call to Stop Street Killings
Spurred by the shooting deaths of two students in Thomas Jefferson High School last week, Mayor David N. Dinkins, a coalition of black ministers and Bill Cosby went to the school yesterday and invoked the imagery of the civil rights movement in a call for East New York residents to begin an anti-violence crusade.
As nearly 800 students, parents and residents of the desolate, drug-plagued Brooklyn neighborhood stood listening in the street outside the school, Mr.
Dinkins reminded the crowd that the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. had led a "nonviolence movement."


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Presidential candidates' use of negative tactics to attract news coverage misidentified the Government agency that helped finance a film cited in a commercial for Patrick J. Buchanan.
The film was subsidized by the National Endowment for the Arts, not the National Endowment for the Humanities.


Neighbors, 1, Wrestlers, 0, in Library Aid Fracas
After last week, the World Wrestling Federation, which brought the universe tough guys like Hulk Hogan, Repo Man and the Model, might be inspired to add another hard-nosed fighting force to its roster: the neighbors.
It all began with a proposal by this city's Mayor for a wrestling exhibition to raise money for the public library.
The benefit would take place one evening in August in the stadium at Stamford High School, with wrestlers and promotion provided at no charge by the wrestling federation, which has its headquarters here.


Besieged Rexene Chairman Quits
The Rexene Corporation said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, William J. Gilliam, whose spending habits have been criticized as lavish, had resigned.
Rexene, a Dallas-based petrochemical company that has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection since October, said Mr.
Gilliam was leaving to focus on other investments.


Correction
An editorial yesterday titled "Women's Work" erred in asserting that more girls than boys are born.
Typically, 105 males are born for every 100 females, reflecting the biological fact that males are more susceptible to fatal childhood diseases.
Child-rearing practices in poorer countries that favor male children only add to a disparity in ratio that begins at birth.


Marsam Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More Japanese Workers Demanding Shorter Hours and Less Hectic Work
In self-satisfied tones, Japanese leaders have recently been calling Americans lazy and praising their own workers' eagerness to toil and sacrifice for corporate Japan.
But these days, despite the comments of some Japanese spokesmen, the legendary willingness of Japanese workers to toil long and hard without complaining is giving way to a new debate over whether Japanese are working too hard.
Increasingly, Japanese are willing to answer yes.


Hawkins Chemical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gay Irish Group Sues to March in Parade
Just 15 days before the St.
Patrick's Day Parade is to step off, the gay group that has been barred from marching under its own banner filed suit in Federal court yesterday to compel the organizers to allow it to march.
This latest legal tactic spurred a lawyer for the parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, to accuse the group, the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, of trying to prevent the parade from taking place.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Hampson and Members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra  Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church
Perhaps as a respite from the grand dramatic posturings of the opera house, James Levine and some of his Metropolitan Opera Orchestra musicians have made a point of playing chamber music together, with Mr.
Levine's piano as the fixed point in changing ensembles of wind and string players.


GTE Names President At Operations in West
The GTE Corporation, the nation's largest telephone holding company, said yesterday that it had named a longtime specialist in dealing with state regulators, Larry J. Sparrow, as the president of its largest local telephone service area.
The area, the Western region, accounts for nearly 22 cents of every GTE revenue dollar.
Mr.
Sparrow, 48 years old, had been GTE's vice president for regulatory and governmental affairs, and was based in Irving, Tex.
Local telephone service can be lucrative because it is a monopoly, but for the same reason can also be restrictively regulated by sometimes hostile public service commissions.


Elwood C. Kastner, 86, N.Y.U. Dean Emeritus
Elwood Curt Kastner, a retired college administrator and dean emeritus at New York University, died on Saturday at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Chatham, Mass., where he moved from Yonkers after he retired.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Epidemic at the Computer: Hand and Arm Injuries
WORK-RELATED injuries, long the plague of those who do heavy manual labor, have become a scourge among white-collar workers, too.
Experts say hundreds of thousands of office workers are being disabled each year in an epidemic of motion-related damage to the hands and arms that is costing the nation many billions of dollars annually.
The problem is expected to worsen in the current recession as businesses demand greater output from fewer employees and workers ignore symptoms for fear of losing their jobs.


Chicago Milwaukee Corp. reports earnings for As of Dec 31


GTI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Tronic Relinquishes Management to Group
The Hiller Group, a corporate management firm, will take over management of the Key Tronic Corporation, a maker of personal computer keyboards based in Spokane, Wash., according to an agreement announced yesterday by the companies.
Under the accord, Stanley Hiller has been elected Key Tronic's chief executive and was named to its board.
Royce G. Pearson, also a member of the Hiller Group, has been elected president and chief operating officer.
Wendell J. Satre, Key Tronic's chairman and acting president since August, will continue as chairman.


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Avis to Back Bill Revising Liability and Banning Surcharges
Avis will announce today it will back a bill that would sharply limit car-rental companies' liability in accidents caused by renters and in exchange would bar the companies from adding surcharges on car rentals based on the renter's home address.
Early this year, Hertz, the nation's largest car-rental firm, began imposing such surcharges -- up to $56 a day on renters from the Bronx, and smaller charges for renters from other boroughs.


Another Final Frontier: 'Star Trek' at Space Museum
The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution here has often been the last hope of parents desperate to interest their children in something besides television.
Now, television wins.
" 'Star Trek': The Exhibition" opened on Friday at the museum with more than 80 original props, costumes and models from the 1960's television series.


Soul's Serenity in the South Bronx
The delicate jangle of rosary beads breaks the predawn stillness inside St.
Crispin's Friary as gray-robed friars pad into the sparsely furnished chapel for morning prayers.
One by one, they stop and genuflect before the altar, some kneeling down to kiss the floor.
In the quiet pauses between prayers, the chirping of birds that flit like black dots across the purple sky lends a soft, pastoral touch.
But sometimes the heralds of God and nature are drowned out by the sounds of sirens, screeching tires or blaring, percussive music.


A Rare Stubbed Toe In a Charmed Legal Life
Until his affiliation with the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its chairman, Charles H. Keating Jr., Peter M. Fishbein led an almost entirely charmed legal career, prospering as a corporate litigator and helping turn the organization he headed, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, into one of New York's largest and most successful law firms.
Colleagues agree that the Government's lawsuit against him and the firm represents Mr.
Fishbein's greatest, and arguably his only, substantial professional setback to date.
Where they disagree is whether the Government's action stems from overzealous regulators or Mr.
Fishbein's very success, which may have bred in him feelings of invulnerability.


Review/Violin; The Virtuosic Midori: Punchy Yet Humble
Midori has the great good fortune, and bad luck, to be a poised and finished virtuoso long before she has any right to be.
What are we to expect from this tiny violinist now in her 21st year but long since famous?
Listening to her recital with Robert McDonald at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts on Sunday afternoon, one recognized all the tools of mastery, and intermittently the mastery itself.
Her passage through Sarasate's famous "Zigeunerweisen" was astonishing, both for its coolheadedness under fire and the dead-on assault she aimed at each successive acrobatic trick.
Yet in a Handel D-major Sonata at the start, Midori was a model of self-effacing simplicity.
One admires the practical thoroughness as much as the extravagant skills.


Strawberry Pokes Gooden With Pen
From the organization's top officials to the players in the clubhouse, the Mets today digested the published excerpts of "Darryl," the autobiography of Darryl Strawberry.
Their response? Fury, indifference, contempt, laughter, incredulity and hurt.


Chef's Goal: Food That Complements a Splendid Dining Room
FEW Parisian restaurants are as magificent as Le Grand Vefour, a landmark with more than 200 years of history behind it.
And now there are signs that the cooking may again be as impressive as the setting.
Four months ago a new chef, Guy Martin, accepted the challenge of restoring the food to its former glory.
A 35-year-old native of the Savoy region of France, he had already earned two stars in the Michelin guide for his food at the Chateau de Divonne in Divonne-les-Bains in the Alps.


Senate Republicans Announce New Campaign for Anticrime Bill
Trying to introduce the crime issue into the Presidential campaign, Senate Republican leaders said today that from now on, and at least once a week, they would attach anticrime measures already rejected by the Democratic majority to unrelated legislation.
While their chance of passing an anticrime bill to their liking is highly improbable, the Republicans are trying to reopen the question of which party is tougher on crime.
Republican strategists say the crime issue has historically benefited their candidates and helps paint Democrats as liberals who are more interested in the rights of criminals than the rights of victims.


Now Read His Lips: Bush Says He Erred
President Bush said that breaking the "no new taxes" pledge of his 1988 campaign has been the biggest blunder of his Presidency because it is hurting his drive for re-election.
The statement and an accompanying apology were intended to blunt attacks by Mr.
Bush's conservative rival, Patrick J. Buchanan, who has been bludgeoning the President with the broken promise.


Market Place; Finding Money In Old Freezers
THERE are occasions where it is possible to do well by doing good.
This appears to be the case with Appliance Recycling Centers of America Inc.
The company collects old refrigerators and freezers and removes the refrigerants before the chemicals can escape and attack the earth's protective ozone layer.
In doing so, the Minneapolis company seems to have carved out a unique and profitable slice of the growing market for environmental services.


Tyson Trial Belonged on Sports Pages
To the Editor:
Complaints from women's groups and press critics about the coverage and placement of stories on the rape trial of Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, sound a familiar note.


If Blood Pressure Is High-Normal, Try Losing Weight
LOSING weight is the best nondrug treatment for reducing blood pressure in people with pressures on the high side of normal, according to a new study of more than 2,100 men and women,
The collaborative study, published in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, found that cutting back on dietary salt was also helpful, though less effective than weight loss, in reducing blood pressure in people whose pressures were not high enough to warrant drug treatment.


Panel Rejects Fee for Landmark Buildings
A plan to impose work-permit fees on the owners of landmark buildings was unanimously rejected yesterday by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Opponents of the plan, intended to raise $300,000 for the agency, argued that it would encourage landlords to sidestep the permit process and discourage designation efforts.


CHRONICLE
The first line LAUREN BACALL uttered in her first movie, "To Have and Have Not," was, "Have you got a match?"
"It was very effective; it made an impression at the time," Miss Bacall said yesterday, even as she tried to make a different kind of impression regarding smoking.


Big Borrowing Is Needed For Albany Jobless Fund
New York State will have to borrow at least $500 million to keep afloat the fund it uses to pay unemployment benefits, state labor officials announced today.
But state officials sought to assuage concerns about the impact of the announcement, contending that the loans from the Federal Government would assure that benefits would continue to be paid.


F.D.I.C. Balks at Accepting Tentative Milken Settlement
The tentative $1.3 billion settlement that Michael R. Milken reached with his former firm, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Government regulators and other civil litigants ran into snags yesterday as one of the parties, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, put off approving the deal for the second straight day.
One lawyer involved in the deal, who insisted on anonymity, said he did not expect it to fall apart.
He added, however: "This is one of those deals if you don't get it done right away, it gets harder to do every time it comes back."


Dinkins Budget Office Conducts Exercise in Numbers-Crunching
In an apparent pressure tactic, the Dinkins administration has asked some city agencies to draft devastating cuts in planned spending for construction, proposing to slash the Mayoral allocation for parks projects from about $20 million to $353,000 in the coming fiscal year, for instance.
Officially, the administration's requests for cuts in the capital budget, made public yesterday, simply spell out its previously announced plans for cutting capital spending by about 30 percent over the next four years, to reduce borrowing costs and help keep the city's operating budget balanced.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Wall Street Has a Rally, For Tsongas
It was a strange image: a Democratic candidate for President having a rally on Wall Street yesterday.
But it seemed completely normal to Paul E. Tsongas, whose mission to turn his party into what he calls a "hybrid" -- liberal on social issues but pro-business -- has made him an anomaly to the Democratic leadership.
Paul Yednak, a vice president at M. A. Schapiro &amp; Company, a Wall Street firm, said he was a Republican who "voted for Bush, Reagan, Reagan, Nixon and Nixon."


Queens College Builds Sanctum in Pandemonium
If asked to find an ideal location for a conservatory, where being able to concentrate on the subtleties of a musical phrase is of paramount importance, few musicians would mention the Queens College campus in Flushing, at the edge of the Long Island Expressway and directly under a La Guardia Airport flight path.
Fewer still would regard it as a likely site for a new concert hall and a digital recording studio.
That, however, is where Queens College has built its new Aaron Copland School of Music, a $28 million complex of classrooms, practice studios and faculty offices, with a wing that includes a recording studio, orchestral and choral rehearsal rooms and a 491-seat concert hall.


New Technology at A.T.&amp;T. To Cut Many Operator Jobs
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it planned to introduce technology that could replace up to one-third of its 18,000 long-distance operators by 1994.
The announcement comes less than four weeks before A.T.&amp; T. begins contract negotiations with the operators and other unionized workers.
Their union, the Communications Workers of America, quickly branded the move an "intimidation tactic," which A.T.&amp; T. denied.


Top Rights Official at State Dept., Advocate of Firm Policy, Resigns
The State Department's top official concerned with monitoring and advocating human rights abroad resigned today, saying that after six years the time had come to "move out."
The announcement of Richard Schifter's resignation as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs denied there were policy differences, but he is known to have taken strong positions within the Administration on rights issues involving China and Kuwait, where the White House has often been more conciliatory.


Treasuries Off on Signs of Rebound
Signs of life in the economy helped to push down prices of most Treasury securities yesterday, and long-term interest rates moved up toward 8 percent.
The economic signals reported yesterday -- the first rise in the Government's index of leading economic indicators in three months and a sharp increase in new home sales in January -- came on top of a report on Monday from the nation's purchasing managers, who suggested the manufacturing sector is no longer in recession.


The Pop Life
Classical Metal
Yngwie Malmsteen's "Fire and Ice" (Elektra) has just been released and, like his last albums, it drips with gothic imagery, hard riffs and fast guitar.
Mr.
Malmsteen (whose first name is pronounced ING-vay) is heavy metal's virtuoso, someone who gets ignored by critics but is a demigod in the murky adolescent heavy-metal and speed-guitar subculture that loves both his guitar playing and his name.
His concerts are pumped-fist heaven.
And in Japan, where the Swedish musican is headed for a three-week tour, the record made its debut on the music charts in the No. 1 spot, something that Michael Jackson wasn't able to do.


Review/Television; Meeting Indiana Jones as a Boy and a Teen-Ager
Bursting with good intentions and some nifty action sequences, "The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" comes galloping onto ABC tonight at 8 with a two-hour premiere, which features two different adventures held together (just barely) by a plot gimmick.
The executive producer, in case you haven't heard, is George Lucas, whose creative imprint can be found on six of the highest-grossing films of all time, the "Star Wars" and "Indiana Jones" trilogies.
Mr.
Lucas has had the perfectly admirable idea of injecting the Indiana Jones action-adventure format with factual information designed to stimulate an interest in history in younger viewers.
The plan: go back to the first decades of this century with young Indy, indeed with two young Indys, one about 10 years old (Corey Carrier), the other 17 or so (Sean Patrick Flanery).
Each weekly adventure will feature one of the boys.
Tonight you get both.
Initial verdict: clunky.


Panel Fines Paine Webber
An arbitration panel of the National Association of Securities Dealers has ordered Paine Webber Inc. to pay a $1.7 million award to an employee who had been dismissed.
The former employee, Barry Berkeley, Paine Webber's former national sales manager in mortgage-backed securities, received the award after the panel found that he had been defamed after his dismissal last year.
The panel also ordered the firm to amend a Securities and Exchange Commission filing to say that Mr.
Berkeley was terminated for "irreconcilable differences caused by internal office politics."


Palestinians Submit Proposal to Israel
The Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks presented Israel today with a detailed plan for self-government in the occupied territories.
It calls for elections within the year and a near-total withdrawal of Israeli forces before a local government is installed.
The plan is a more comprehensive version of an outline given to the Israelis at an earlier session of the talks in January, said Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman.


First City Bank of Texas Seeks $400 Million Deal
The First City Bancorporation of Texas is scouring the financial markets for banks or other buyers willing to invest in one of the state's largest, but loss-plagued banks.
The plan being circulated by First City and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation would call for $400 million in new capital but no F.D.I.C. outlays.


Fujitsu Plan To Re-enter U.S. Market
Fujitsu Ltd. plans to announce today that it will re-enter the American market for supercomputers.
The entry by the Japanese electronics giant represents a new challenge for American computer makers in an important sector.
Supercomputers are being used more and more to simulate design and manufacturing processes, helping companies gain crucial time in getting competitive products, like semiconductors and drugs, to market.


Books of The Times; The Forms of Solitude, Including Total Isolation
Migrations to Solitude  Sue Halpern Illustrated. 213 pages.
Pantheon Books. $20.
Journeys in Dream and Imagination  Artur Lundkvist Translated by Ann B. Weissmann and Annika Planck. 129 pages.
Four Walls Eight Windows. $17.95.
The word privacy does not appear in the Constitution, but it has developed into a right that is sought and practiced, sometimes at personal risk, by men and women everywhere.
In his famous dissenting opinion in the 1928 wiretapping case of Olmstead v.
United States, Associate Justice Louis D. Brandeis said that "the right to be let alone" was the most comprehensive of rights and "the right most cherished by civilized men."


Sears Will Sell Goodyear Tires
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that it would sell its name-brand tires through Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
The move is a shift for the nation's largest tire producer, which has avoided distribution pacts with large retailers.
Goodyear, which has a big network of its own dealers, will sell seven tire lines through 875 Sears tire and auto centers beginning April 1.
Goodyear holds about a third of the market of tires sold to automobile companies and about 25 percent of the replacement-tire market.
Sears stores sell about a tenth of the nation's replacement tires.


Ordinary Citizens
To the Editor:  Reo M. Christenson (letter, Feb. 7) claims that "the outrageously irresponsible entertainment industry, shielded by the American Civil Liberties Union, is primarily responsible for the increasing degradation of our popular culture."


Siemens, Toshiba Discuss Venture
Siemens A.G., Europe's largest electronics group, is in talks with the Toshiba Corporation of Japan about a venture to make semiconductors.
A spokesman for Siemens confirmed German news reports that an accord might be reached by the spring.
He would not discuss the terms.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; The Road Not Taken
To the Editor:
Thanks for putting some perspective back in "Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test" (editorial, Feb. 14).
I knew Bill and his fellow Rhodes Scholar housemates at Oxford: Strobe Talbott, who has gone on to become a journalist with Time magazine, and Frank Aller, whom you have probably never heard of.
Frank was drafted and out of his convictions against the war became a draft resister.


Wine Talk
A READER writes: "Wine is too expensive. Say it. Or are you afraid of the wine people? People are sick of the prices in stores and especially in restaurants.
"The wine people act as if these dollar prices are normal when they are utterly insane. Your 'Tastings' mentions a Napa Valley chardonnay for $30! I am a comfortable man with a good six-figure income. I love wine, but the heck with $30.


U.N. Seeks Blocked Funds to Use in Iraq
The United States and the other four permanent members of the Security Council are considering using Iraqi assets frozen abroad to pay for humanitarian supplies and the destruction of Baghdad's most dangerous weapons, and to start compensating victims of its invasion of Kuwait, diplomats said today.
Iraq's assets abroad are thought to total about $5 billion.
The amount in the United States is about $500 million, according to recent Congressional testimony by the Bush Administration.


Problems Mounting For Steelers' Worley
Pittsburgh Steelers halfback TIM WORLEY missed at least two mandatory National Football League drug tests in the last month, subjecting himself to an automatic one-year suspension without pay.
But his reason for missing the tests -- he joined a group of N.F.L. players in Orlando, Fla., for the N.B.A.
All-Star Game weekend -- shows, according to his agent, that he should be punished only for acting without brains.
"He's sorry now," his agent, JERRY ALBANO, said.
"I know we ain't got much ground to argue on. The only thing we got to argue on is stupidity."


Metropolitan Diary
Dear Diary:
I happen to be the so-called star of the very successful revival of "The Most Happy Fella." Standing on the subway going to work I glanced over the shoulder of a very nicely dressed young man and couldn't help but notice that he was reading the one less-than-favorable review our show had received.
He read and I watched.
For some reason, he looked up, saw me and did a bit of a double-take.
He must have recognized me because he looked down at the magazine, politely closed it and put it in his case.
He did it in a manner as if to protect me.
I was very touched.
Now tell me that New Yorkers don't have hearts. -- SPIRO MALAS
. . .
Dear Diary:
Going past the Toy Center Building on Fifth Avenue and 23d Street the other morning I could tell the annual fair was on: models, dressed up as such well-known "action figures" as Spiderman and G.I.
Joe were greeting the arriving buyers.
A hard-working young man was assisting buyers from their taxis.
Could it be? . . .
Was he? . . .
Yes, by golly, he was! . . .
The newest superhero . . .
DOORMAN, the First Urban Action Figure!
Faster to a cab than any man alive, even in the rain!
More powerful than a mugger!
See Doorman being nice to nagging tenants!
Watch as Doorman gets heat and hot water back on the H line of apartments!
Check him out as he sorts the mail and deals with the surly porter!
Some New York kids have had more dealings with these superheros than with any on the tube.
He comes with a whistle, too, and the more expensive versions will, no doubt, have a snappy uniform and coordinated canopy. -- JOHN L. HAGGERTY
. . .
The scene: Seventh Avenue South, in front of Dede's Dog-O-Rama, a grooming and gift shop for pets.
Dramatis personae: One pleasant-but-impatient woman, one tiny-but-feisty Yorkshire terrier.
Action: The dog, paws planted firmly on the pavement, stares into the window of the pet store.
Dog: Woof woof! The woman tugs at his leash, bends down, and speaks.
Woman: I keep telling you. They're closed!
. . .
Dear Diary:
He was coming down the crowded aisle of a Broadway bus presenting an empty coffee cup to every passenger with no results.
When he reached me I was especially gripped by his plight: I emptied out all the coins from my right-hand jacket pocket into his cup.
He stopped to sort out the pennies, nickels and dimes I had given him and then extended his hand.
I reached out to receive what I assumed would be a handshake.
Instead, with a broad grin he returned a batch of Tums that had been mixed with the coins. -- LOU GARBUS
. . .
Dear Diary:
After completing rather complicated oral surgery, my dentist gave me a prescription for a pain reliever.
I had it filled and as the novocain began to wear off, I decided the time had come to take the medication.
Checking the label, I read: "1 tablet 4 times daily for pain. May cause drowsiness. Have a pleasant day." -- M. C. BAKER
. . .
Dear Diary:
A frigid Manhattan morning.
I was walking down Third Avenue when a 30-something woman passed me.
Glaring pointedly at my fur coat she muttered, "Uncivilized bimbo!"
Bimbo?
Absolutely thrilled, I rushed to the first available store window.
The image staring back was undeniably that of a 50-something lady in a four-year-old coat.
Still, she'd said it.
Bimbo!
I continued downtown -- snug and smug -- in my cherished new appellation. -- PELDA B. LEVEY
. . .
Gail H. Kedrus of Larchmont, N.Y., is in the midst of a transaction at a money machine in Grand Central Terminal.
At an adjoining machine a cop is making a withdrawal when a dispatcher's voice is heard over his walkie-talkie: "Code Red -- robbery in progress 41st and Lexington. All police in the area report to location."
The cop has just punched in his code and has yet to get his money.
He looks around, uncertain whether to respond to the call or wait for his cash and his card.
Deciding that civic duty comes first, he runs out of the bank but not before shouting to the guard standing in the kiosk: "Get my money and card and hold them for me. I'll be right back!"
Ms.
Kedrus didn't stick around to find out what happened but it was certainly one of the more dramatic withdrawals of her money-machine life.
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was dashing toward an escalator at J.F.K. when an elderly fellow who was ascending about one-quarter of the way up, gave the go-ahead signal for me to get ahead of him.
"Gandhi said that there was more to life than speeding life up," the fellow commented as I prepared to pass him.
"Gandhi was assassinated, wasn't he?" I asked.
"Good heavens, you're right," the man said.
"Gandhi just wasn't fast enough. Better get out of my way."
With that, he bounded up the stairs ahead of me. -- JIM DADY


Smith Rejoins Buckeyes
Running back ROBERT SMITH is returning to the Ohio State team he quit in a dispute with an assistant coach whom he says told him to skip class to attend football practice.
"I told the team this morning he is coming back and of, course, they're happy," Coach JOHN COOPER said yesterday.
"I'm happy. Robert's happy."


The Pain of Adams's Fall Is Sorely Felt in Senate
Senator Brock Adams's colleagues returned to Capitol Hill today and lamented the latest scandal in what Senator Jim Sasser called "a cascade of negatives" that has blighted Congress.
Many described the accusations of sexual harassment that led Mr.
Adams to abandon his re-election campaign as a tragedy, identifying more with the Democratic Senator from Washington than with his anonymous accusers.


Trenton to Send Industry New Rules for Car Insurance
New Jersey plans this week to distribute sweeping new regulations that will bar the use of age, sex or marital status in setting automobile insurance rates.
The new regulations, which will take effect on Jan. 1, 1993, will also require companies to place less emphasis on geographical location when setting rates and will list the factors companies should use in setting their rates.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  TAPPING IRAQ'S FROZEN ASSETS
The permanent members of the United Nations Security Council are considering using Iraqi assets frozen abroad to pay for the destruction of Baghdad's most dangerous weapons, needed humanitarian imports and compensation for victims of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
A3  PALESTINIANS SUBMIT A PROPOSAL
The Palestinian delegation to the Middle East talks presented Israel with a detailed plan for self-government in the occupied territories.
The initial response was negative.
A3
Kurds in Iraq are puzzled by Turkish raids on their towns.  A5
Riyadh Journal: TV is beamed at the Arabs, and they beam back.  A4


Media Group Makes a Deal For Building
In a transaction that gives some indication of the weakness of the city's real-estate market and how hard the Dinkins administration will fight to retain jobs, Bertelsmann A.G., the world's second-largest media concern, announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy a 44-story office tower in Times Square that had been vacant since it was completed in 1990.
The German-based company said it would consolidate its New York-based companies, which include RCA Records and the Bantam Doubleday Dell publishing group, into the building at 1540 Broadway, at the corner of West 45th Street, and forgo plans to move 500 employees to Chicago and Indianapolis.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, named Patrick W. Kenny group executive for the finance and administration unit. *
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, New York, named Lorraine A. Montero managing director of corporate finance. *
Citizens First Bancorp Inc., Glen Rock, N.J., named Allan D. Nichols chairman and chief executive of both the company and its unit, Citizens First National Bank of New Jersey. *
Colonial Companies Inc., Columbia, S.C., an insurance company, named Frank S. Smith Jr. president and chief executive.
He succeeds Stephen G. Hall, who resigned. *
Jockey International Inc., Kenosha, Wis., appointed Arthur F. DeCesaro executive vice president and national sales manager, working out of New York. *
Lockheed Corp., Calabasas, Calif., named Dr.
Vance D. Coffman to the newly created post of corporate executive vice president.
Dr.
Coffman, previously president of the company's space systems division of its Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. unit, is succeeded by Donald F. Tang, the division's vice president and assistant general manager. *
Kellwood Co., St.
Louis, named John E. Conroy president of its home fashions unit.


Peter J. Crotty, Democratic Force In Western New York, Dies at 82
Peter J. Crotty, the erudite king-maker who dominated Democratic politics in western New York as the party chairman of Erie County and was a force in the campaigns of John F. Kennedy for President and Robert F. Kennedy for the United States Senate, died yesterday at Mercy Hospital in Buffalo.
He was 82 years old and lived in Buffalo.
He died of a heart attack, his son James said.


Bridge
Of the items of condensed wisdom that were current half a century ago the most reliable was, and is, this: Against three no-trump lead an unbid major suit.
However, the opening leader should take into account the possibility that a major suit has been implied without being bid.
In the diagramed deal from the Long Island Regional Imp Pairs played Saturday in Smithtown, L.I., North's use of Stayman followed by three no-trump implied ownership of a four-card spade suit.
West therefore led a club and struck pay dirt.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON WINS GEORGIA PRIMARY AND TSONGAS TAKES MARYLAND; PROTEST ERODES BUSH VICTORIES
The Democratic Presidential campaign moved decisively toward a two-man struggle Tuesday as Gov.
Bill Clinton won convincingly in Georgia and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas prevailed in Maryland.
President Bush won in Georgia what would normally be considered a comfortable victory, but Patrick J. Buchanan, his conservative challenger, once again showed the strength of a Republican protest vote in times of economic discontent.
Mr.
Bush's margin of about 64 percent to Mr.
Buchanan's 36 percent reflected a high percentage of votes from women, according to surveys of voters leaving polling places.
Brown Shows Strength
The voting in the three major Democratic primaries Tuesday -- in Georgia, Colorado and Maryland -- carried grim news for Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, both of whom lagged at the back of the pack.
But former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, with a surprisingly strong showing in Colorado, seemed to get a toehold for his campaign against politics as usual.


Reprieve Sought for Doomed Tarrytown Plant
One week after the General Motors Corporation announced a plan to close its assembly plant here, New York State today announced a counteroffensive, pledging to do all it could to change the auto maker's mind.
In Albany, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said he had appointed government, business and labor officials to a task force to explore financial incentives and other inducements to keep G.M. in Westchester County.
The task force, he said, would also examine new ways G.M. could use the plant as well as identify "new uses and users" should G.M. refuse to reconsider.


Eating Well
AFTER news reports in the last few months that the French eat as much fat as Americans yet have about half the number of heart attacks, sales of red wine and foie gras soared in the United States.
But those who were quick to embrace the promise of this French paradox may have to step back again.
An American nutritionist says there is a simple explanation: The French have only recently begun to eat as much fat as Americans have been eating for almost half a century, so it will take several decades before the French heart disease rate is likely to match the American rate.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
BP Exploration Inc., Houston, an oil and natural gas exploration company, sold its stake in the Canadian Hunter Joint Venture in British Columbia to Noranda Inc., Toronto, the other partner in the venture.
Dial Corp., Phoenix, a producer of personal and household products, said shareholders had approved a tax-free spinoff of its GFC Financial Corp. unit.
Shareholders will receive one share of GFC common stock for every two shares of Dial.
Today is the date of record for the distribution. *
Healthinfusion Inc., Miami, a home health-care provider, agreed to acquire Home-Medic Lifeline.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Hilb Rogal &amp; Hamilton Co., Glen Allen, Va., an insurance company, acquired Bilger-Ketchum Inc., Pittsburgh, an insurance brokerage.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Pacific Telesis Group, San Francisco, a regional telephone company, increased its holdings of Cellular Communications Corp.'s outstanding series A common stock to 27.7 percent from about 23 percent. *
Zenith Electronics Corp., Glenview, Ill., expects to receive $5 million over two years from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency to support the production of high-resolution display monitors for military purposes.


Russian Envoy Says Famine Is Unlikely, for Now
Russia's new Ambassador to Washington said today that the former Soviet republics would most likely get through this winter without any famine, but that disruptions in planting this spring could lead to serious shortages next year.
"I don't think that this year famine is the real menace," said Vladimir N. Lukin, during an interview in a sitting room of the former Soviet Embassy, now the Russian Embassy, on 16th Street.
"Of course, in some parts the situation in foodstuffs will be difficult, but I am sure that we will survive until the new harvest."


Level of Government Assistance for American Exporters Is Debated
At a time of heightened concern about American competitiveness and lagging foreign trade, debate is growing over whether the United States' modest and loosely coordinated efforts at export promotion are falling behind other industrialized nations.
American businesses, whose shipments abroad are viewed as the best hope for leading the United States out of recession, are far less likely than their foreign rivals to get low-interest government loans or help from their embassies when they try to sell goods in foreign capitals.


Women Clubbed by Police in Kenya During a Protest


Canada-Japan Accord On Beverage Is Cleared
The Clearly Canadian Beverage Corporation said today that it had entered into an distribution agreement with Asahi Breweries Ltd.
Under the accord, Asahi will distribute Clearly Canadian's line of sparkling beverages to the Japanese market.


Art Show Looks at Los Angeles's Underside
On the opening night of "Helter-Skelter: L.A. Art in the 1990's," the most provocative art show in Los Angeles in years, 10,000 people showed up and there was a near-riot at the entrance.
Since then, the exhibition, a showcase of 16 Los Angeles artists at the Museum of Contemporary Art's warehouse-style annex, has not only lured big crowds, but also stirred anger, applause, astonishment.
What is, perhaps, especially startling about the perverse, ambitious, often bleakly funny show by artists ranging in age from their early 20's to late 50's is its attempt to explore the unique culture of Los Angeles and address what Paul Schimmel, the museum's 37-year-old chief curator, calls "the darker angst-ridden side of contemporary life" here that has little to do with the stereotypes of the city as a cultural wasteland or a sunny, hedonistic playground.
He said the show, which opened in late January and will run until April 26, "has succeeded beyond our wildest expectations."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE KILLING OF A MOB BOSS
Salvatore Gravano, John Gotti's former underboss, gave a detailed account of the killing of the mob boss Paul Castellano and several other slayings that he said were ordered or authorized by John Gotti.
For Mr.
Gravano, who turned informer four months ago, it was his second day of testifying in the racketeering-murder trial of Mr.
Gotti, who maintained a fixed smile as he stared at his former aide in the crowded, tightly guarded courtroom.
A1.


U.S. Cup Might Raise Americans' Game
For Bora Milutinovic, here was succor for a soccer-starved man:
The powerful national soccer teams of Italy, Ireland and Portugal, all prepackaged and ready to go, in a four-city, round-robin tournament starting May 30, with the flawed United States team that Milutinovic has coached now for a year.


Economic Index Rose 0.9 in January
The Government index intended to predict turns in the economy jumped nine-tenths of 1 percent in January after two straight declines, the Commerce Department reported today.
The increase was the biggest since July and, along with other figures showing a sharp advance in sales of new houses last month, inspired fresh optimism among analysts that some sort of recovery was taking shape.


U.S. Tariffs on Hondas Roil Japanese
A simmering dispute over the national origin of Honda automobiles assembled in Canada has flared in the last two days into the newest political battle between the United States and Japan, with the Japanese Government declaring today that it is beginning an investigation into whether the Bush Administration is "discriminating against Japanese interests."
The announcement came in protest of a ruling on Monday by the United States Customs Service that the Honda Motor Company owed millions of dollars in tariffs for Civic autos imported from Canada because they contained an insufficient percentage of parts made in North America.
Canada has reached an opposite conclusion on the key point in the ruling, saying engines made in Ohio for the Civics qualified for duty-free treatment under the United States-Canada free-trade agreement.
Japan Sees Political Motives


North Resolute in Resisting Seoul on Atom Inspections
North Korea today continued to resist South Korean demands for inspections of its nuclear installations soon, adding to suspicion here that the North is intent on concealing efforts to build an atomic weapon.


Edward S. Mason, 93, Economist And a Former Harvard Professor
Edward Sagendorph Mason, a noted economist, former Harvard dean and frequent Government adviser, died on Saturday at his retirement home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 93 years old and had lived in Cambridge, Mass., until 1988.
A Harvard University statement said he died after suffering a second stroke.


New Head Start Studies Raise Question on Help: Should Fewer Get More?
In an election year in which the promise to offer Head Start preschool programs to all poor children is virtually a campaign mantra, several new studies raise a provocative question: Would it be better to include fewer children but give them longer-lasting programs that have proved to be more effective?
Three recent studies offer new evidence that poor children need the kinds of services Head Start provides for several years once they reach elementary school in order to make dramatic and permanent progress.


Hewlett and GTE In Sales Accord
The Hewlett-Packard Company and GTE Telephone Operations entered a three-year strategic agreement under which Hewlett will provide GTE with approximately $100 million in computer products and services.
GTE will resell some of the products through its distribution arm, GTE Supply.
The deal also includes about $40 million that GTE will spend in 1992 for HP Apollo work stations for use by telephone customer service representatives.
The orders will include computer systems, related software and support and peripheral products, with GTE Supply marketing Hewlett products to computer resellers and value-added resellers.


Economic Scene; Canada's Lumber: Subsidized or Not?
IS the Canadian Government subsidizing exports of lumber?
Trade hawks in the Commerce Department do not doubt it, and have begun a counterattack.
If the rest of official Washington can be brought around to the hawks' side, the result could be a nasty spat with the United States' largest trading partner -- not to mention double-digit inflation in lumber prices that builders in the United States say would add as much as $1,000 to the price of a house.
That, of course, is sufficient reason to be interested in this long-simmering case.
But for economists, there is an added bonus: The issue of the lumber subsidy is one of those odd corners of trade law where legal reasoning and economic theory collide.


Tyson Trial Belonged on Sports Pages
To the Editor:
Complaints from women's groups and press critics about the coverage and placement of stories on the rape trial of Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, sound a familiar note.


Manhattan Institutions Reject Merger Idea
After studying the possibility of a merger of their two institutions, representatives of the New-York Historical Society and the Museum of the City of New York have concluded that consolidation, while desirable, would be too costly.
The possibility of a merger had been proposed last fall by Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, then the New York City Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, when she was looking for ways to help cultural institutions survive the city's budget crisis.
Her interest led trustees and board members of the two institutions to discuss the possibility informally in late January.


A Battle That Is Going Beyond the Court
There will be no tearful reunion between Drazen Petrovic and Vlade Divac tonight at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif.
No cheek-kissing at midcourt, no hugging between old friends, no post-game dinner to catch up.
When Divac's Los Angeles Lakers visited New Jersey to play the Nets last Dec. 6, Divac was shelved with an injured back.
Tonight's game represents the first time these longtime teammates on the Yugoslav National Team will meet in more than a year, the first time since a bloody war splintered their former country.


Richard Tucker Award Goes to Deborah Voigt
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation has given its top award for 1992 to the soprano Deborah Voigt, a 31-year-old native of Fullerton, Calif.
The honor includes a $30,000 cash award.
Ms.
Voigt, who has been a first-prize winner of the Tchaikovsky, Rosa Ponselle and Verdi competitions, made her Metropolitan Opera debut in October in "Un Ballo in Maschera" and is to sing Chrysothemis in four performances of the Met's "Elektra," starting on March 26.


Complaint on Harvard Law's Hiring
Pursuing a new avenue in his quest to get Harvard Law School to hire a black woman as a professor, a Harvard law professor has filed a complaint with the Federal Education Department's Office of Civil Rights, asking the office to investigate the school's hiring practices.
Prof.
Derrick Bell, Harvard's first black tenured law professor, filed the discrimination complaint on Monday, after announcing last week that he would not return to the law school even though his two-year leave of absence has expired because the school had still not hired a black woman for its faculty.
Although Harvard has a two-year limit on leave of absences, Professor Bell has refused to resign, saying the rules should not apply to those who leave for reasons of conscience.


Shot by Shot, an Ex-Aide to Gotti Describes the Killing of Castellano
Salvatore Gravano, an admitted Mafia underboss, gave a detailed and chilling account yesterday of the murder of Paul Castellano and several other slayings that he said were ordered or authorized by John Gotti.
In his second day on the stand, Mr.
Gravano, a crucial prosecution witness who turned informer four months ago, testified in a gruff, matter-of-fact voice.
Mr.
Gotti maintained a fixed smile as he stared at his former friend and trusted aide in the crowded, tightly guarded courtroom.


Hugh D. Pickett; Baptist Minister, 60
The Rev.
Hugh D. Pickett, who oversaw pension plans and other employee benefits for 10,000 Baptist ministers, missionaries and lay workers around the world, died on Saturday in Tampa, Fla., where he was attending a church meeting.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, church officials said.


Public &amp; Private; The Right Call
All our lives are filled with "everyone knows" stories.
"Everyone knows" the man down the street is having an affair with his wife's bridge partner.
"Everyone knows" the head of purchasing takes kickbacks from suppliers.
"Everyone knows" the boss is a lech.
If you've seen him in action, you may warn the new receptionist not to stay late and alone.
And if you've comforted a friend who says he tried to rape her, you may even go to the boss's boss.
It's a balancing act, depending on the behavior, the evidence, on what the stakes might be.


Albert S. Keston, 80; Invented Diabetes Test
Dr.
Albert S. Keston, inventor of a diagnostic test used by diabetics to determine urine sugar levels, died last Wednesday while working in his laboratory at New York University.
He was 80 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Keston died of a heart attack, said his wife, Katharine.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit
To the Editor:
In "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17), Walter McDougall, despite a backward glance at civil disobedience, seems to conclude: My country, right or wrong, is the highest patriotism.
I would suggest a re-reading of the Declaration of Independence, the Nuremberg trials and the Vietnam War itself.


Emilia Sherman, Choreographer And a Dancer With the Rockettes
Emilia Sherman Maurer, who put the Rockettes through their paces from the gala opening of Radio City Music Hall on Dec. 27, 1932, until she retired as director of the dancers more than 40 years later, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhassett, L.I.
She lived in Point Lookout, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla.
Miss Sherman, who used her maiden name professionally, had kept her age a secret and left "explicit instructions" that it remain so, her son said.
She died after a long illness, he said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS -- Advertising; A Very Good Year for Cable: Ad Sales Jumped 18% in '91
IT may have been a tough year for the television networks to attract advertising dollars, but the cable TV industry racked up yet another increase in ad revenues, according to the Cable Bureau of Advertising.
Cable ad sales jumped to $3.02 billion in 1991, an 18 percent increase from the previous year.
Of that, two-thirds was spent on cable networks, and the rest on regional networks or local advertising.


Quotation of the Day
"If I had it to do over, I wouldn't do what I did then, for a lot of reasons, including political reasons." -- PRESIDENT BUSH, about breaking his "no new taxes" pledge.  [ A17:1. ]


Slain Youth's Poem on Death Is Read at Brooklyn Funeral
Ian Moore once wrote a poem called "Fear." In it, he gave a voice to the sense of the fragility of life that many youths in his East New York neighborhood had come to know.
It read, in part:
I fear death because I don't know  what will happen when I go  It is something I can't face  When I die, will I be thought about?
Will my name be shouted out?
Death will come at any time  No matter how far you're up the ladder


Greenspan Seeking To Get Rates Down
Voicing his concern that stubbornly high long-term interest rates will hold the economy back, the Federal Reserve chairman sought to nudge those rates down by repeatedly saying, in testimony before a Congressional committee, that inflation was declining.
His comments came as long-term rates climbed again on reports indicating renewed strength in the economy, including the first gain in three months in the index of leading indicators, a gauge of future performance, and a 12.9 percent jump in sales of new homes in January.
Business Day, pages D1 and D3.


About New York; A Walk Across the Past, With Miles of Microfilm
A SPLENDID addition to New York City opened at 8 A.M.
Monday.
It is the repository of the National Archives for the Northeastern United States, at 201 Varick Street.
When everything is moved from the archive's previous and more inaccessible home, at an Army terminal in Bayonne, N.J., the archives will house 65,000 cubic feet of records, literally millions upon millions of documents.


Fed Chief Sees Lower Inflation
Voicing his concern that stubbornly high long-term interest rates will hold the economy back, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, sought today to nudge those rates down by repeatedly saying that inflation was declining.
Testifying before a Congressional committee, Mr.
Greenspan noted that long-term rates had drifted up to nearly 8 percent, but sought to make interest rates reverse course by saying that inflation should improve into next year even if economic growth strengthens.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Wars Enough for All
To the Editor:
Walter McDougall confuses leadership skills with machismo in "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17).
He believes only those who have served in active duty in the armed forces during wartime "have the right to ask other citizens to take the same risk." I guess we'd better schedule one good bloody war every generation to keep up our pool of Presidential candidates.


Brock Adams's Staff Stays Loyal Despite Reports
The central paradox of the Brock Adams episode is that the Democratic Senator, who terminated his re-election campaign in the wake of accusations that he sexually abused women, has long been a leading advocate of feminist causes.
As such, he attracted many women to his staff, and they remain loyal to him, incredulous of the accusations brought anonymously by eight women.
"I've worked with him in many capacities; I've ridden in the car with him, seen him interact," Cindi A. Laws, state field director for the Adams campaign, said today as employees began dismantling the Senator's campaign headquarters in downtown Seattle.


Corrections
A sports picture in some copies yesterday, showing a swimmer at the Olympic trials in Indianapolis, was captioned incorrectly by The Associated Press and published in error.
It showed Kristine Kuance of Northridge, Calif., not Anita Nall, who broke the world record in the 200-meter breast-stroke twice.


Food Notes
Nutrition by Phone
People seeking guidance on nutrition can now obtain it by phone, thanks to a special information line operated by the National Center for Nutrition and Dietetics in Chicago.


Slight Changes in Yields On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on bank money market accounts and short-term certificates of deposit showed only modest changes in the week that ended yesterday, with a tendency to be lower than the previous week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that tracks bank rates.
"Although savings yields appeared to have touched bottom temporarily, their next direction will be influenced by new economic inidicators, such as the unemployment report due out on Friday," Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher, said yesterday.
"Even if the data show improvement, there is enough broad weakness in the economy to prevent any sharp rebound in interest rates."


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Quayle and Clinton
To the Editor:
In "Bill Clinton and the Draft" (Op-Ed, Feb. 12), Prof.
Michael Mandelbaum's comparison of the nonparticipation in the Vietnam War records of Vice President Quayle and Gov.
Bill Clinton begs the question of who is more qualified to be President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces.
Their records, whatever the nuances of one's avoidance or the other's, give no evidence of suitability for that responsibility.
Their motives were interest in self -- their own careers -- not the interests of their country.


Microwave Cooking
ONE of life's paradoxes is that vegetarian cooking, which is often assumed to represent a simpler, better life, usually requires more care and attention than preparing for carnivores.
I am not a vegetarian and only from time to time a barefoot bread baker, but I have vegetarian friends and sometimes like the flavors they favor for my own meal.
What follows is not a vegan meal, for it uses some products derived from animals (like milk, cheese and eggs).
Omit the custard and serve fruit if even well-cooked eggs make you nervous.


A Softer 'Neutron Jack' at G.E.
General Electric's chairman, John F. Welch Jr., who earned the nickname Neutron Jack on his reputation for eliminating people while leaving buildings standing, has gone through a conversion and is now preaching corporate pacifism.
"We cannot afford management styles that suppress and intimidate," he said in the company's new 1991 annual report.
Instead, he called on his managers to adopt a set of "soft concepts" including such warm, fuzzy notions as having "the self-confidence to empower others and behave in a boundaryless fashion."


Theater in Review
'Chain' and 'Late Bus to Mecca'  Judith Anderson Theater 420 West 42d Street Manhattan  Through March 22 Two one-act plays by Pearl Cleage; directed by Imani; set design, George Xenos; lighting, Melody Beal; costumes, Ornyece; sound, Bill Toles; production stage manager, Jacqui Casto.
Presented by the Women's Project and Productions, Julia Miles, artistic director, and the New Federal Theater, Woodie King Jr., producer.
WITH: Claire Dorsey, Karen Malina White and Kim Yancey.
In "Chain," Pearl Cleage has taken a shocking news story and tried to turn it into a play about the lengths to which some parents will go to protect their children against themselves and the dangers of urban violence.
Last summer a Hispanic teen-ager was found chained to a metal pipe in her family apartment.
When she was released by authorities, she defended her parents' drastic act of discipline.


Level the Baseball Field
"Nintendo" translates roughly as "we do the best we can, and await the results." Japan's Nintendo Company now hopes to apply that philosophy by investing $60 million in the struggling Seattle Mariners, thus helping to keep major league baseball in Seattle.
It will be a mistake if league owners don't deal with the offer at their quarterly meetings this week.
Foot-dragging could imperil a golden opportunity.
The rule against non-North American owners sensibly favors ownership with strong home-town loyalty.
But applied to the Mariners, the rule is perverse.
The bidders are thoroughly local.
Nintendo is Japanese, but its U.S. subsidiary is based in Seattle, where the president has lived for 15 years; his in-laws own the parent company and would put up the money.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Not Worth the Risk
To the Editor:
Re "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17) by Walter McDougall: Throughout a decade of fighting in Vietnam, legislators and Presidents hid behind the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, rather than bring to a vote a formal declaration of war.
At the time, many of these same officials said that such a vote would tear the country apart.
Of course!
The declaration of war clause is in our Constitution to end "King's wars" -- wars declared and fought without regard for the public will.


No Bouquets on Homelessness Until We've Done a Lot More
To the Editor:
"Moving Ahead With the Homeless" (editorial, Feb. 10) lavishes praise on a new policy consensus in New York City emerging from the Dinkins administration and the mayoral commission on homelessness.
You call this consensus remarkable and extol as profound the new agreement on "fundamental philosophy": that smaller, service-based programs are the way to go.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Monday about a benefit auction for Fordham Law School referred incorrectly to a student who donated his services.
He is Samuel Kirschner.


Legislative Panel Gets Wide Range of Fiscal Pleas
With a procession of speakers from a mayor to a cystic fibrosis patient, the appropriations committees of the Republican-controlled Legislature today convened the first of several public hearings on Gov.
Jim Florio's proposed $15.7 billion budget.
The committee chairmen -- Senator Robert Littell and Assemblyman Rodney P. Frelinghuysen -- said they hoped the hearings would help them identify areas where the budget could be cut.
But during the five-hour session today at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, most of the speakers appealed for more money or for the salvation of programs the Governor has proposed dropping.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Wars Enough for All
To the Editor:
Walter McDougall confuses leadership skills with machismo in "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17).
He believes only those who have served in active duty in the armed forces during wartime "have the right to ask other citizens to take the same risk." I guess we'd better schedule one good bloody war every generation to keep up our pool of Presidential candidates.


An Emotional Finale in the Spotlight for Tarkanian
Jerry Tarkanian, at the end of his 19th and final season playing the biggest room in Vegas, came out for a final encore tonight while maintaining to his superiors that he has no intention of leaving the University of Nevada-Las Vegas until he's ready.
Amid screaming, exploding fireworks and a full house of adoring fans that chanted, "Keep Tark, Keep Tark, Keep Tark," Tarkanian expanded a spotlilght in a darkened arena by surrounding himself with current and former Runnin' Rebel basketball players and coaches, his family and three grandchildren who scurried across the court.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 28
Feb. 21
Mar. 1
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.8
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.7
2.8
Gasoline stocks
229.6
230.8
222.6
Distillate stocks
108.4
113.2
103.3
Crude imports, daily
5.6
4.9
5.5
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.4
1.1
Crude stocks
339.8
334.2
336.1
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
79.2
80.1
85.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Mahler Ryder, 54, Teacher of Illustration
Mahler Ryder, a professor of illustration at the Rhode Island School of Design, died on Thursday at Roger Williams Medical Center in Providence.
He was 54 years old.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the school said.


2,000 Rally in Albany for More Money for Drug Treatment


A School for the Deaf That's Founded on Speech
Sandy Kobylarz and her husband were living with her parents in Manville, N.J., and renovating a house when her family's worst suspicions were confirmed.
Their first child, a boy then 9 months old, had been born deaf.
But for Mrs.
Kobylarz, the shock did not fully set in until months later, when the couple began searching for the right school for their son, Ryan.
While visiting a school 30 minutes from her home that purported to teach both sign language and speech, she noticed that the classrooms seemed abnormally quiet.


Corrections
An article in the Media Business pages on Monday about gay publications' entry into the mainstream referred incompletely to a new magazine, NYQ.
While some of its managers once worked on Outweek magazine, which closed last summer, NYQ has no connection with Outweek and says it opposes many of Outweek's positions, including the practice of "outing," or exposing the homosexuality of public figures.
A picture caption with the article misidentified several NYQ officials.
Those shown were, from the left, Maer Roshan, Avril McDonald, William F. Chafin and Colleen Mangan; seated in front was Troy Masters.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Says Raising Taxes Was Biggest Blunder of His Presidency
In his increasingly anxious search for a way to blunt the conservative assault of Patrick J. Buchanan, President Bush has acknowledged in a published interview that breaking his "no new taxes" pledge was the biggest mistake of his Presidency because it is hobbling his bid for re-election.
"If I had it to do over, I wouldn't do what I did then, for a lot of reasons, including political reasons," Mr.
Bush said in an interview with a columnist for The Atlanta Journal.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Greenspan sought to nudge long-term rates down by repeatedly saying that inflation was falling.
He voiced a concern that stubbornly high long-term rates would hold the economy back.  [ Page D1. ]
The leading indicators jumped 0.9 percent in January after two straight declines.
The increase was the biggest since July and, along with a sharp advance in sales of new houses, inspired fresh optimism that a recovery was taking shape.  [ D3. ]
The Senate Finance Committee voted to raise top tax rates to pay for a politically attractive mix of $300 tax credits for children, easing student loans and more generous I.R.A.'s.  [ A19. ]
New York State will have to borrow at least $500 million to keep afloat the fund it uses to pay unemployment benefits.  [ B4. ]
New auto insurance regulations in New Jersey will bar the use of age, sex or marital status in setting rates.  [ B4. ] Companies
Two leading airline computer reservation systems will merge.
United's Apollo and Galileo, formed by European carriers, will be the first global system not under the control of a top airline.  [ D1. ]
A.T.&amp; T. said it planned to introduce new technology that could replace up to a third of its 18,000 long-distance operators.  [ D1. ]
ITT agreed to sell its 30 percent stake in Alcatel for an estimated $3.6 billion.
The move ended the involvement of ITT in the telephone industry, its original business.  [ D1. ]
General Electric's chairman, John F. Welch Jr., who earned the nickname "Neutron Jack" on his reputation for eliminating people while leaving buildings standing, has gone through a conversion and is now preaching corporate pacifism.  [ D1. ]
First City Bancorp of Texas is scouring the financial markets in search of banks or other buyers as investors.  [ D2. ]
Apple Computer lifted the curtain on new software technologies that will begin appearing in Macintoshes.  [ D4. ] International
With concern high about U.S. competitiveness, there is a growing debate over whether the loosely coordinated U.S. efforts at export promotion are on the verge of falling behind.  [ A19. ]
A simmering dispute over the national origin of Hondas assembled in Canada has flared into a political battle.  [ D6. ]
Fujitsu plans to announce that it will re-enter the American market for supercomputers.  [ D6. ]
At Mazda and other Japanese transplants, American executives are learning to immerse themselves in the nitty-gritty.  [ D1. ]
Bertelsmann agreed to buy a 44-story Times Square office tower that has been vacant since it was completed in 1990.  [ B3. ] Business Technology
Industrial engineers are in hot pursuit of cold technologies, like air-conditioners that use plain water as a refrigerant.  [ D7. ] Markets
Stocks were mixed in heavy trading, but the Dow hit its 13th high this year, gaining 14.98, to 3,290.25.  [ D8. ]
Prices of most Treasury securities fell on signs on life in the economy, and long-term rates moved up toward 8 percent.  [ D14. ]
Wheat futures prices tumbled to a two-month low after the former Soviet republics made grain purchases.  [ D15. ]  The dollar advanced strongly and gold prices were mostly lower.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Is Canada's Government subsidizing exports of lumber?
Trade hawks do not doubt it.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Appliance Recycling Centers of America finds that it can do well by doing good.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
It may have been a tough year for the TV networks to attract advertising dollars, but the cable TV industry racked up yet another increase in ad revenues.
Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Airline Ticketing Systems Plan to Merge
Two leading airline computer reservation systems, Apollo, controlled by United, and Galileo, formed by a group of major European carriers, will be merged into what would be the first global system outside the control of a major airline, several United States and European airline executives said yesterday.
The merger is expected to be announced tomorrow by John C. Pope, the chairman of Covia, the United affiliate that owns the Apollo system, in Amsterdam, said the executives, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Bush, Buchanan and No One at All
The answer came a week ago and derives from the figure 31 percent.
The question is, How alarmed should tolerant, optimistic Americans become about Patrick Buchanan's showing in yesterday's Presidential primaries?
He attracted a third or more of the Republican vote in Georgia, Maryland and Colorado, just as he had in New Hampshire.
For so sudden a candidate to do that well can be read as a victory for his fearful isolationism, nativism and protectionism.
But the Buchanan vote can also be taken as a protest against President Bush and hard times.
That's where the 31 percent figure comes in.


New Campaigns
*
To lure back tourists and suburbanites to New York City, the New York State Department of Economic Development is presenting a new version of its "I
New York" campaign. The theme: "It's great to be back in The City!" The effort, to start appearing this month in newspapers and magazines throughout the region, is the first work on the account from McCann-Erickson, New York, which assumed it from Wells Rich Greene BDDP Inc.,New York.


D'Amato's Disclosure Forms Sought by Federal Investigators
Federal prosecutors here have asked for financial disclosure forms filed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato over the last six years.
It is the first known instance of the Senator's records being sought by Federal investigators.
The investigators last week asked the Secretary of the Senate for copies of financial disclosure forms detailing assets, liabilities and honorariums filed since 1985 by Mr.
D'Amato.


As Vote Starts, N.H.L. Players Show They're Willing to Strike
As the players union and the owners prepare for next week's showdown over their collective-bargaining agreement, the players have begun voting to authorize a strike.
So far, the Rangers and the Islanders as well as at least eight other National Hockey League teams have voted unanimously in favor of a walkout if no significant progress is made at the next bargaining session, next Monday in Manhattan.


What's in a Name? About $5,000
Senator Donald Riegle wants to add about $5,000 to the cost of your next minivan.
Of course the Michigan Democrat doesn't say it quite so starkly.
But that's exactly what would happen if the provision he attached to the Senate Finance Committee's tax bill -- to reclassify imported minivans as trucks rather than cars -- becomes law.
What's in a name?
In this case, a whopping increase in tariffs, from 2.5 percent to 25 percent.


Accounts
*
McCaw Cellular One of Florida, West Palm Beach, Fla., and Cash Station Inc., Chicago, have awarded their accounts to the Orlando, Fla., and Chicago offices, respectively, of Cramer-Krasselt.
The McCaw Florida account, with billings of $2 million to $3 million, had been handled by various agencies on a project basis.
The Cash Station account, with $2 million in billings, had been at Haddon Advertising, Chicago. *
Valley National Bank, Passaic, N.J., to Waring &amp; LaRosa Inc., New York, from Venet Advertising, Union, N.J.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Cook's Cuisine, West Conshohocken, Pa., to Elkman Advertising &amp; Public Relations, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., for the company's first store, Ham Sweet Ham, which opened in Montgomeryville, Pa.
No billings were disclosed.


Dow Gains 14.98 to Reach Another High
Stocks were mixed yesterday in heavy trading, but blue-chip issues reacted favorably to stronger-than-expected signals on the economy, sending the Dow Jones industrial average to another new high, its 13th this year.
By gaining 14.98 points, to 3,290.25, the Dow erased the record it set just last Wednesday, when it ended at 3,283.32.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Same Old Dirty Tricks?
To the Editor:
As I watched Gov.
Bill Clinton respond to personal attacks over the last few weeks, I have been reminded of an earlier Democratic front runner, whose 1972 campaign for the Presidency dissolved in the New Hampshire snow.
Ed Muskie's campaign was destroyed, not by his Democratic rivals, but by Republican operatives working for the Richard Nixon re-election team who wanted him to run against George McGovern.


2 Children in Brooklyn Die in Child-Abuse Cases
A 5-year-old boy who lived in a homeless shelter died yesterday, after being beaten by his mother's boyfriend, the police said.
The death came two weeks after shelter officials said they reported trouble in the family to the state's child abuse hot line.
The boy, Raphael Martin, died of a head injury when his mother's boyfriend threw him across a room because he would not play a game, the police said.
The boyfriend, Terry Baker, 24, has been charged with second-degree murder.


For Knicks, It's No Masterpiece but It's a Victory
It was hard to tell whether last night's victory by the Knicks over Dallas solved their recent problems because the Mavericks have so many problems of their own.
New York did what was necessary to defeat Dallas, 102-83, at Madison Square Garden, in a victory the Knicks sorely needed.
But considering that the Mavericks have lost 15 consecutive road games, it was a victory the Knicks were expected to achieve.


Japanese-Americans Face New Fears
Janice Higoshi is a little nervous as she prepares to escort her daughter and other members of a mostly Japanese-American Girl Scout troop to sell cookies this weekend.
She has heard the reports of increased harassment of Japanese-Americans, fueled by the anti-Japanese comments of some public figures, and she has followed the news of the recent killing not far from here of a Japanese businessman who had reported receiving a racist threat.


Yugoslav Town's Memorial to Hatred: New Strife Deepens Bloody Heritage
For a grasp of the miseries that have befallen Yugoslavia, few places are more powerful than the cemetery outside this devastated town.
In December 1944 soldiers of the Bulgarian Army who died fighting retreating Nazi troops were the first to be brought to the graveyard on the outskirts of this town.
Now, nearly 50 years later, it has become the final resting place of some of the victims of the latest battle for Vukovar.


Poison Foam as a Weapon In the War on Termites
Orkin Pest Control has begun to attack termites with a method it considers one of its biggest breakthroughs since 1925, the year a rodent exterminator named Otto Orkin turned his deadly attention to the wood-eating insects haunting the cellars of Atlanta.
"Visualize shaving cream," Judy Donner, a spokeswoman for Orkin, said of the Atlanta-based company's newly adopted termite method.


Bossy Gives Fans Reason to Cheer
After honoring one of the best players in their history tonight, the Islanders played one of the best teams of both the past and the present.
Although the Islanders took a 2-0 lead early in the game, the Montreal Canadiens spoiled Mike Bossy night with a 4-3 victory before 14,085 fans at Nassau Coliseum.
Kirk Muller and Brent Gilchrist each scored twice for Montreal.
Pierre Turgeon scored twice for the Islanders and he now leads the team with 35 goals.
But Gilchrist scored the winner by knocking a rebound past Mark Fitzpatrick with 2 minutes 21 seconds left in the game.


Review/Television; Skits of Hispanic Paradox
Columbus knows he shouldn't have fooled around with the girl named America, but he couldn't help himself: "She was virgin territory." Che Guevara returns from the dead and meets an armchair radical from Berkeley who has to break the news about the fall of Communism.
Jaime Escalante, the crusading calculus teacher from the movie "Stand and Deliver," opens a pizzeria.
Those are some of the skit situations in "A Bowl of Beings," the "Great Performances" installment featuring Culture Clash, a three-man comedy group from San Francisco.
Most of the hourlong program, tonight at 10 on Channel 13, was taped before an audience in Los Angeles.


Sandy Dennis, Film and Stage Veteran, Dies at 54
Sandy Dennis, who as a young actress in the 1960's entranced Broadway and Hollywood with performances that won her two Tony awards and an Academy Award, died on Monday at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 54 years old
Although the exact cause of her death was not known, Ms.
Dennis had been fighting a long battle with cancer, said Doris Elliott, a longtime friend.
Ms.
Dennis's death was confirmed by a spokesman for the Lewis Funeral Home in Westport.


Tax Bill, Senate Version, Is Voted by Finance Unit
The Senate Finance Committee fired another shot today in the election year war over taxes, voting on straight party lines to raise top tax rates to pay for a politically attractive mix of $300 tax credits for children, easing student loans and more generous individual retirement accounts.
President Bush, who had threatened to veto a House bill with a broader middle-class tax cut last week, said the Senate version was "the same old business" and he would veto it, too.


U.S. Opponents Named
PETR KORDA, KAREL NOVACEK, MARIAN VAJDA and CYRIL SUK were named yesterday to play for Czechoslovakia in its Davis Cup quarterfinal against the United States.
The match will be played March 27-29 at Fort Myers, Fla. (AP)


Riyadh Journal; TV Is Beamed at Arabs. The Arabs Beam Back.
At 9 every night, from Dhahran on the Persian Gulf to Riyadh in the middle of the Saudi desert, thousands of television viewers blithely ignore the nightly news program on Saudi television to tune into a television channel that is barred from the Government-controlled airwaves.
Elsewhere in the Arab world more and more people are doing likewise, spurning the boring, censored, Government-produced programs that in most Arab countries have been the only television fare since the medium was introduced to the region in the 1950's.


Kurds Say Turkish Planes Hit Wrong Village
Kurds in this remote mountain village in northeastern Iraq said today that they waved greetings at four Turkish warplanes shortly before the planes fired missiles and strafed them on Sunday, killing 10 people, including seven children, and several farm animals.
"We don't know why Turkey came here and bombed the village, because we are far from Turkey," said Jawhar Abdullah Qader, the village leader, as he stood in front of a shattered mud and stone farmhouse complex where nine of the ten villagers were killed.


Apple Shows Products For Its Macintosh Line
Im an unusual sneak preview, Apple Computer Inc. today lifted the curtain on new software technologies that will begin appearing in its Macintosh computers over the next two years.
In a two-day conference that began today at a wine-country resort, Apple executives said the Macintosh would continue to be a central product for Apple at least through the year 2000.


Before They Inherit the Earth; Gently, South Bronx Friars Tend the Downtrodden
Brother Richard Roemer fingers the rope belt cinched around his waist and explains how the three knots stand for the vows he took upon becoming a friar: poverty, chastity and obedience.
"No money, no honey and a boss," he said with a chuckle.


Lakers Lose Worthy
The Los Angeles Lakers, losers in 10 of their last 11 games, have lost forward JAMES WORTHY for at least a week with a strained left knee.
Worthy was injured in the Lakers' 105-97 loss to Houston on Sunday. (AP)


CHRONICLE
"I think the entire West Side must be here," Representative CHARLES B. RANGEL, Democrat of New York, said as he surveyed the crowd jammed into Tavern on the Green on Monday evening to honor the political activists SARAH and VICTOR KOVNER.
Well, maybe not the entire West Side, but certainly a good portion of the politicians, allies in campaigns from Eugene McCarthy's to Bill Clinton's, preservationists, artists, writers, advocates for the homeless and neighbors from Fire Island.
As Rabbi BALFOUR BRICKNER put it, "Anybody who is everybody is here," and that included Mayor David N. Dinkins, Representatives Ted Weiss, Major R. Owens and Bill Green, along with Geraldine Ferraro, Victor Navasky, Mort Zuckerman, Wilbert Tatum, Elinor Guggenheimer and N. J. Nicholas Jr.


Japanese Mariners Bid Irks Most Americans, Poll Shows
The proposed purchase of the Seattle Mariners by the Nintendo Company of Japan is disconcerting to a majority of Americans, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
There is "something about" Japanese companies buying North American major league baseball teams that "bothers" 57 percent of the 1,673 adults nationwide who were interviewed by telephone.
Eight percent said they thought it was all right for Japanese companies to buy major league teams and 34 percent said it didn't matter to them.


Catering to the Necessities Of Fashionably Frugal Dinners
LIKE psychologists and bartenders and cab drivers, caterers get into intimate conversations with virtual strangers.
They find out how people see themselves and how they want to be seen.
And, these days, they hear the same sentiment again and again: extravagance is out.


3 Students With Guns Underline Schools' Burden
As officials wrestled with how they might stanch the flow of weapons into New York City's schools, three students were arrested yesterday for carrying semiautomatic guns, two of them students at a pair of the city's more respected high schools.
For many school officials, the confluence of incidents seemed to underscore the difficulty of stopping teen-agers from carrying guns even as the Board of Education fashions plans to start daily weapons screenings at 20 high schools and more occasional screenings at an additional 20 high schools by next September.
The high schools involved in yesterday's incidents are not currently in the weapons-detection program.


Youthful Executive Rebuilding the Expos In Old-Fashioned Way
Not long after becoming the youngest general manager in the major leagues last September, Dave Duquette learned how Old Mother Hubbard must have felt.
When he looked around the Expos cupboard, it was bare.
Duquette's predecessor, Dave Dombrowski, had fled to Florida and lured virtually all the Expos' front-office executives to the expansion Marlins.
Although the creation of the Marlins, a team that will join the National League next year, was the opportunity of Duquette's life, he faced serious problems in restocking the cupboard.
But the 33-year-old executive saw a chance to turn the potentially negative circumstances into a positive development.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Flames' Coach Out  Doug Risebrough removed himself as coach of the floundering Flames last night, but that wasn't enough to halt his team's skid as the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins defeated Calgary, 6-3.
Risebrough, who remains as the Flames' general manager, watched the game from the press box while assistant coach Guy Charron ran the team.
Calgary (25-31-9) had given up 17 straight goals in losing its three previous games. (AP) North Stars 3, Capitals 1: Minnesota knocked out the former North Star Don Beaupre by scoring on three of its first seven shots and extended the Washington Capitals' winless streak to four games with a victory at Landover, Md., last night.
Darcy Wakaluk had 21 saves for the North Stars, who were 1-7-0 in their previous eight games.
Goals by Gaetan Duchesne, Mike Modano and Steve Maltais gave the North Stars a 3-0 lead after the first period and enabled them to coast past the struggling Capitals, who managed only three shots on goal in the opening 20 minutes.
Beaupre lasted only 14:44 before being replaced by Jim Hrivnak. (AP) Whalers 4, Bruins 0: Hartford ended a 12-game regular-season winless streak against Boston as Peter Sidorkiewicz posted his second shutout in 10 days in a home-ice victory. (AP) Jets 4, Red Wings 3: Phil Sykes's goal with 5:26 to play broke a 3-3 tie and ended the visiting Jets' four-game losing streak.
Danton Cole started the play by breaking through the Detroit defense.
Goalie Greg Millen stopped his first shot and turned aside Cole's swipe at the rebound, but Sykes put in the third shot for his third goal of the season. (AP) Nordiques 4, Sabres 4: Mats Sundin scored on a penalty shot at 15:30 of the second period as the struggling Nordiques earned a tie with Buffalo in Quebec.
Sundin was tripped on a breakaway by defenseman Doug Bodger after Pat LaFontaine had given away the puck.
Sundin skated in on goaltender Tom Draper before firing a short wrist shot between his pads for his 24th goal. (AP) COLLEGE HOCKEY  R.P.I.
Stuns Vermont  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the 10th and last-place team in the ECAC Hockey tournament, defeated Vermont, 5-1, last night in a stunning first-round upset.
The Engineers won before a capacity crowd of 4,035 at Gutterson Fieldhouse in Burlington, Vt., despite a home-ice advantage by the Catamounts that had seen visiting teams win only 16 per cent of ECAC Hockey playoff games in the last five seasons.
Rensselaer was aggressive from the start, scoring two goals in the first period and two more before Vermont had one, in the third period.
The victory sends Rensselaer to Harvard to play the Crimson, the ECAC regular-season first-place team, in a quarterfinal game at the Crimson rink on Saturday night.
The semifinal and final games of the tournament will be played in Boston Garden on March 13 and 14.
In other tournament games last night, Mercyhurst defeated Oswego State, 8-2, and Fredonia State over came Geneseo State, 4-2, in the ECAC West first round, a Division III tournament.
TENNIS Connors Advances  Jimmy Connors, who turns 40 in September, outplayed Italy's Cristiano Carratti, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in a first-round match of the $1 million Champions Cup in Indian Wells, Calif.
Michael Chang, down 1-5 in the third set, defeated Martin Jaite of Argentina, 0-6, 7-6 (8-6), 7-6 (7-3). (Reuters) Collegiate Star Wins: Lisa Raymond of the University of Florida, the No. 1 collegiate player in the country, took advantage of an unexpected wild-card entry into the Virginia Slims of Florida and then surprised the tour veteran Peanut Harper, 6-3, 6-1, in a first-round match at Boca Raton yesterday.
Raymond, an 18-year-old sophomore from Wayne, Pa., utilized an all-court attack featuring powerful groundstrokes and booming serves to pin Harper, a former top 20 player now ranked 121, to the baseline. (AP)


Editors' Note
An article on Friday about the Democratic primary campaign in Colorado referred to an advertisement for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas that was critical of Paul E. Tsongas.
The article quoted the ad as calling Mr.
Tsongas a "Reagan clone." That was a paraphrase provided by a Tsongas aide; the words do not appear in the ad.
The writer should have checked the ad firsthand.
It said Mr.
Tsongas favored "another capital gains tax cut for the rich, more nuclear power plants and a 5-cent-a-year hike in the gas tax," and added, "but that's what went wrong in the 80's."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.37
6.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.02
6.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.10
6.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
7.05
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.91
7.89
8.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
8.85
9.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.73
7.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


60-Minute Gourmet
CHICKEN livers, considered by many to be an ethnic staple, have countless uses for any home cook pressed for time.
What's more, they are about the least expensive main-course meat one can find.
They can be put to good use in stuffings, sauces, terrines, in rice dishes and in scores of main courses.
One of my favorite recipes is chicken livers with onions, which can be prepared in minutes.
Another calls for simply dipping the livers in seasoned flour and cooking them in oil until crisp and browned.
They are then served in a sauce of a dry red wine, chopped vegetables and seasonings.


New Juilliard Drama Head
Michael Kahn has been named director of the drama division of the Juilliard School.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Joseph W. Polisi, the president of Juilliard, who praised Mr.
Kahn's "enormous creativity, vision and energy" as both director and teacher.
Mr.
Kahn, who will also continue as artistic director of the Shakespeare Theater in Washington, has been a member of the Juilliard faculty since 1968.
He succeeds Michael Langham, who completes a 12-year tenure as director of the drama division at the end of the current academic term.


Salomon Fills Position With Family Member
Salomon Brothers Inc. yesterday named one of its own, Robert S. Salomon Jr., to be chairman and chief executive of the firm's money-management unit, Salomon Brothers Asset Management Inc.
The similarity of names is no coincidence.
His grandfather, Percy Salomon, was one of three brothers who established the brokerage house in 1910, which is now struggling to regain its position as one of Wall Street's dominant firms in the wake of the Treasury scandal that has shaken it since last August.


Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit; Draft Unconstitutional
To the Editor:
Murray Polner in "Draft Registration Is Dumb. End It" (Op-Ed, Feb. 13) gives many practical reasons for ending draft registration, but fails to say that military conscription is unconstitutional and should never have been imposed in the first place.


Vote Blocks Plastics Ban For Suffolk
The Suffolk County Legislature voted today to block a landmark county law that would have banned the use of many plastic products, from plastic grocery bags to plastic-foam takeout cups.
The Legislature voted 12 to 5 to delay the measure until next year for more study, but many of those voting said support for the curb had eroded so much in a legislative body once known for its swashbuckling adventurousness that the law was all but dead.


Book Notes
Men Only, So Far
This year's PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction will carry on a tradition that began when the literary prize was first given in 1980: the winner will have been written by a man.


Big Hair Is Rearing Its Head at the Malls
AS they checked out the crowd at the Long Island Exchange, a nightclub here, David Nijankin and Brett Harrison observed that it was really quite difficult to see the women for the hair.
"When you talk to them, it's like three people," said Mr.
Harrison, a lawyer, eyeing a skimpily dressed woman whose hair rose above her head and then fell down wildly, as if styled with an eggbeater.
"You, them and the hair."


The Moment for Campaign Reform
In a rare reach for fairness, the New York State Board of Elections has ruled to keep Paul Tsongas on the state's April 7 Democratic primary ballot.
The board rejected the nitpicking petition challenge brought by the fringe New Alliance Party.
The demeaning case now moves to the courts because the Republican-controlled State Senate refuses to pass legislation that would guarantee Mr.
Tsongas his place on the ballot, or allow Patrick Buchanan on the Republican ballot.


California Puts Lottery in Review
Amid plunging sales of its lottery tickets and a substantial cut in its advertising budget, the California State Lottery has placed its $25 million account into review.
The decision came two years into a four-year assignment awarded to Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles.
Philip Joanou, Dailey's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday that he doubted whether the agency would participate in another lottery review after winning several previous ones over the last five years.


'Balance Between Values and Numbers'
Following is an excerpt from a statement by John F. Welch Jr., General Electric's chairman and chief executive, and Edward E. Hood Jr., vice chairman, in the company's latest annual report:
Over the past several years we've wrestled at all levels of this company with the question of what we are and what we want to be.
Out of these discussions, and through our experiences, we've agreed upon a set of values we believe we will need to take this company forward, rapidly, through the 1990's and beyond.


ITT Accepts $3.6 Billion Alcatel Sale
The ITT Corporation agreed today to sell its 30 percent stake in Alcatel N.V. of the Netherlands, the world's largest manufacturer of telephone equipment, for an estimated $3.6 billion.
The move ended the involvement of ITT in the telephone industry, its original business, leaving it with interests mostly in automotive and electronic components, forest products, hotels and financial services.
ITT said the sale was in line with its goal of maximizing shareholder value.


People
*
Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, has named Nancy Korda to the new position of executive vice president and account director and Bill Puckett to the new position of senior vice president and creative director.
Both had worked at Geer, DuBois Inc., New York, as, respectively, executive vice president and group account director and senior vice president and associate creative director.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Clinton Draft Issue Doesn't Sway Most in Georgia
Four of five Georgia voters said their opinion of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was not adversely affected by questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, but more than a third of those who voted against him said the issue had a negative impact on their view of him, according to interviews with voters leaving polling places today.
On the Republican side, the interviews with voters conducted by Voter Research and Surveys showed that Patrick J. Buchanan's challenge to President Bush drew most of its support from voters with the most negative views of both the national economy and their own financial status.


Armenians Block Exit By Former Soviet Army
Armenian civilians and gunmen obstructed the withdrawal of the last troops of the former Soviet army from an embattled enclave today as fighting in the four-year feud between Azerbaijan and Armenia increased.
The army unit, the 366th Motorized Rifles, was ordered out of its base in Stepanakert, the capital of the enclave, Nagorno-Karabakh, after weeks of intensive shelling that left three soldiers dead and much of the installation in shambles.


Vikings Sign a Giant
The Minnesota Vikings signed defensive tackle LORENZO FREEMAN, a Plan B free-agent from the Giants.
The 6-foot-3-inch, 319-pound Freeman was used by the Giants mainly to defend against running plays.
The Vikings also signed middle linebacker JACK DEL RIO, the Dallas Cowboys' leading tackler last season, and former Cincinnati defensive end SKIP McCLENDON.
Last season, Del Rio had 77 solo tackles, 53 assists and 130 total tackles, leading the Cowboys in all three categories.  (AP)


Archibald T. Steele; Journalist, 89
Archibald T. Steele, an author and former foreign correspondent, died on Friday at his home in Sedona, Ariz.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Steele died of cancer of the prostate, said his sister, Isobel L. Steele of Stamford, Conn.


Corrections
A brief report in the Peripherals column of Science Times yesterday about a CD-ROM disk, "Baseball's Greatest Hits," misidentified its author.
He is Jeff Kisseloff.


Eva Jessye, 97, Dies; Choral Group Director
Eva Jessye, one of the first black women to direct a professional choral group, died in her sleep on Feb. 21.
She was 97 years old and lived in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Miss Jessye was born in Coffeyville, Kan., the daughter of former slaves.
She graduated from Western University in 1914 and taught in segregated public schools in Oklahoma.
Before moving to New York City in 1926, she was the director of music at Morgan College in Baltimore and wrote for The Baltimore Afro-American.


Even in the Ivy League, Cutbacks Are the Rule
With their accumulated power and privilege, the eight institutions of the Ivy League have long stood apart from most other colleges and universities in the United States.
But in these economically troubling times, the Ivies find themselves under the same sort of financial pressures as the smallest community college or state-run university.
The University of Pennsylvania is scrambling to stop the state government from cutting nearly $40 million in state aid.
Yale University is saddled with an $8.8 million budget shortfall.
Columbia is looking at a deficit of at least $15 million for next year.
And Harvard University, which usually does not release budget figures until months after its fiscal year ends, has disclosed that it finished the last academic year with a deficit of $41.9 million, the first shortfall in Cambridge since 1974.


Convenience In the Kitchen: The Way Mama Used to Heat
THE box for Quaker Instant Oatmeal seemed to have everything a modern package should have.
It was large, easy-to-handle and could be opened with a zip.
It pictured a bowl of oatmeal, unembellished and sharply focused, an image that bleated "
easy
" as insistently as a microwave's timer beeps "
ready
."
But Primo Angeli, a package designer in San Francisco, knew something was missing, something he said he believes consumers want.
Food packages -- and maybe the food they contain -- have hit the outer limits of convenience, he said.
Technology has brought America the "nanosecond meal," which can be bought, carried, cooked and consumed from its own disposable package.
But with the technology to dine a la George Jetson, even time-pressured Americans still want their fingers in the pot.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment -- And Still, Mixed Reviews; Bush, Tsongas and Clinton All Have Reason To Rejoice, Yet All Have Reason to Be Wary
It was a day when the big boys in both parties got something, but some of the little guys among the Democrats got hustled closer to the exit.
The best news was delivered to Bill Clinton, who found that he could win big inside his home region and compete effectively elsewhere despite weeks of battering in the press, and to Paul E. Tsongas, who found that he could win outside his home region, in Maryland and in Utah as well.
President Bush managed to fight off a threat by a tyro who has never held elective office, but he learned that he faces a long hard slog.


Atlanta Shops Get Accounts
Two large agencies in Atlanta have been awarded significant new accounts.
In a victory that increased its billings by about 20 percent, Fitzgerald &amp; Company has been assigned the estimated $6 million account for Jerzees, a manufacturer of sweatshirts and sweatpants that is a division of the Russell Corporation in Alexander City, Ala.


Corrections
The Metro Matters column on Monday, about guns and crime in New York City, misidentified the city where the gun used last week in the shootings at Thomas Jefferson High School was stolen in 1989.
It was Plainfield, N.J., not Plainview.


Porter McKeever, 76, U.N. Backer And Adlai Stevenson Biographer
Porter McKeever, a biographer of Adlai E. Stevenson, a close associate of John D. Rockefeller 3d and founding president of the United Nations Association of the United States, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 76 years old and lived in Pelham, N.Y.
He died of cancer, a member of the family said.


Witt Takes Slow Steps Back to Mound
Mike Witt measures his life in small increments.
On Monday, he lobbed a baseball 150 feet to home plate.
Today, it was 300 feet.
In a month, he will attempt to throw off a mound for the first time in almost a year, and by the end of July, he could be back pitching at Yankee Stadium.
Every step is slow, steady and deliberate.
Every day, Witt continues moving forward in his hope of returning this season, not by April or May but soon enough to pitch the final two months of the season.


A New York City Auto Race? Look Both Ways, It's Coming
Brushing aside complaints over tobacco advertising and a lack of support by community leaders, New York City granted final approval yesterday to the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York, an annual auto race that will start rattling the financial district's windowpanes in June 1993.
The Franchise and Concession Review Committee voted to approve a 10-year agreement with the promoter, MotorMarketing International Incorporated, for a race of 180 to 200 miles over a 1.3-mile temporary track using streets around the World Trade Center.
The first race, with most of the same cars and drivers from the Indianapolis 500, is scheduled for June 27, 1993.
Long Way From Gasoline Alley
Although the low-slung Indy cars, driven by the likes of Rick Mears and Danny Sullivan, exceed 220 miles per hour at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, they will probably average a more leisurely 100 m.p.h. on the Manhattan course.
But the maximum speed on the West Street straightaway could be as much as 165 m.p.h.


Sports of The Times; Bossy Left His Numbers Behind Him
MIKE BOSSY was a wing the way Tom Seaver was a pitcher, the way Walt Frazier was a guard.
He played for the finest New York team in the past quarter century.
It makes no sense at all to throw tickertape off the roof of a suburban ranch house, or the arches of a fast-food stand, but there are rafters at the Nassau Coliseum, and last night Mike Bossy's No. 22 was retired, hoisted into the eaves, alongside the No. 5 of Denis Potvin that was retired a month ago.


New York Festival Offering the Arts To the World
An international marketing campaign to promote New York City's cultural life around the world and lure tourism dollars to the city was announced yesterday by the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Martin E. Segal, the chairman of the festival organization, said at a news conference that the campaign, called "New York Celebrates the Arts," will use the arts to attract tourists, both foreign and domestic, including visitors from New Jersey, Connecticut and New York as well.


Conner Tries to Beat Technology With Sailing Smarts
It is all that Dennis Conner can do to keep up with William Koch's heavily financed, boat-rich campaign to defend the America's Cup.
As a third set of trials began today, Conner had a lot of catching up to do.
Conner has been outgunned before; in 1983 he became the first American yacht skipper to lose the America's Cup when his opponent, Alan Bond of Australia, turned out to be the proverbial wolf in sheep's clothing.
Early on, Bond, whose team had developed a secret winged keel, pretended its boat was just like any other.


Breast Milk for Premature Babies Tied to Higher Intelligence Scores
CHILDREN fed breast milk as premature infants scored significantly higher on intelligence tests than children also born prematurely who had not received their mothers' milk, a study has found.
The results, reported recently in The Lancet, a British medical journal, were called significant, even after taking into account other possible explanations, for example that mothers who provided breast milk tended to be better educated and from higher-income families.


New Insurance Practice: Dividing Sick From Well
In a new practice, some health insurance companies are starting to divide the sick from the well, even in large groups that were once a bastion of security in a tumultuous industry.
Families in large groups had always felt that if they had been part of the group for at least six months or a year, their medical costs would be covered and their premiums would remain stable.
But now, some insurance companies are dramatically raising rates for sick people, and even for people they think may become sick.


Regardless of Injured Knee, He's Still in Charge
Manager Jeff Torborg of the Mets using a golf cart to supervise training in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., yesterday, after undergoing knee surgery on Monday.
He was advised to have the arthroscopic surgery right away. (Associated Press)


Personal Health
SINCE the building of the great pyramids, backbreaking loads, cancer-causing fibers and fumes, lung-damaging dust and other bodily threats have plagued blue-collar workers, who often paid with their health or lives for the privilege of employment.
Now, with workplace safeguards largely in place to control such risks, it is the white-collar workers' turn to suffer.
In offices, newsrooms and at switchboards, growing numbers of people who work hour after hour on computer keyboards are developing sometimes crippling symptoms in their hands.


More Than 1,000 Attend Funeral for Youth Slain in Brooklyn High School


Neediest Cases Fund Ends Best Campaign
In a year when many charities have struggled to meet fund-raising goals, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has completed the most successful campaign in its history.
The 80th annual appeal, which ended on Saturday, raised $5,083,550.81 for seven charities that help New York's poor, sick and disabled.
That total topped the previous record, set last year, by $644,444.


Alaska Farm Plan Yields Bitter Harvest
After spending more than $120 million to create farms where none existed before, the state has given up on a dream born when oil money grew faster than anything planted in the ground.
The 15-year-old program to produce milk on this stretch of flat land near Anchorage and to raise barley in Alaska's icy interior has collapsed under a pile of debt and bad luck.
The land that was supposed to give rise to the great Alaskan dairy industry is fast returning to nature; on a winter day, moose chomp on frozen willow twigs around barns that have been abandoned to the long boreal night.


Bruins Sign Olympian
The Boston Bruins yesterday signed center JOE JUNEAU, the leading scorer on the silver medal-winning Canadian Olympic team.
The team would not disclose the contract's terms.
Juneau, who turned down an offer from the Lugano club of Switzerland, said he hoped to be playing in Boston by the weekend.In four years at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Juneau had 69 goals and 144 assists for 124 games. (AP)


Adjusting to Japan's Car Culture
Clark Vitulli had been employed by the Mazda Motor Corporation only a few days when he heard Mazda's Japanese president ask what sounded like a trivial question.
"He wanted to know precisely how we would attach rear-view mirrors on trucks arriving in the port -- if the holes weren't drilled properly, rust might develop," Mr.
Vitulli said.
"I thought, what the hell kind of question is that for a president to be asking?"


Disclosures Prompt Call for House Administrator
Speaker Thomas S. Foley today endorsed a Democratic effort to create the office of a House administrator, a move that would give him more direct control over various offices that have caused him and the House embarrassment and attracted accusations of scandal in recent months.


Man in Hostage Standoff
A man took at least one person hostage in a 34-room mansion today in a standoff with the police that lasted into the evening, officials said.
The man, whom the police refused to identify, barricaded himself inside the former Monday Afternoon Club around 3 P.M., residents of the neighborhood said.
Law-enforcement officials cordoned off a two-block area and pointed floodlights at the Victorian house.
The man, who was holding at least one person hostage, told officers at the scene that he was armed, Plainfield Police Lt.
Michael Lattimore said.
No injuries were reported.


Leader of I.B.M. Unit To Join Investment Firm
William O. Grabe, who has headed I.B.M.'s Integrated Systems Solution Corporation subsidiary, said yesterday that he was leaving the computer maker to take a position as special partner at General Atlantic Partners, a private investment firm with offices in New York and Greenwich.
Mr.
Grabe was given credit at I.B.M. for building bridges to the software developers who are now increasingly viewed as I.B.M.'s business partners.


Chamber Music Society Names Head
David Shifrin, the clarinetist of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center since 1989, has been named artistic director of the society.
The appointment, which the society announced yesterday, is effective July 1 and runs through the 1995-96 season.
Mr.
Shifrin succeeds Fred Sherry, the cellist who has directed the society since 1988 and who will remain an ensemble member.
The 42-year-old Mr.
Shifrin, who was born in New York City, is widely known through the recordings he has made for the Delos, Angel and Nonesuch labels over the last decade.
He has also held several orchestral posts, including the principal clarinet chairs of the Cleveland Orchestra and the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra.
He returned to New York in 1987 to accept a teaching post at Yale University, and was principal clarinetist of the New York Chamber Symphony for several seasons.


De Klerk Hits the Campaign Trail for Reform
Balancing her plate of lasagna precariously in one hand, Charlene Beukes trotted out of the student cafeteria in pursuit of President F. W. de Klerk, who was striding across the green campus of Rand Afrikaans University with aides and journalists in tow.
"We love F. W.," said Miss Beukes, echoing a slogan printed on the sticker adorning her pink dress.
"He's thinking. He's not babbling."


Amre Accepts S.E.C. Order
Amre Inc., once a high-flying home improvement stock, yesterday consented to a cease and desist order from the Securities and Exchange Commission, barring it from committing further violations of the securities laws.
The S.E.C. said the company had engaged in "a fraudulent scheme to inflate" its reported profits.
In addition, three former officials of the firm agreed to pay damages relating to their sale of Amre stock during the period the S.E.C. said the books were being overstated.


Texas Executes Convicted Slayer
A man was executed by injection at the state prison here early today for strangling an elderly woman at a Houston apartment complex where he had been dismissed as a maintenance worker.
The 38-year-old prisoner, Edward Ellis, was put to death after the United States Supreme Court refused on Monday night to grant a stay based on his lawyers' claim of new evidence that another man, who died a year ago, was the killer.


INSIDE
Tapping Iraq's Assets
The United Nations Security Council may use Iraqi funds frozen abroad to pay for scrapping Baghdad's arms and to buy food for Iraqis.
Page A3.
Sandy Dennis Dies
Sandy Dennis, who won an Oscar for her performance in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?," is dead at 54.
When Cooking Is Too Easy
Cooks are rebelling against meals that are too easy to prepare, clinging to even the smallest role in food preparation.
The Living Section, page C1. 3 School Gun Arrests
As New York officials wrestled with the school violence, three students were charged with weapons possession.
Page B1.


Chilling Without Ozone Damage
Under pressure from environmentalists, industrial engineers are in hot pursuit of cold technologies, including air-conditioners that use plain water as a refrigerant and semiconductors that cool down when charged with electricity.
Makers of home refrigerators and freezers, along with producers of commercial chilling equipment, face an uncertain but impending deadline to phase out chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, a family of refrigerant chemicals believed to attack the earth's protective ozone layer.


Evans Gets Chance For More Swim Gold
Just when bad was turning to worse, Janet Evans got healthy tonight.
She won the women's 400-meter freestyle in the United States Olympic swimming trials, and at age 20 she earned a chance to regain the glory of her carefree teen-age days.
In the last year, she has changed colleges (Stanford to Texas) and coaches (Richard Quick to Mark Schubert).
She wavered over which races she wanted to swim in the Olympics.
She has anguished over her poor (for her) performances on the first two days of tbis six-day competition.
She has bared her frustrations and tears.


Monk Jazz Contest Moving to New York
Lincoln Center and the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz announced yesterday that they have established an alliance to present the sixth annual Thelonious Monk International Jazz Instrumental Competition at Lincoln Center on Oct. 24 and 25.
The competition, considered the most important in the jazz world, had been held at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
"This competition is extremely important," said Rob Gibson, the director of jazz at Lincoln Center.
"Because it is dealing with younger musicians, it draws a lot of attention, not only in the media but in the musical community at large. That sort of attention, and that market, is what we're looking for at Lincoln Center. It is all very, very good for jazz."


Muscular Dystrophy Treatment Raises Questions About Research
A maverick researcher says he has developed the first effective treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
But other researchers say that although his results are promising, he has not yet proved that the treatment works.
The researcher, Dr.
Peter Law, director of the Cell Therapy Research Foundation in Memphis, said that when he injected healthy muscle cells into the legs of boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the boys' legs grew stronger.
Although the boys are by no means cured, Dr.
Law said, "it is quite spectacular."


Coping With Peace -- A Special Report.; Cambodia, Bleak and Fearful, Yearns for U.N. Peacekeepers
Throughout this shattered and still heavily land-mined nation, many Cambodians agree that only the swiftest arrival of United Nations peacekeepers can reverse a slide into anarchy, and some even wonder whether the force of 22,000 will prove large enough for the task.
In authorizing the deployment, the United Nations has approved one of the largest and most expensive peacekeeping operations in its history, with the assembly, transport and maintenance of soldiers and civilian monitors expected to cost more than $2 billion.


Health Professionals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Doctors Say Cancer Therapy Has Tsongas in Good Health
More than five years after undergoing an experimental treatment for cancer, Paul E. Tsongas is in good health and, if elected President, the Democratic candidate has a favorable prognosis for serving out his term, his doctors say.
The doctors pronounced the 51-year-old Mr.
Tsongas fit after he underwent an array of tests last December that showed no evidence of recurrence of the lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system, that was detected in 1983 and for which he received experimental therapy in 1986.


Isomedix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quadra Logic Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key West Journal; 'Margaritaville' vs. Military Housing
Peary Court is 29 acres of open green space adjoining a neighborhood of Victorian gingerbread houses that has been designated a National Historic District.
But the triangular parcel also abuts Key West Naval Air Station, and the Navy, which owns the land, wants to build 160 units of military housing on it.
And on this small, densely populated island with virtually no undeveloped areas left, that has proven to be a prescription for conflict.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE meaning of failure changes as children grow older.
Infants, whose daily routines are filled with small defeats, take most of their failures in stride.
Toddlers get angry when they can't do or have something they want, but their anger is usually directed at the world, not at themselves.
The concept of personal failure is more obvious in preschoolers and becomes increasingly important throughout childhood and adolescence.
One reason for that shift is the higher expectations adults have for children who have mastered basic verbal skills and physical coordination.
Parents feel the pain of an older child's failure more acutely than a younger one's.
They are also more likely to interpret their child's poor performance as reflecting on their merits as parents.
Children are very sensitive to their parents' reactions.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Danny Rivera  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Saturday
Danny Rivera knows that lovers don't shout.
When he sings about romantic dreams or nights of love, he sounds almost awed by his good fortune.
And in his most ardent declarations his voice becomes clear and ringing but never forced.


International Power Machines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High Tech or Low, Bromides Linger
Probably no sport has more misinformation, misguided theories and plain fantasy concerning equipment than skiing.
Some of these myths are so outlandish -- anything black is for experts -- that they disappear quietly; others -- if your feet don't hurt, the boots won't work -- are disproved as technological improvements become standard.
But plenty of myths linger. Take these 10 bromides:


Warner Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


New Jersey Punishes Those on Welfare
To the Editor:
The defense by Gov.
Jim Florio and Assemblyman Wayne Bryant (letter, Feb. 13) of New Jersey welfare changes against Anna Quindlen's criticism, seems obviously flawed.
They say people should not focus on the omission of their children from the budget, but be grateful for a 50 percent increase in retained benefits when they go out and get jobs.
Why, when our most experienced workers can't land a job, should newly trained applicants with high school equivalency diplomas and one or two years' training be made to count on finding one?


Enserv Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


With Friends, Dinkins Basks In Cheers' Glow
Reuniting with the man whose voter registration drive in the 1988 Presidential race helped propel him into City Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins joined the Rev.
Jesse Jackson yesterday at a rally of hospital workers for a new voter drive and an anti-crime crusade.
The stated goal of the rally, led by Dennis Rivera, the head of Local 1199 of the hospital workers union, was to register new voters to protest proposed state cuts in Medicaid.
But several agendas seemed to be at work in the auditorium at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan, where hundreds of union members joined hospital officials and local politicians.


Quotation of the Day
"We know that productivity has increased since 1977 and that more people are working. Where did all that extra income go? The answer is that it all went to the very top." -- PAUL KRUGMAN, an M.I.T. economist.  [ A1:3. ]


Masstor Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lufthansa Deal Is Seen
Deutsche Lufthansa A.G. is close to a deal with a United States airline that would give the German carrier access to more destinations in the United States, a member of Lufthansa's board said Tuesday.
United States airline industry analysts believe that Lufthansa may be looking at USAir Group Inc. as a possible partner.


Perry Drug Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Franco Out 2 Weeks
JULIO FRANCO, whose .341 batting average led the American League last season, has bursitis in his right knee and will miss at least two weeks of spring training, the Texas Rangers said yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. was stripped of its triple-A bond rating by Moody's, which downgraded it two notches, to Aa-2.
But analysts saw the move as a blow more to pride than to balance sheet.  [ Page D1. ]


Qaddafi Parries Attempt to Impose Sanctions
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, has made a series of confusing moves, apparently in an attempt to buy time as the United States, Britain and France seek to impose Security Council sanctions on his country over the bombing of two airliners in the 1980's, officials said today.
In recent talks with a senior United Nations official, the Libyan leader reportedly hinted that he might hand over agents accused of bombing one of these planes for trial in Britain or the United States if the United States improves relations with Libya.
This caused the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, to say Libya's position is evolving.


Garments Grown Faint? Time to Dye
WHEN Elissa Tatigikis Iberti begins her work, she puts on a mask and gloves, and makes sure her young son isn't nearby.
Ms.
Iberti is a professional fabric colorist, and dyeing can be dangerous business.
"Dyeing is chemistry," she said, standing by the heavily used washing machine in her Brooklyn studio.
"You have to know the different pigments and how they will affect fabrics. There's also a certain health hazard. Some dyes are toxic."


Immucell Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Battle Over Bias; Blacks Resent Outsider Role
More than 20 years after court orders cracked open a handful of Long Island's traditionally white volunteer fire departments, a dispute over upgrading a park for the exclusive use of volunteer firefighters in a racially mixed neighborhood has reopened questions about the makeup of the departments.
In Huntington Station, blacks and Hispanics make up 30 percent of the population but are absent from the 89-year-old Huntington Manor Fire Department.
Blacks have rarely applied to join the department; one who did two years ago was approved by members in a voice vote, but moved away before being sworn in.


Market Place; Officials at Amre Settle S.E.C. Case
FOR connoisseurs of financial fraud, the case of Amre Inc. appears to have many classic elements.
The wrongdoing started small, in what seems to have been an effort to allow the company to live up to the forecasts it had given to Wall Street.
Then it grew.
Along the way, the pace picked up and the company managed to fool its accountants and much of Wall Street.
It became a hot stock; the very manager who was masterminding the fraud sold more than $1 million in stock.
But eventually the cops caught on, and this appears to be one case where the perpetrators will pay millions of dollars.
In documents filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission this week, the company and five former executives consented to a variety of sanctions but did not admit or deny any violations of securities laws.
The company, whose main business is installing vinyl siding and making other home improvements as a contractor for Sears, had already rescinded its previous financial reports, saying they were false and misleading.


Canam Manac Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interactive Media Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Niagara Exchange Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel Can't Remain Oppressor of Palestinians
To the Editor:
"The Territories Aren't 'Occupied' " by Cynthia Ozick (Op-Ed, Feb. 19) challenges Palestinian legal claims to the West Bank, and her argument makes sense.
One does not have to be an international lawyer to understand that territories that had no prior sovereignty cannot be considered "occupied."
But then one does not have to be an international statesman to understand that legal arguments are largely irrelevant to the political realities that Israel and the Israelis face.
For them, the legal status of the territories could not be more beside the point.
The question they need to answer is, If the Likud has its way and achieves permanent Jewish rule of the territories, what will they do with the nearly two million Palestinians who live there?


Telling on Clients; When Do Lawyers Blow Whistle? Government Revives an Old Debate
In moving aggressively this week against a New York law firm that represented a corrupt savings and loan institution, the Government revived an ethical argument about when lawyers should blow the whistle on clients.
Here and on Wall Street, lawyers are accusing the Government of trying to win cases by forcing lawyers to police their own clients and of intimidating lawyers, deterring them from providing the most zealous defense.


Dow Falls 21.69; Ends At 3,268.56
Stocks fell in heavy trading yesterday, punctuated by a sharp selloff in blue-chip issues late in the afternoon following a downgrading of I.B.M.'s credit ratings by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 21.69 points, to 3,268.56, after a record closing on Tuesday.
Trading was flat most of the day, as investors held back because of concern over rising interest rates and their potential effect on corporate earnings and a recovering economy.


Plan to Revise Trash Pickup For Businesses
In an attempt to shatter what authorities have described as a cartel imposed by New York City's 475 private garbage collectors, the Dinkins administration wants to reduce, rather than increase, the number of companies picking up refuse at office buildings, stores, restaurants and factories.
Under a plan called exclusive licensing, the city would radically revamp the way garbage is collected from 250,000 businesses, granting one company sole rights to pick up refuse in a defined area of the city.
Ultimately, the zoning plan could result in as few as six or seven large companies handling all of the city's commercial garbage.


New Campaigns
*
Troll Kidz, new versions of the troll dolls popular during the 1960's, are featured in television commercials by Ayer Chicago for Russ Berrie &amp; Co.
Five children, filmed in a fairy-tale forest, offer seemingly spontaneous answers to the question: "Why do kids love Troll Kidz?" One girl asks her own question: "Do they live in other planets like South America and New York?" *
A series of television commercials by Deutsch Inc., New York, for the Ikea home furnishings chain are pegged to the recession and the election campaign.
In one spot, chefs recommend that the nation's salvation would be to "cut the fat." In another spot, after a politician says the debt is $1 trillion, the words "Never spend a trillion on anything" appear on screen.


Sheeb Journal; For Bedouins of Africa, Sands Are Running Out
In the sands of the Red Sea coast, Hamida Mohammed, who is 18 years old, displayed all the regalia of her recent marriage: elaborate gold bracelets on each wrist, a heavy steel watch and an ornate, metallic threaded mask that revealed only her eyes during the three days of her wedding feast.
Like all the women gathered in her tent of woven goat hair, Mrs.
Hamida has worn a veil that covers her mouth since she was 5.
She was circumcised at 7, and as the first wife of her 22-year-old husband she takes it for granted he will take one or two more.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Carmike Cinemas Inc. of Columbus, Ga., said it had arranged a private placement for $25 million in senior notes, due in 2002 and bearing 7.9 percent interest, through the underwriting firm of Furman Selz Inc.
Common  *
International Family Entertainment of Norfolk, Va., has filed for 10 million shares to be sold through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette at $14 to $16 a share.
The company provides entertainment programming and operates a cable television network. *
Lam Research Corp. of Fremont, Calif., said its 2.5 million shares offered through Smith Barney, Harris Upham had been priced at $13.50 a share.
Lam makes semiconductor processing equipment used in fabricating integrated circuits.
Ratings  *
United Air Lines Inc. received a BBB+ rating for a recent shelf registration covering $1 billion of equipment trust certificates and other debt from Standard &amp; Poor's, based partly on the airline's strong revenue generation from choice routes.
*
York International Corp. will receive an upgrading on its senior debt, now rated BB+, according to Standard &amp; Poor's, upon completion of a recently announced sale of four million shares by the heating and air-conditioning company.
S.&amp; P. said the proceeds would be used to reduce debt.


At Times, Nature Too Is Cruel to Animals
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 9 report on how the trapper is becoming a rare species, you introduce the reader to "one of a dwindling number of trappers in New York and the United States at a time when some are arguing that killing animals, especially by trapping, is cruel and unnecessary."
You presuppose a balance of nature in which human beings are not involved and natural deaths in the wild are free of cruelty and always necessary.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Predators frequently prey on their own young or favor the babes of other species, often kill more than they need for sustenance and often kill inefficiently, even consuming their prey while it is still alive.


Dynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aloette Cosmetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Integrity reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mendes Hershman Is Dead at 80; Leader in New York Legal Circles
Mendes Hershman, who helped improve the merit selection of judges in New York as chairman of both the city and state judicial screening panels, died on Monday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Crystal Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


U.S. Companies Settle Manila Reactor Suit
The Philippines and two American companies yesterday settled a lawsuit involving assertions that the companies had paid big bribes to an associate of Ferdinand E. Marcos to get a contract to build a nuclear plant near Manila.
One company, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, agreed to pay $100 million in cash and services that the Philippines characterized as repayment of the bribes.
Westinghouse continued to deny that it paid any bribes, and pointed out that a Swiss arbitration panel that heard the case last year had found in its favor.
And the settlement gives it a contract to run the plant and take a share of its revenues, leaving the strong possibility of profit.


What Debt Does Hollywood Owe to Truth?
When Hollywood and history collide, which side wins?
With "J. F. K." still agitating a national audience, the question was put before Oliver Stone, the film's director, and fellow panelists Norman Mailer, Nora Ephron and Edward Jay Epstein on Tuesday night at Town Hall in Manhattan in a debate sponsored by the Nation Institute and the Center for American Culture Studies at Columbia University in association with the Writers Guild of America, East.
Before a packed house, the four discussed the duty of art to history, fiction to fact and whether George Bush could be placed at Dealey Plaza in November 1963.
Feelings ran high.
"Never have I been so besieged and be-faxed by people who felt that their point of view was not represented," said the moderator, Victor Navasky, the editor of The Nation magazine, in his opening remarks.
Looking out over the audience, he asked, "Will all of you out there who feel you don't belong on this panel please stand?" 'I've Come to Have Severe Doubts'
It was a pro-Stone crowd, primed to sneer at what Mr.
Mailer called "the mind-stultifying myth of the lone assassin," with a large percentage of groundlings eager for tales of conspiracy and cover-up, and inclined to become restless if more than five minutes passed without a fiery denunciation of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Warren Report, American cold-war policy or the Bush Administration.
They got all this and more from Mr.
Stone, who, as he lumbered toward the lectern, looked like a man who had bulked up by carrying the weight of history on his shoulders for too long.


Genisco Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ICOS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Desoto Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Asea Brown Boveri Inc., Stamford, Conn., a unit of Asea Brown Boveri A.B. of Sweden, received a $130 million contract for six gas turbines for two Kentucky utilities, with an option for two additional units. *
Cadence Design Systems Inc., San Jose, Calif., a software concern, said its subsidiary in Japan, Cadence Design Systems K.K., had signed an agreement with C. Itoh &amp; Co., Osaka, Japan, and Innotech Corp., Trumbull, Conn., to acquire C.I.C.
Inc.


Transit Union's Members Are Divided on Contract
As more than 32,000 New York City transit workers began voting this week on a new three-year contract, a deep split has developed within their union.
Many members have called for the rejection of the pact endorsed by their leaders, saying that it would increase their health care costs and contains inadequate salary increases.
Leaders of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union have endorsed the tentative agreement reached in January with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, saying that it was the best they could do in a severe recession.
The ballots were mailed to members on Friday, and must be postmarked by March 16, said Sonny Hall, the local's president.


Hoenig Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shopsmith Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Calendar: Old Weavings
Blankets Plain and Fancy  Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
An exhibition of woven coverlets made in the United States between 1800 and 1850 opens today and runs through May 6.
On Tuesday at 6 P.M., Martha Leversuch, the show's curator, will describe 19th-century weaving techniques.
Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M. daily.
Free.
Housing Solutions  Great Hall at Cooper Union, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 353-4195.


Teachers Union, in Solid Front, Authorizes Walkouts
Angered by the steady presence of guns in New York City schools, delegates for 66,000 teachers voted yesterday to authorize walkouts in any school where the staff feels there is a "clear and present life-threatening danger."
A spokeswoman for the United Federation of Teachers, Susan Amlung, cautioned that the vote would not mean immediate walkouts.
She said it would give teachers leverage to grapple more aggressively with principals and community leaders over safety issues.


McGraw Not Guilty
MARK McGRAW, the 19-year-old son of the former Mets and Phillies relief pitcher TUG McGRAW was found not guilty of rape yesterday in Philadelphia by a jury that deliberated less than 40 minutes.


Strawberry Says Gooden Isn't 'Bitter'
Darryl Strawberry, trying to stem at least some of the potential fallout from his new book, said today that he had called Dwight Gooden and found his former teammate understanding and not bitter about a passage involving the Mets' pitcher and cocaine.
"Me and Doc already have straightened it out," Strawberry said.
"Doc knows. He's been my friend and he'll always be my friend. He said you really didn't say nothing, so it's not a big issue. We washed that under the bridge. He's not bitter; he knows I'm his friend."


Tax-Exempt Yields Off; Taxables Slip a Bit
The yields on tax-exempt funds continued moving down in the week ended Monday, and short-term taxable funds dropped very slightly in the week ended Tuesday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"As yields of tax-exempts decline for another week, we have seen an outflow of funds," said Walter Frank, Donoghue's economist.
He added that for the taxable funds "the bottoming-out process continued as yields declined only marginally for the second week."


February's Vehicle Sales Cooled Down
Sales of North American-made cars and light trucks dipped 13.6 percent in late February, as most analysts concluded that evidence of a recovering automotive market remained slim.
Upticks in the selling rates of domestic vehicles in early February and mid-February had encouraged some automotive analysts and economists to believe an upturn in the market was at hand.
Sales had risen 23.8 percent in early February and 4 percent in the middle of the month.
But many car buyers are evidently holding back out of caution or because of insufficent disposable income.


F.B.I. Warns Computer Users About Virus Attack Friday
The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation yesterday joined a growing number of computer experts and others warning about the potential danger of a computer virus called Michelangelo.
The director, William S. Sessions, noted that the destruction of data in Government computers was a Federal crime.


Southwest Cafes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3


Photo File Of World's Wonders
An ambitious program to photograph 200 of the world's cultural and natural wonders and to make the images instantly available worldwide through digital transmission was announced here tonight at the headquarters of Unesco, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Called "a cultural adventure" by Federico Mayor, general director of Unesco, the project's goal is to assemble an unprecedented collection of "quality images" documenting such famous sites as Angkor Wat in Cambodia and Borobudur in Indonesia before they are further damaged by war or the environment.
The photos will then be made available free to scholarly and educational institutions and for a fee to commercial users.


Youth Charged in Killing
A 14-year-old was arrested last night and charged with second-degree manslaughter in the death of his 8-year-old cousin, whose body was found last September in the East River, the police said.
The suspect, whose name was not released because of his age, was arrested at 8 P.M. and taken to the Spofford Juvenile Center in the Bronx pending arraignment today, the police said.
The body of the girl, Shemika Jennings, of 1630 Undercliff Avenue in Morris Heights, the Bronx, was found Sept. 10 in the waters off Randalls Island.


Rating Cut On I.B.M.'s Debt Issues
I.B.M. was stripped of its prized triple-A bond rating yesterday by Moody's Investors Service Inc., which downgraded its rating of the ability of the company to repay its debt by two notches, to Aa-2.
However, financial analysts said the move was a blow more to I.B.M.'s pride than to its balance sheet.


A Worry for Bush: Independent Voters
Polls of Tuesday's voters in Colorado, Georgia and Maryland sent a serious warning to President Bush: he should worry less about conservative support in the primaries and more about independent voters a Republican needs to win in November.
In each state, he received more than 70 percent of the vote from people who called themselves Republicans but less than 60 percent from voters who considered themselves independents.


Sports of The Times; Auth-thor! Auth-thor! Auth-thor!
EVEN though Darryl Strawberry won't arrive at Shea Stadium with the Dodgers until May 8, it's time to rehearse a new greeting.
Instead of chanting "Darr-rryl! Darr-rryl! Darr-rryl!" his new career as a book salesman deserves to be recognized.
All together now:
"Auth-thor! Auth-thor! Auth-thor!"


LDDS Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; Buchanan Quest: Turning Protest Votes Into Delegates
The candidacy of Patrick J. Buchanan faces two crucial questions: Where is he actually going to find Republican delegates, and how can he stop being the one who gets the protest vote plus six percent?
By capturing 36 percent of the vote in the Republican primary in Georgia on Tuesday, Mr.
Buchanan did well enough to keep his mutinous campaign against the President going and to keep the hopes of his conservative followers alive for at least one more week.


Police Charge 2 in 16 Robberies Of Korean-Owned Businesses
The accidental shooting of a man in a Brooklyn apartment led to the arrest of two of his friends in the robberies of 16 Korean-owned laundries and fruit stands in Flatbush, East Flatbush and Crown Heights, the police said yesterday.
The Korean merchants were apparently chosen, the police said, because the thieves thought they would be reluctant to go to the authorities.


Tseng Labs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN:Voters; Messages of Warning to Bush And of Hope for Democrats
Polls of voters leaving the booths on Tuesday in Colorado, Georgia and Maryland sent a serious warning to President Bush: He should worry less about conservative support in the primaries and more about independent voters a Republican needs to win in November.
In each state, just as he did in his New Hampshire victory over the conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr.
Bush won about the same level of support from voters in the Republican primaries who described themselves as liberals, moderates and conservatives.
That may be a measure of success in satisfying ordinary conservative voters, if not some of their more vocal leaders.


Centennial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MGM Grand Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


AEP Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about Paul E. Tsongas described the scene incorrectly in some copies.
The picture, in which Mr.
Tsongas was shown smiling, was made Tuesday night in Columbia, S.C., after his victory in the Maryland primary.


Pare Lorentz, 86, a Film Director On Socially Conscious Matters
Pare Lorentz, the writer and director whose socially conscious documentary films included "The Plow That Broke the Plains" and "The River," died yesterday at his home in Armonk, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
The cause of death was heart failure, said his wife, Elizabeth Meyer Lorentz.


Now Bo Jackson Will Undergo Critical Gaze
The talk about Bo Jackson no longer was of the remarkable feats he could perform on a baseball field.
The talk now was how well, or even whether, he could do the most elementary tasks, such as swinging hard at a baseball and running to first base.
On a gray, sometimes drizzly afternoon, Bo Jackson today was given his first test of the spring, playing as a designated hitter in a Chicago White Sox intrasquad game and seeking to supply clues about how much physical therapy had helped over the winter.


Mid Atlantic Medical Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ducommun Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Israel and Arabs Halt Talks Without Progress
Israelis and Arabs ended their third round of peace talks today as divided on substance as they were when they began four months ago and unable to agree on where and when to meet again.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d summoned each of the parties today for talks in his office to urge them to resolve their differences over a site so that at least one more round of negotiations can be held in April, before the Israeli national election on June 23.


Pamida Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


BRE Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


R &amp; B Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Democrats Debate On TV Tonight
The Democratic Presidential candidates will debate tonight in Dallas.
The 90-minute debate will be moderated by Peter Jennings and will be broadcast on ABC at 11:30 eastern standard time in place of the program "Nightline."


Little Prince Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Falcon Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Atrix Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At 88, an Undiminished Dr. Spock
THE author of one of the most popular books ever published did not waste time with a stiff, formal introduction.
He simply extended a big, firm hand, smiled and said, "Hi, I'm Ben."
Benjamin Spock, M.D., to be official.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about conservatives' dissatisfaction with President Bush misidentified a Heritage Foundation board member who criticized Mr.
Bush's foreign policy.
He is Robert H. Krieble, former chairman of the Loctite Corporation.


Dinkins Rebukes Fiscal Aides
Mayor David N. Dinkins rebuked his budget aides for unnecessary brinkmanship yesterday, ordering them to include at least $15 million in the Parks Department's construction budget for the fiscal year that starts on July 1, instead of the $353,000 target the budget office previously announced.
In a memo to Budget Director Philip R. Michael, First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel said that he had reviewed the original target with the Mayor and that Mr.
Dinkins put a high priority on parks despite the need to cut the overall capital-construction budget to save on borrowing costs.


Rangers Put On Pressure but Devils Don't Wilt
The Rangers waited too long and threw away too many passes.
By the time they unleashed their full fury in the third period last night against the Devils, all their huffing, puffing, and 21 shots on goal would not be enough.
"That was unbelievable," Coach Tom McVie said after his Devils had survived the storm for a 5-4 victory at the Garden.
"If you've never been there, you can't describe it. You think as a coach, it's going to be easy. You pick out a suit and tie and change the lines. Well, it's not like that."


Competitiveness Panel Urges Action
Saying that America's leadership role in the world is bound to decline unless its competitiveness improves, a panel appointed by President Bush and Congress criticized both the White House and lawmakers today for doing far too little to help the nation vie in the world economy.
"America's competitiveness problem reflects slow erosion rather than sudden crisis," said the report from the panel, which includes corporate chairmen, union presidents, government officials and economists.
"Democratic societies such as ours -- and perhaps especially ours -- are not adept at responding to 'termites in the woodwork.' Our national leadership has yet to acknowledge the scope or seriousness of the challenge."


Royal Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suspension of Police Force Baffles Town
For months now, the four-man Police Department has been big news in this little town amid the woods and dairy farms of northwestern New Jersey.
The chief, Mark Van Engelen, had a rough time with the Borough Council before it appointed him in November after 13 months as acting chief.
The town's merchants and many of its 2,200 residents, mostly middle-income or elderly people on fixed incomes, have had a long-running debate about paying higher taxes for quicker police service and more foot patrolmen on Main Street, especially on weekend nights when things sometimes get rough in the town's three bars.


Motor Vehicle Lines? Give Bus a Try
RUTH ELLMS came prepared to wait, her pink satchel filled with newspapers and a good book.
Her fur coat and hat were pulled close around her with the wind whipping outside on a chilly, bright morning.
"This is the Department of Motor Vehicles, after all," she said.
"I thought for sure I'd be waiting outside in the cold a good hour or two."
Instead, within minutes, Ms.
Ellms found herself seated on a warm, albeit crowded, bus that serves as a mobile photo-license center, heat wafting around her, pop music playing on the stereo.
The bus was parked outside Ed Mitchell's, a clothing store on the Boston Post Road in Westport, where two days a month people from the area can renew their licenses.


7-Eleven Work Garners Reggie
Promotional Resources Group in New York and W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., shared the top prize at the Promotion Marketing Association of America's ninth annual Reggie Awards ceremony in Chicago yesterday.
The campaign that garnered the "Super Reggie," for the Southland Corporation's 7-Eleven stores, increased soft-drink and coffee sales by allowing customers to choose cups marked "yes" or "no" to vote on provocative questions like "Do men drive better than women?"


FPI Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Chase Bank of Arizona, Phoenix, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., named Charles J. Coronella president and chief executive. *
Dillon, Read &amp; Co., New York, an investment banking firm, named Mack F. Rossoff managing director in the corporate finance department.


Israel Can't Remain Oppressor of Palestinians; Tell the Whole Story
To the Editor:
I would like to cast a different perspective on United States policy in the Middle East from "Lending for Peace in Israel" (editorial, Feb. 6).
In endorsing the Administration's policy on loan guarantees, which demands major concessions from Israel, you are very harsh on Israel.
Israel is not the only party to the conflict.
When discussing loan guarantees to absorb refugees, those who advocate that the United States put pressure on Israel to resolve the issue of settlements in the West Bank focus on only part of the story.


U.S. Bioscience reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


There's a Vital Art to Living With His (or Her) Taste
SOME people want to call the whole thing off when they don't see eye to eye.
Others stick together in spite of their differences: When she says Victoriana, he says hard-edge metal; she likes ruffles, he's into plaid; she buys modern, he cherishes grandma's table; she's Sports Channel, he's Coltrane.


Trade Delayed In Merck Stock
Trading in Merck &amp; Company shares was suspended for two and a half hours shortly after the opening of the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
The pause interrupted a two-day selloff that analysts said was spurred by British reports questioning two major Merck drugs, Mevacor and Zocor.


Canadian Northstar reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Glazer Won't Buy Pats
Scratch MALCOLM GLAZER as a potential purchaser of the New England Patriots.
Just a week after the businessman emerged as the latest prospective buyer, he has quietly withdrawn, according to The Boston Globe, which said National Football League officials had not been surprised.
Glazer, it seems, has a reputation as a franchise window shopper, one who looks at virtually every team that comes up for sale, The Globe said.


Woodhull Fails Review, Officials Say
The major hospital regulatory group has decided to withdraw its accreditation from one of New York City's major municipal hospitals, Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn, after concluding that it does not do a good enough job reviewing some of its surgical procedures, administrators at the hospital said yesterday.
The loss of accreditation could hurt the hospital's efforts to recruit doctors and maintain residence programs, but will not affect its daily operations or its ability to collect the Medicaid funds that are vital to its survival.
Nonetheless, the decision by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations represents another blow to the city's troubled Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs 11 major public hospitals, by far the biggest municipal system in the nation.


Rezoning Vote Clears Raceway for Development
After four years of controversy, the Town of Hempstead has approved an ambitious development plan for Roosevelt Raceway, long a white elephant and political embarrassment to local Republican leaders.
But local civic groups said today that they would continue to fight the parts of the plan they find objectionable.
They said a 10-screen cinema, for example, would add too much traffic to an already crowded area.


Doctor Is Found Guilty in Fertility Case
A Federal jury today convicted an infertility specialist on 52 counts of fraud and perjury for artificially inseminating unwitting patients with his own sperm and for telling them they were pregnant when they were not.
The doctor, Cecil B. Jacobson, who could be sentenced to up to 280 years in prison and fined up to $500,000, sat impassively with his arms crossed when the jury foreman read the guilty verdicts.
Sentencing was set for May 8.


Officers Say Banker Tried to Kill Them
A Manhattan investment banker was charged in the attempted murder of three police officers after they said he resisted arrest in a rape case early yesterday morning.
The man, Craig Medoff, 32 years old, opened the door of his apartment at 738 Broadway and Astor Place at 3:30 A.M. wearing shoes, pants and a military-issue armored vest, the police said.
Officer Edwin Murphy, one of the three officers from the Ninth Precinct who had knocked, said he could see the butt of a handgun sticking above Mr.
Medoff's waistband.


Flow International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


American Travellers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G. Archibald Douglas; Executive, 81
G.
Archibald Douglas, a retired chairman of Saab-Scania of America Inc. and of the Swedish-American Chamber of Commerce in New York, died last Wednesday at the family manor, Ekensholm, just outside Stockholm.
He was 81 years old and also lived at Rivanna Farm near Charlottesville, Va.
He died in his sleep of a heart attack, his family said.


Galveston-Houston Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Integrated Health Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Norstan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Vulcan International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Teen-Age Fan Club  The Marquee
"Metal baby," sang Norman Blake of Teen-Age Fan Club at the Marquee last Friday night.
"Ooh, metal baby." This song from the Scottish quartet's second album, "Bandwagonesque" (DGC), about a young girl who likes heavy metal, is quintessential Teen-Age Fan Club: a couple of chords strung together to make a pop hook, a few vague phrases repeated over and over, a lot of guitar distortion.
It's mindless, a bit moronic.
It's songwriting only in the sense that a kindergartener's picture of a house and a tree and a sun is art.


The 1980's: A Very Good Time for the Very Rich
Populist politicians, economists and ordinary citizens have long suspected that the rich have been getting richer.
What is making people sit up now is recent evidence that the richest 1 percent of American families appears to have reaped most of the gains from the prosperity of the last decade and a half.
An outsized 60 percent of the growth in the average after-tax income of all American families between 1977 and 1989 -- and an even heftier three-fourths of the gain in average pretax income -- went to the wealthiest 660,000 families, each of which had an annual income of at least $310,000 a year, for a household of four.


Ballistivet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Verifact reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ziegler Will Face Off With Players' Group
Both John Ziegler and Bob Goodenow are lawyers from suburban Detroit, an international border city that, in terms of hockey consciousness, might as well be suburban Canada.
Ziegler is the veteran president of the National Hockey League.
Goodenow is the rookie executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association.
Next Monday in New York, they will sit across the table for discussions toward a new collective-bargaining agreement.
Without one, the union could go on strike, for the first time in its history, before April's Stanley Cup playoffs.


Home Video
Lyne on 'Attraction'
When last seen, Alex Forrest (Glenn Close), a bullet hole in her chest and an astonished look on her face, had succumbed in a bathtub in suburban Westchester.
The climactic scene of Adrian Lyne's film "Fatal Attraction," in which the crazed, knife-wielding Alex invades the household of a lawyer (Michael Douglas) who has spurned her, capped a thriller that went on to become one of the biggest video hits of all time.


Genentech In Joint Pact
Genentech Inc. said Tuesday that it had entered a collaborative agreement with Hoffman-La Roche Ltd. of Basel, Switzerland, a subsidiary of Roche Holding Ltd., for the international development and promotion of DNase, Genentech's recombinant drug for the treatment of cystic fibrosis and chronic bronchitis.
Roche acquired a majority interest in Genentech in 1990.


The Tragedies of Bedlam In 'Titicut Follies' of 1967
"Titicut Follies" was shown as part of the 1967 New York Film Festival.
It also played briefly at the Cinema Rendezvous before it was withdrawn from distribution because of court action in Massachusetts.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4, 1967.
The film opened yesterday at the Film Forum 1, 209 West Houston Street.
Movies became talkies 40 years ago, but it wasn't until recently, with the development of new, lightweight camera and sound equipment, that motion picture documentaries learned how to speak for themselves.
The possibilities of this combination of the aural with the visual actuality are stunningly realized in "Titicut Follies," a calm, cool and ultimately horrifying look at conditions in the state prison for the criminally insane at Bridgewater, Mass. (Titicut, incidentally, is the Indian name for the area around Bridgewater.)


Etz Lavud Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
My Bloody Valentine and Dinosaur Jr.  The Ritz
From the start of its set at the Ritz on Friday night, My Bloody Valentine was louder than most rock bands would dream of.
The Irish-English quartet's two guitarists, Kevin Shields and Bilinda Butcher, had their instruments cranked up to a level that sent buzzing, distorted waves of sound over the sold-out audience; the drummer Colm O'Ciosoig and the bassist Deb Googe laid down a rhythm as brutal and relentless as factory machinery.
Some of the songs, like "Soon," from the band's recent album "Loveless" (Sire), had recognizable pop structures apparent beneath the barrage; others were sheer noise.
The vast wall behind the stage danced with psychedelic light patterns that spilled over onto the musicians' bodies, like a post-modern version of the Velvet Underground's Exploding Plastic Inevitable; two lighting devices on the stage sent knife shafts of neon blue and white into the spectators' eyes.


Bentsen Says Buchanan Holds Bush Hostage
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, author of the Democrats' tax bill, said today that there was little chance of progress on taxes, health care or other important issues "as long as the President's decisions are being held hostage by Pat Buchanan."
The Texas Democrat said Mr.
Bush was rejecting tax increases on fewer than 1 percent of Americans to pay for tax credits of $300 per child because he was scared of losing the votes of conservative Republicans.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day on Tuesday about Ames Department Stores Inc. misstated the deadline for the company to file a revised reorganization plan.
It is April 27.


Biopharmaceutics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conpak Seafoods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


HOUSE EASILY KILLS BUSH BUDGET PLAN
After an impassioned debate punctuated by election-year politics, the House tonight overwhelmingly rejected President Bush's $1.52 trillion budget request by a vote of 370 to 42.
Mr.
Bush's budget measure never had a chance for passage, but most Republican leaders treated it as a campaign blueprint to navigate the country over a course of gradual cuts in the defense budget and a fine-tuning of social programs designed to expand economic growth.


UConn Holds Off Syracuse to End Slide
In another of those Big East reversal-of-fortune games, Connecticut beat Syracuse, 85-78, tonight at the Civic Center and stopped the big leak in the Huskies' season.
After a 16-1 start, UConn had lost seven of its last eight games, all to conference opponents, and had disappeared from the Associated Press ranking of the top 25 teams.


Lufkin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health-Mor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Litchfield Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Alba-Waldensian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jones Medical Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grancare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coastal Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Motivated Barrowman Is a Winner for Losing
Mike Barrowman is the best 200-meter breast-stroke swimmer in captivity -- world champion, world-record holder, world-record-breaker five times in the last 31 months, favorite for this summer's Barcelona Olympics.
Since 1988, he had swum this race 50 or 60 times and had never lost.
Tonight, at the United States Olympic Trials, he lost.
He also won.
He lost the race, but he finished second, and the first two finishers will make the Olympic team.


Consilium Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Asset Investors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Intersolv Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cliffs Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bonray Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TJX Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out; Kerrey Decides to Withdraw After Poor Showing in West
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska told several Senate colleagues today that he had decided to withdraw from the Democratic Presidential primaries.
Earlier, on a flight from Arizona to Washington, Mr.
Kerrey said he had changed his mind about traveling to Florida this morning after he saw his poor finish in caucuses in Idaho and Washington State on Tuesday.
"The full picture was painted," he said drily.
"All the dots were connected."


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 20,864.42, down 241 points, or 1.1 percent.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 53.71 points.


Drug Industry Going Back to Nature
Skin of frog, venom of spider and saliva of leech.
Ingredients for the witches' brew from "Macbeth"?
No, they are potential sources of drugs.
The pharmaceutical industry is going back to nature, scouring the oceans for algae, the soil for fungi and the jungles for plants, insects and beasts that might provide chemicals to fight cancer, AIDS and other diseases.
Such chemical prospecting could also provide an economic incentive for preserving rain forests and endangered species, conservationists and drug company officials say.


U.S. Expects Ex-Soviet Republics To Get $4 Billion I.M.F. Aid Soon
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the republics of the former Soviet Union could be expected to receive about $4 billion in assistance from the International Monetary Fund in the near future.
Testifying before a House subcommittee, Mr.
Brady also said the Bush Administration was renewing its call for Congress to approve $12 billion more for the I.M.F. so the organization can increase its loans to the third world and the former Soviet bloc.
Since World War II, the United States has contributed $24 billion to the fund.


Jaco Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nazi Show Of 'Bad' Art Reopens In Berlin
More than half a century after Nazi leaders assembled their infamous exhibition "Degenerate Art," a sweeping condemnation of the work of the avant-garde, it has reopened here to high praise.
The exhibition, which was re-created by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art last year, returns to Germany as Germans are beginning to confront long-repressed truths about the Nazi era.
Several weeks ago, the lakeside villa in the Wannsee section of Berlin where Nazi leaders planned the elimination of European Jews was opened as a museum.
Some Berlin officials are also hoping to build a memorial to Nazi victims in the underground bunker complex from which Hitler directed World War II.


Knicks Can't Afford to Let Their Defense Rest
Two-thirds of the way through the season, the Knicks have established their identity as a team that relies on defense to win.
Heading into tonight's game against the Los Angeles Clippers at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks have reached 110 points in just one of their last 12 games.
That's quite different from a team like the Golden State Warriors, who average more than 119 points a game.


Corrections
A report in the Campus Life pages last Sunday about a film course taught by Spike Lee at Harvard misstated his educational background.
Mr.
Lee has a Bachelor of Arts degree from Morehouse College in Atlanta and a Master of Fine Arts degree from New York University.
A caption with the article described the picture incorrectly.
Mr.
Lee was shown during a news conference after his lecture, not during the lecture.


Ares-Serono Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BULGARIAN PREMIER PAYS VISIT TO BUSH
For Filip Dimitrov, the Prime Minister of Bulgaria, it was a special occasion, meeting President Bush on his country's new independence day.
Mr.
Dimitrov, a lawyer and author of a historical novel, is head of Bulgaria's first non-Communist Government since 1944.
He is seeking investments and aid for Bulgaria, a country of nine million whose transition from Communist rule has been far more tranquil than that of Yugoslavia or Romania.


FCMI Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Snyder Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Money Store Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Many serious bridge players play some tennis and vice versa, but until this week the games have always been quite separate on a tournament level.
For the last two days the Virginia Slims tennis tournament in Boca Raton, Fla., has been accompanied by the Virginia Slims All-Star bridge tournament, with a prize fund of $10,000.
The bridge was organized as a 16-player individual event by Bridge Today magazine, and the field consisted largely of players with world reputations.
With 20 deals remaining to be played last night, the leaders were: first, Richard Pavlicek Sr., 141 imps; second, William August, 139 imps; third, Sabine Zenkel, 126 imps; fourth, Zia Mahmood, 125 imps.


Gleason Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Florio Defends His Policies but Admits Mistakes
Insisting that he "had the right medicine" when he took office two years ago but conceding that he had "a lousy bedside manner," Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey came here today to apologize and to proselytize.
In an unusual midterm report, the Governor told a luncheon of the Center for National Policy, a nonprofit research group, that he had made mistakes but touted his policies as a guide to take the country out of the recession and into the next century.


Builders Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Isis Drug Approved For Testing
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. said today that it had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to begin human clinical trials of a new class of drugs that work by blocking disease at its genetic source.
Isis said it would begin trials immediately, which would make its drug the first such compound ever administered to humans.
The drugs, known as anti-sense compounds, mark the next frontier in biotechnology.
They work by binding with RNA molecules containing the genetic code that prompts cells to produce disease-causing proteins.
In contrast, a traditional drug inhibits the action of a single disease-causing protein that has already been formed.


Varlen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


4 Israeli Arabs Are Held in Ax Killing of 3 Soldiers
The Israeli police said today that they had arrested four Israeli Arabs and charged them with hacking and stabbing three Jewish soldiers to death at an isolated army outpost in mid-February.
The four suspects were said by the police to belong to Islamic Holy War, which is one of the most militant Palestinian groups but which is not believed to have well-planted roots among the 700,000 Muslim Arabs living in Israel.


The Cases That Lawyer Lincoln Took
To the Editor:
"Under the Dust, a New Luster for A. Lincoln, Esq." (news article, Feb. 9) credits the Lincoln manuscripts discovered in the Macoupin County Courthouse in Illinois with debunking the myth that Lincoln took only morally correct cases.
This was done long ago by John J. Duff in "A. Lincoln, Prairie Lawyer" (New York, 1960), who did not set out to destroy the image of the "hick lawyer"; the evidence did so.
In your Book Review (March 20, 1960), Richard N. Current wrote: "John J. Duff, since 1927 a lawyer at the New York bar, has little patience with those who say that Linclon seldom defended persons charged with crime, and never did so unless assured of their innocence. This, Mr. Duff says, is 'poppycock.' Lincoln often took a case where the facts were overwhelmingly against his client and like any good lawyer has put forth his best effort regardless of what he thought of the client's guilt."


Integral Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gamma Biologicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Homecare Management reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Plague of Young Guns
After a student pulled a gun and shot down two other students at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, New York City officials responded swiftly with plans for more metal detectors and other security measures.
That's fine as far as it goes.
But teen-age gunplay has become a nationwide problem that demands a national response -- sadly lacking in a Presidential election year.
All over urban America, more adolescents are using firearms to settle disputes once decided with fists or insults.
A fourth of urban school districts now use metal detectors, and many conduct drills in ducking at the sound of gunfire.
Federal researchers find that one student in five carries a weapon and one in twenty carries a gun.


APL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Official Says Charity's Files Were Destroyed
Five file drawers containing financial records of United Way International, an small nonprofit organization once affiliated with United Way of America, were destroyed six weeks ago in the midst of investigations into the finances of United Way of America, a board member of the smaller organization said tonight.
The investigations had focused on the lavish spending habits of William Aramony, who was forced to retire last week as president of United Way of America but who retains his unpaid post as president of the smaller spinoff, United Way International.


Sandy Dennis, Veteran Actress And Prize Winner, Is Dead at 54
Sandy Dennis, who as a young actress in the 1960's entranced Broadway and Hollywood with performances that won her two Tony Awards and an Academy Award, died on Monday at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 54 years old.
Although the exact cause of her death was not known, Ms.
Dennis had been fighting a long battle with cancer, said Doris Elliott, a longtime friend.
Ms.
Dennis's death was confirmed by a spokesman for the Lewis Funeral Home in Westport.


Living at odds over his (or her) taste: page C6.


Brooklyn Principal Is Also Chief Guard; Hall Monitoring at Brooklyn School Turns Deadly Serious
The principal of Eastern District High School in Brooklyn has forsaken some regular visits with teachers and mounds of paperwork to prowl the halls in search of nomadic youths.
Linked by a crackling walkie-talkie to his security force of 15 school safety officers, Floyd Green has become the chief law-enforcement officer at his school, but not by choice.
Mr.
Green once had a security administrator who did much of the walking around.
But the security chief, whose stern face made many students scatter, vanished in December 1990 as a result of deep budget cuts.


Few Tears for a Blocked Plastics Ban
When the Suffolk County Legislature voted this week to block most of a landmark law banning a host of plastic products, from supermarket shopping bags to foam takeout cups, few tears were shed by environmentalists.
In 1988, when the law, the first of its kind in the nation, was passed, it had been a rallying point for environmentalists in something of a holy war against an eternal and evil substance called plastic, piling up in landfills across the country.


CHRONICLE
Syracuse University is in the news more for basketball than for literature.
But its literary achievements will be celebrated on Tuesday, when some of the most illustrious graduates and faculty of the university gather at Lubin House, its center in Manhattan, to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the school's graduate program in creative writing.
Among those expected are Jay McInerney, Ken Auletta, Michael Herr, William Safire and Richard Elman.
They are all graduates of either the university or of the creative writing program.


Rauch Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hadron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tarkanian and Foes Enjoy Some Calm
For one day at least, following what seems certain to be Jerry Tarkanian's final game as the basketball coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, both sides in his bitter dispute with the administration sounded happy and relieved, if exhausted.
A decision to hold a closed session of the university system's Board of Regents on March 12 in Reno, at which U.N.L.V.'s president, Robert Maxson, will answer questions about the basketball program, was announced today as a means of placing an angry debate behind the university, the city and the state.


Artistic Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.D.I.C. Seen Still Wavering on Settlement With Milken
With important court hearings scheduled today and tomorrow that could well determine Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s future, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was still wavering yesterday about whether to sign off on a $1.3 billion civil settlement reached last month with Michael R. Milken and other former executives of the firm.
"The deal is still very much alive, but they haven't completed their research on it," said L. William Seidman, a former F.D.I.C. chairman who remains in close contact with agency officials.
He said the agency seemed most concerned about releasing Mr.
Milken from potential liability in lawsuits it could still bring concerning the savings-and-loan crisis in exchange for the $500 million it stands to get under the settlement.


Corrections Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Incumbent; Schwarzkopf Offers Praise, Not Endorsement
Stung by Patrick J. Buchanan's showing in the Georgia primary but hoping to stop the bleeding from his right flank with his contrition on taxes, President Bush swept back into the South today with Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf at his side.
But the hero of the Persian Gulf war came to praise Mr.
Bush, not to endorse him, exactly.


Two Men on Street Shot in Bath Beach
Two men were shot and seriously wounded last night in Bath Beach, Brooklyn, by a group of gunmen who unleashed a barrage of gunfire from a passing car, the police said.
Michael Giangregorio, 21 years old, was shot at least six times in the back, and his roommate, John Dunn, 29, was shot four times in the back and arms, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.
Both victims were taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island.


Fair Grounds Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Charter Golf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Inter-Tel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gaines Coming Back After a Long Illness
He had to give up his hopes of making the 1992 Olympic team, but six months after he was stricken with Guillain-Barre syndrome, ROWDY GAINES is back in the water, swimming as fast as he can.
"I'm feeling good now," he said yesterday in Indianapolis where he dropped in on the United States Olympic Trials, but not as an Olympic hopeful.


Offshore Pipelines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Lancit Media Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Great 'Hello' Mystery Is Solved
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL invented the telephone.
But Thomas Alva Edison coined the greeting.
The word "hello," it appears, came straight from the fertile brain of the wizard of Menlo Park, N.J., who concocted the sonorous syllables to resolve one of the first crises of techno-etiquette: What do you say to start a telephone conversation?
Two contemporaries of Edison credited him with the word, but too vaguely for Allen Koenigsberg, a classics professor at Brooklyn College who has a passion for early phonographs and their history.
Resolved to sort out the "hello" mystery, Mr.
Koenigsberg embarked on a tortuous search five years ago that led him, finally and triumphantly, to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company Archives in lower Manhattan, where he found an unpublished letter by Edison.
Dated Aug. 15, 1877, it is addressed to one T.B.A.
David, president of the Central District and Printing Telegraph Company in Pittsburgh.
Mr.
David was preparing to introduce the telephone to that city.


House Fire Toughest Loss For Floyd
For years, the gala event of the Doral Ryder Open had been Raymond Floyd's annual party at his lavish home on the waters of Biscayne Bay.
But this year, the party was canceled on Feb. 19.
That was the date Floyd's 12,000 square foot, six-bedroom estate on Indian Creek Island was destroyed by fire.
Floyd's wife, Maria, and his three children, escaped unhurt.


Handex Environmental Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long Island Lighting reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Donegal Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whittaker Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Abroad at Home; The Attorney Corporal
James Benkard is a senior partner in the old-line New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, where he has mostly represented large corporations and securities firms.
He is 54, a Republican, a graduate of Harvard College and Columbia Law School.
Those credentials are not enough, these days, to keep someone from being politically suspect to the Bush Administration.
So Mr.
Benkard has learned.
The story is informative.


New Merrill Director Of Municipal Markets
In Merrill Lynch's second juggling of executives in a week, the firm named Edward E. Sheridan yesterday to be director of municipal markets, replacing John Miller.
A week ago, the firm said that Mr.
Sheridan had become head of sales in junk bonds at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, in addition to his job as head of global fixed-income sales.
Yesterday, Merrill said that Joseph H. Moglia would head sales for junk bonds, while Mr.
Sheridan was being promoted to oversee municipal issues.


Critic's Notebook; The Reaganite Ethos, With Roy Cohn As a Dark Metaphor
At the end of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," a new American play that has become a runaway sensation here, the theater rocks with deafening apocalyptic thunderclaps, a proscenium-size Old Glory explodes in a burst of lightning, and a beautiful angel descends from heaven to retrieve a young man who is dying of AIDS.
"
Very
Stephen Spielberg," says the awed young man. "The Great Work begins," announces the Angel. "The Messenger has arrived."
It says a lot about Mr.
Kushner's huge talent that this outrageous finale, far from seeming as over-the-top as it sounds, is an appropriate, cathartic and, yes, Spielbergian conclusion to the three-and-a-half hours of provocative, witty and deeply upsetting drama that have come before.
Mr.
Kushner, who is 35 years old and lives in Brooklyn, may well be creating a great work in "Angels in America," a two-part epic of which this multi-layered evening is only the first installment.
Without question he is a messenger who demands to be heard.


Accounts
*
Tyco Toys Inc., Mount Laurel, N.J., to Mingo Group Inc., New York, for a new doll, called Kenya, to be marketed to black consumers.
A print and television campaign is scheduled to begin in the fall.
Billings were not disclosed.


Cable TV Concerns to Own Local Telephone Company
Two of the nation's largest cable television companies, Cox Enterprises Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc., will join in owning the Teleport Communications Group Inc., one of several tiny companies that could someday break the $100 billion monopoly on local telephone service.
At present, cable TV companies cannot offer telephone services, but Federal regulators may be moving toward easing the restriction.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SPECTER OF NEW CAMBODIAN CHAOS
Four months after the signing of a peace treaty, Cambodians warn that only the swift arrival of United Nations forces can prevent anarchy.
The Government has stopped providing medical care, education and sanitation in rural areas.
A1  MON DIEU!
Political correctness threatens "La Marseillaise," France's revolutionary anthem.
Campaigners would replace martial lyrics with brotherly phrases to show that French patriots no longer dream of spilling the "tainted blood" of foreigners.
A1


U.S. Expects Ex-Soviet Republics To Get $4 Billion I.M.F. Aid Soon
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the republics of the former Soviet Union could be expected to receive about $4 billion in assistance from the International Monetary Fund in the near future.
Testifying before a House subcommittee, Mr.
Brady also said the Bush Administration was renewing its call for Congress to approve $12 billion more for the I.M.F. so the organization can increase its loans to the third world and the former Soviet bloc.
Since World War II, the United States has contributed $24 billion to the fund.


From Ukraine, a Show Of Political Cartoons
IN the Ukrainian language, lapas means a slap in the face, not a bad name for a group of young political cartoonists.
In 1988, at the Kiev Institute of Art in Ukraine, a group of students banded together as the Youthful Poster Lapas.
A show of 17 their posters, along with political cartoons from Ratusha, a newspaper published in Lviv, is at the Ukrainian Museum, 203 Second Avenue (12th Street) in Manhattan, through March 15.


Costar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ALTHOUGH rollers are the primary tools for interior paint jobs, they can't do all the work.
Wielding a paintbrush skillfully, then, is crucial.
First, choose well-made brushes that are appropriate for the areas to be painted.
Generally, three brushes are needed for most rooms.


President Is Appointed For a New Schwab Unit
The Charles Schwab Corporation announced the opening yesterday of the Charles Schwab Trust Company, and named Harvey A. Rowen president and chief executive.
Based in San Francisco, Charles Schwab is the nation's largest discount brokerage firm.
"The Trust Company is a requested extension to the services our affiliated discount broker now provides to 3,000 independent financial advisers who manage over 83,000 client accounts at Schwab nationwide," said Mr.
Rowen, the former chairman of the trust committee of the Merrill Lynch Trust Company.
Neither the advisers nor Schwab, as a dealer-broker, are allowed to provide trust services, which include holding assets and require that a company be chartered as a limited-purpose bank.


Diana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Nestor Almendros, Cinematographer, Dies at 61
Nestor Almendros, an Academy Award-winning cinematographer, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.
He died of lymphoma, said Robert Benton, the director and a friend and colleague.


Oak Hill Sportswear Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bob Evans Farms reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24


Heartland Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cognitive Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Don't Create a War Between the Generations
To the Editor:
In "Orphans of the Ballot Box" (Op-Ed, Feb. 6) Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane perpetuate the myth that "the elderly can pressure Congress as a unified voting bloc." Like many bashers of the elderly, they are apparently unaware that the votes and political attitudes of older people are as diverse as those of any other age group.
Exit polls conducted by The New York Times-CBS News Poll during Presidential and Congressional elections indicate clearly that older people distribute their votes among candidates in roughly the same proportions as do younger groups of American voters.


Natural Alternatives International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ABUSE CASE: TROUBLED HISTORY
A 24-year-old Brooklyn mother charged in the beating death of her 3-year-old daughter had a history of problems caring for her four children, an official with access to case records said.
Her children had been taken away two years ago by caseworkers because she had been leaving them unattended and because they were filthy and infected with lice.
B3.
RIFT IN TRANSIT UNION
As more than 32,000 New York City transit workers began voting this week on a new three-year contract, a deep split has developed within their union.
Many members have called for the rejection of the pact endorsed by their leaders, saying that it contains givebacks on health care and inadequate salary increases.
B3.
WOODHULL IS SAID TO HAVE FAILED REVIEW
In another blow to New York City's hospital system, the major regulatory group has decided to withdraw its accreditation from one of the city's major municipal hospitals, Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn, after concluding that it does not review enough surgical procedures, hospital administrators said.
B3. 2 held in robberies of 16 Korean businesses.
B2.
Dinkins and Jackson call for new voter drive and crusade against crime.
B3.
Suspect in officer's killing commits suicide at Rikers Island.
B4.
REGION  TRANSIT PLAN FOR NEW JERSEY
In a move intended to provide thousands of construction jobs while improving mass transit and repairing the worst of New Jersey's battered roads, the Transportation Commissioner proposed a $1.5 billion transportation program, the largest in the state's history.
A1.
FLORIO ON FLORIO
Insisting that he "had the right medicine" when he took office two years ago but conceding that he had "a lousy bedside manner," Governor Florio went to Washington to apologize and to proselytize.
In an unusual midterm report, he said he had made mistakes but supported his policies as a guide to take the country out of the recession and into the next century.
B6.
A DEADLY STANDOFF
An 18-hour standoff between the police and a man who had barricaded himself inside a Plainfield, N.J., mansion with the body of his mother-in-law ended when the man shot himself, officials said.
B7.
ENVIRONMENTAL OBSOLESCENCE
When the Suffolk County Legislature voted to block most of a landmark law banning a host of plastic products environmentalists shed few tears.
The have come to view it as something of an anachronism and an embarrassment: plastics, they realized, when tightly compacted in a landfill, are not much worse than paper.
News Analysis, B7.
INTEGRATING THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
More than 20 years after court orders cracked open a handful of Long Island's traditionally white volunteer fire departments, a dispute over upgrading a park for the exclusive use of volunteer firefighters in a racially mixed neighborhood has reopened questions about the makeup of the departments.
B7.
Renewing a driver's license, painlessly.
Westport Journal, B8.
Plan approved for Roosevelt Raceway.
B9.


Casey's General Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cameco Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Treasuries Mixed in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in light trading yesterday, as market participants began an uneasy wait for the release of the February employment statistics tomorrow.
Dealers said most of the activity was concentrated among short- and long-term securities, with little action in intermediate issues.
With the Federal Reserve Board unlikely to ease its monetary policy soon to stimulate the economy further, traders said there was selling of shorter-term bills and notes.


Democracy, Good and Messy
Although Tuesday's primary results winnowed the Democratic Presidential field to, at most, three plausible contenders, the Democrats are a long way from choosing a standard-bearer.
That worries some of the party faithful.
It shouldn't.
The primary season is never tidy and often exasperating.
But the longer it goes, the more we learn.
Democracy is served.
What was learned on Tuesday?
Senator Bob Kerrey is virtually finished, Senator Tom Harkin nearly so.
Jerry Brown did well enough in his native West to stay the course, at least through Super Tuesday.
Meanwhile, Pat Buchanan now seems capable of getting one-third of the vote wherever he goes, a measure of Republican discontent and President Bush's oddly disjointed campaign.
The most striking finding, judging by exit polls, was how sharply the vote for Bill Clinton and Paul Tsongas divided along class and racial lines.
Blacks and poorer whites voted overwhelmingly for Mr.
Clinton, while high-income, better-educated whites favored Mr.
Tsongas.
Mr.
Clinton outpolled Mr.
Tsongas among blacks by 5 to 1 in Georgia and 3 to 1 in Maryland.
Eight of ten Georgia voters without a high school education voted for Mr.
Clinton; Mr.
Tsongas did far better among college graduates in Georgia and won decisively among graduates in Maryland and Colorado.
In Maryland, Mr.
Clinton beat Mr.
Tsongas by a 2-to-1 ratio among voters with incomes of less than $15,000.
The figures were exactly reversed among voters making more than $75,000.
There are two cautionary notes for Mr.
Tsongas here.
Mr.
Clinton's strong showing among blacks augurs well for him on Super Tuesday, when seven contests will be held in Southern and border states where blacks are a significant factor.
And looking toward November, educated upper-income voters -- the quiche-and-Volvo crowd who turned out for Mr.
Tsongas -- tend to exercise disproportionate influence in Democratic primaries; they loom less large in general elections.
A more important cautionary note applies to all candidates: States are different, not only in size and composition but in the rules and trappings of their primaries and caucuses.
There's no guarantee that Mr.
Clinton will be able to duplicate his Georgia showing in, say, Florida.
Even if he does, Mr.
Tsongas should do well in the Northeast and, barring an across-the-board disaster, is likely to be alive and kicking when the campaign moves to the big Midwestern battlegrounds of Michigan and Illinois on March 17.
On the Republican side, a harried Mr.
Bush simply can't shake Mr.
Buchanan, many of whose supporters said they hoped mainly to send a "message" to the President.
Has he gotten it?
He says he grieves for those wounded by the recession, yet so far offers no organized countermeasures.
Meanwhile he missed a fine opportunity in Georgia to repeat the healing themes of his State of the Union address -- his warnings against "scapegoating," "finger-pointing" and "racism" -- and confront Mr.
Buchanan's divisive appeals head on.
Instead he apologized for his sound reversal on tax increases, which merely made him look insecure.
All this would have been impossible to predict even four months ago.
A group of little-known Democrats seeking to reinvent their party; a rogue Republican; a President searching for his soul.
All very messy.
All unexpected.
All interesting.


Standoff, Gunman and a Mutilated Body
An 18-hour standoff between the police and a man who had barricaded himself inside a mansion with the body of his mother-in-law ended today when the man shot and wounded himself, Union County officials said.
The body of the man's 74-year-old mother-in-law was found in the house, her hands severed and an ax nearby, the officials said.


American Consumer Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Aux Barricades! 'La Marseillaise' Is Besieged
Exactly 200 years after France's stirringly revolutionary national anthem was composed, "les enfants de la patrie" are once again being called to arms -- this time to defend "La Marseillaise" against an attack by political correctness.
The offensive has taken the form of a campaign to replace the anthem's most bloodthirsty lyrics with more brotherly phrases to demonstrate that French patriots no longer dream of spilling the "tainted blood" of foreigners.
Instead, the new message would be kinder and gentler.


Kerr Glass Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Violence in Nairobi Draws a Warning by U.S.
Violence continued in the Kenyan capital today when the police fired tear gas canisters and clubbed demonstrators protesting the forceful eviction of women on a hunger strike from a city park.
The unrest came as Washington warned that Kenya's new era of multiparty politics was being threatened by official violence and intimidation.


Not Without the Rain Forests
With rain forests disappearing and species becoming extinct, many possible sources of drugs may vanish in coming decades.
"Nature is still full of all these compounds that no one really knows what they do," said Thomas Eisner, a professor of biology at Cornell University.
"Species are disappearing faster than we are looking chemically."


Athena Neurosciences reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thousands of Burmese Said to Flee Drive by Army
A harsh dry-season campaign by the Burmese military against an array of ethnic and religious minorities is driving thousands of refugees across international borders daily, say United Nations officials and American experts on Myanmar, formerly Burma.
They say the Burmese are crossing into China, Laos and Thailand as well as Bangladesh, where a steady stream of refugees has turned in the last week into a flood.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Finds a Theme: He Is Not Paul Tsongas
Gov. Bill Clinton thinks he has hit his stride.
He has the message he wants: an us-versus-them economic pitch.
He has the electoral credibility he wants, thanks to an unexpectedly solid win in the Georgia primary and two respectable second-place finishes in Colorado and Maryland.


K Mart Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 29


Books of The Times; Growing Up Disdaining The 'Talented Tenth'
High Cotton  By Darryl Pinckney 309 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
"No one sat me down and told me I was a Negro," reads the opening sentence of Darryl Pinckney's eloquent first novel, "High Cotton." "That was something I figured out on the sly, late in my childhood career as a snoop, like discovering that babies didn't come from an exchange of spinach during a kiss. The great thing about finding out I was a Negro was that I could look forward to going places in the by and by that I would not have been asked to as a white boy."


Lawyers Title reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ERLY Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Medgroup Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Braves' Eight Men In
Seven Atlanta Braves, including DAVID JUSTICE and STEVE AVERY, agreed to one-year contracts yesterday.
DEION SANDERS did not come to terms and the club automatically renewed his contract of $560,000.
MARK LEMKE, BRIAN HUNTER, KENT MERCKER, GREG OLSON and FRANCISCO CABRERA joined Justice and Avery in agreeing to one-year 1992 contracts.
The eight players, each with fewer than three years service in the major leagues, are not eligible for salary arbitration.


Durakon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Friction Rises as Ukraine and Russia Clash Over Ex-Soviet Armed Forces
Depending on who's talking, Ukraine's tussle with Russia over the former Soviet armed forces is either the front line in the fight for independent statehood or a dangerous folly.
Either way, Ukraine's insistence on forming its own armed forces -- with its claims to the Black Sea Fleet and the oath of allegiance asked of the 700,000 military men stationed on Ukrainian soil -- has become the main source of growing friction with Russia.


General Trustco of Canada Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hornbeck Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fighting Guns With Fame
In an effort to persuade gun-toting teen-agers in New York City to relinquish their weapons, the city's Police Department has begun reaching out to celebrities, including Arnold Schwarzenegger, for an anti-gun campaign.
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said officials representing the department have tried to reach Mr.
Schwarzenegger, as well as other actors, rap musicians and sports figures, in an effort to get them to join the department in a battle against what Mr.
Brown calls a "cultural acceptance of violence" prompted by movies and television.


Nutmeg Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Alan Roth, 74, Dies; Baseball Statistician
Alan Roth, a pioneer in getting teams to use baseball statistics as a tactic, died on Tuesday at Brotman Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 74 years old and suffered a heart attack, his family said.
It was in 1947 that Mr.
Roth, a native of Montreal who had worked as a statistician for the Canadiens and the National Hockey League, approached Branch Rickey, president of the Brooklyn Dodgers, with a proposition that would transform somewhat how the game was played.


Pool Energy Services Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastern Europe Foils All but the Hardiest Of Western Investors
More than two years after the fall of Communism, it now seems clear that the early dreams of a gold rush to Eastern Europe were vastly overblown.
While there has been a trickle of investors -- like General Motors, which announced last week that it was setting up a joint venture to make cars in Poland -- their numbers have remained small, and the sums of money much less than what is needed.


Harlyn Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hearx Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Events: Exploring Gardens, Old and New
A Historic House  Community Church, Sycamore Avenue at Orville Court, Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.; (914) 265-2029.
The Garden Conservancy is sponsoring a conference on March 13 on an unexecuted 1845 landscape design for the Hermitage, a 1750 house in Ho-Ho-Kus, and future plans for the property.
After the conference, participants may visit the Hermitage.
Fee, including lunch, $85.
Registration is required.
Garden Tours  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue (off Eastern Parkway), Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.


Renewal of Pact Upsets Maas
Kevin Maas was clearly unhappy after learning today that he was among six players whose contracts were renewed by the Yankees.
Maas was paid $250,000 last season, in which he hit 23 homers and drove in 63 runs.
He was given a $5,000 raise after first asking for $325,000, then lowering his request to $300,000.


Apple to Adopt Pen-Based Units
Apple Computer Inc. said it would give its Macintosh computer the ability to be operated by a pen instead of a keyboard and mouse controller in the coming years.
At a conference here on the company's software plans, Apple's chief executive, John Sculley, also clarified how the Macintosh operating system would compare with a new operating system being developed by Taligent, a joint venture of Apple and I.B.M.


Dianon Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Microwave Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Gravano's World: Gotti Witness Gives Glimpse Into Mafia Life
In his usual rasp of a voice, Salvatore Gravano admitted yesterday to duties that surprised no one who has listened to his three days of body-strewn testimony in John Gotti's trial.
Sitting stone still with his hands in his lap, Mr.
Gravano said he knew how to get body bags and where to dump the people he had helped kill, a total of 19 men.
Then, speaking so softly that spectators wondered if they had heard him right, Mr.
Gravano revealed the number of times he himself pulled the trigger: one.


Bailey Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Review/Television; Sununu Joins 'Crossfire' Opinion Program
John H. Sununu, lately chief of staff to the President of the United States, became co-host of a talk show this week.
The ascension took place on Monday on "Crossfire" (7:30 P.M. on CNN), a weeknightly half-hour of aggressively expressed, uncomplicated opinions delivered in a spirit of absolute certitude and combative bonhomie.
Mr.
Sununu fitted right in.
His senior colleague, Michael Kinsley, welcomed him to "the Buchanan memorial chair," the former occupant being otherwise engaged for the Presidential season.
The guests were Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, a liberal Democrat from Ohio, and Senator Trent Lott, a Republican conservative from Mississippi, who can be counted on to agree on nothing and be sure about everything.
The subject was "The Politics of Taxes."


Bio-Vascular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Nets, Sultans of Sulk, Tumble to Lakers
After disposing of four straight playoff-caliber units the Nets crumbled, 101-92, tonight to a Los Angeles Laker team that is staring the draft lottery in the face.
A parade of Nets cried to the referees -- especially when the Lakers were locating nearly every offensive rebound in the decisive third quarter -- but the men with whistles were hardly sympathetic.
Five technical fouls were called on the pouting Nets, including two against a disenchanted Coach Bill Fitch, who was ejected in the third quarter.


International American Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Grey Network For Communications
After recently being assigned four business-to-business accounts with total billings exceeding $60 million, Grey Advertising Inc. has formed an in-house network specializing in business communications.
The network, called Grey Business Worldwide, has billings of about $350 million and offices in 20 countries.
Klein &amp; Grey, a Grey unit in London, will serve as the network's lead agency.
Among its accounts are the four new assignments, from Akzo Coatings of Amsterdam, ICL of London, Raytheon of Lexington, Mass., and Nokia Mobile Telephones of Helsinki, Finland.


Intelligent Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suspect's Death Is Ruled Suicide
A man accused of killing an off-duty Bronx police officer in January committed suicide by strangling himself with a bed sheet and a drawstring in his Rikers Island jail cell early yesterday morning, officials said.
Yesterday afternoon, the city's Medical Examiner ruled the death a suicide by hanging, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the examiner's office.
It was the first suicide in the city correction system this year, said Thomas Antenen, a spokesman for the Department of Correction.


Trenton Transit Plan Calls for $1.5 Billion In '93 Construction
In a move intended to provide thousands of construction jobs while improving mass transit and repairing the worst of the state's battered roads, Transportation Commissioner Thomas M. Downs today proposed a $1.5 billion transportation program, the largest in New Jersey's history.
Mr.
Downs said that more than half the projects would be financed by the Federal Government and that the rest would be paid for by the state's Transportation Trust Fund.
He said they would require no increase in the pending $15.7 billion budget.


Judge Fears U.P.I. Shutdown
The judge overseeing United Press International's bankruptcy proceedings said yesterday that the news agency was in danger of shutting down next month and gave creditors the right to fashion a plan to save it.
After reviewing U.P.I.'s financial data, Judge Francis Conrad said there was a strong possibility that U.P.I.
"won't be in business by the end of April."


Edo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Study Finds Benefit in Test for Colorectal Cancer
New research suggests that a screening technique in which doctors use instruments to view the colon and rectum may greatly reduce the risk of death from cancers that arise there.
But the researchers found that the tests need be performed only every 10 years, rebutting arguments by some health organizations that patients should be tested every 3 to 5 years.


Fronteer Directory Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coda Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


President Noodle
President Bush's abject apology for raising taxes in 1990 is doubly dismaying.
In a single utterance he managed both to tarnish his own good deed and reveal an appalling lack of conviction.
Mr.
Bush acted responsibly in 1990 when he signed a deficit-reduction package that included a modest tax hike.
Had he stood behind his 1988 know-nothing campaign pledge -- "Read my lips: No new taxes" -- he would have brought the Federal Government to a screeching halt or triggered an orgy of irresponsible spending cuts.


Safety Railway Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
200 Feared Dead in Blast At Coal Mine in Turkey
More than 200 miners were believed dead after a methane gas explosion deep underground at a state-run Turkish coal mine.
Rescue workers said they had abandoned hope for those still trapped.
Page A7.
Israel Arrests 4 in Killings
Israel said four Israeli Arabs had been arrested and charged with hacking and stabbing three Jewish soldiers to death.
Page A8.
Mideast Talks End
Israelis and Arabs ended their third round of peace talks as divided on substance as they were when they began four months ago.
Page A9.
No Longer Wed to the Mob
At the John Gotti trial, Salvatore Gravano has revealed himself as a cool, professional killer.
He has also revealed a lot about the mob.
Page B1.


F.B.I. Looks Into Shift in Drug Policy Chief's Political Funds
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has opened an inquiry into whether Bob Martinez, the Bush Administration's director of drug control policy, improperly spent funds left over from his unsuccessful campaign for re-election as Governor of Florida in 1990, Federal officials said today.
At issue are two checks totaling $63,644 that Mr.
Martinez sent to the Florida Republican Party last fall.
The checks were accompanied by a letter -- on Mr.
Martinez's official White House stationery and dated Oct. 30 -- in which the former Governor told Florida Republican officials that he hoped the money would be used to support the re-election of President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press in some editions yesterday about the actress Sandy Dennis referred incorrectly to the actor Eric Roberts.
He is alive.
The obituary also included a film incorrectly among her credits.
She did not appear in "Same Time, Next Year."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Pura Fe  Dance Theater Workshop
Near the end of her concert Monday evening at Dance Theater Workshop, Pura Fe asked the audience to stand while four drummers chanted and beat a ceremonial rhythm in an "honor song" for the tenor saxophonist Jim Pepper.
Pepper, who died last month, was known best for having written "Witchi-Tai-To," one of many compositions in which he adapted American Indian songs into a jazz idiom.


Wainoco Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dick Clark Productions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saudi Prince Asks Approval To Keep His Citicorp Shares
Al-Waleed bin Talal, the Saudi Arabian prince who bought $590 million of Citicorp preferred stock early last year and was expected to dispose of Citicorp common that he already held, is now seeking permission from the Federal Reserve to keep the Citicorp common stock, which has risen smartly in two and a half months.
The combination of preferred and common stock would give the prince 14.4 percent of all Citicorp's shares, putting him above the 10 percent level that requires approval of the Federal Reserve Board.
The Federal Reserve received the prince's application last week and has not yet scheduled a meeting to consider it.


John Collier Jr., 78, A Teacher, Writer And Photographer
John Collier Jr., a documentary photographer and teacher, died on Feb. 25 while on vacation in San Jose, Costa Rica.
He was 78 years old and had homes in Muir Beach, Calif., and Talpa, N.M.
He died after surgery for internal bleeding, said his wife, Mary.


Miltope Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastern Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cadema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Branson Looks to Sell All or Most of Virgin Music
In what would be the biggest divestiture of his career, Richard Branson, the British entrepreneur, is on the verge of selling all or most of his Virgin Music, one of the world's largest recording companies.
"I think this is going to rapidly move to a conclusion within the next week or so," Will Whitehorn, a spokesman for Mr.
Branson, said today of a bidding contest.
Some people close to the negotiations said a deal, which could exceed $1 billion, could be reached within a day or two.


'91 TV Revenue Off; First Drop Since '71
Buffeted by the recession and the Persian Gulf war, television advertising revenues fell last year for the first time since 1971, when cigarette commercials left the airwaves.
Revenues totaled $21.4 billion, down 5.3 percent from $22.6 billion in 1990, the Television Bureau of Advertising announced yesterday.
Network revenues dropped 5.9 percent, to $9.5 billion from $10.1 billion.
Spot television revenues dropped 8.8 percent, to $5.2 billion from $5.7 billion.
Local revenues dropped 3.8 percent, to $5 billion from $5.2 billion.
The sole increase came in national syndication revenues, which included results for the Fox network; they rose 18.8 percent, to $1.9 billion from $1.6 billion.


Commercial Cartoon Furor Grows
In the latest skirmish over marketing to children, a coalition of advocacy organizations is seeking to block a proposed television show that would star Chester Cheetah, an animated character originally intended to sell snack food.
They are concerned that there will be a rush of similar characters from ads into programs.
Indeed, there are also plans for a syndicated cartoon series that would star Cheesasaurus Rex, a cheese-colored dinosaur that appears in advertising for Kraft Macaroni and Cheese Dinner.


CSC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


XOMA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.75
6.55
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.02
6.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.11
6.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.07
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.91
8.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.76
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Major Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McGrath Rentcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Autotrol reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interpoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


HPSC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Agassi Dodges Defeat In Desert of Drowsiness
Last month, Andre Agassi lost his confidence in Europe and hustled home to the United States to rebuild it.
He hired a traveling coach, Brian Teacher, adopted a four-hour daily practice regimen, and decided, for a change, to take a businesslike approach to his business.
But despite his good intentions, his game refused to reassemble itself.
Agassi, seeded 10th here, barely survived his first-round match against Jaime Yzaga Tuesday night at the Newsweek Champions Cup.
He emerged from it shaken.
Although he was just a short spin from his Las Vegas home, he entered the second round in a European frame of mind: adrift.


Insituform East reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rolland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Jazz; The 60's Revisited by Jones and Turre
The jury on the 1960's is still out, and two shows at the Blue Note on Tuesday night, one by the drummer Elvin Jones and the other by the trombonist Steve Turre, showed exactly why.
Both bands mixed ambition with real inventiveness, and both tried to make listening something more than a simple esthetic experience, but it didn't always work.
Mr.
Jones rewrote jazz drumming in the 1960's as a member of the John Coltrane quartet.
He made the phrase, in all its variety, more important than the rigid delineation of the bar line.
As a result, he opened up jazz to a loose, more fluid rhythmic ideal.
His innovations reflected the era: there's a searching quality to his playing, a willingness to experiment.


Democrats Revive Anti-Crime Bill, Knowing It May Be Killed Again
Countering a Republican effort to portray them as soft on crime, Democratic senators today resurrected an anti-crime bill killed last year that would expand the death penalty to 50 Federal crimes.
There is little likelihood that the Democrats will have more success this year than last, but they hope to gain political advantage from the dispute.


Krisch American Inns Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IG Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Perez Brothers, Yankees Attract Opposites
They grew up on the dusty streets of San Cristobal in the Dominican Republic, with no bats or gloves and sometimes with no shoes.
The memories are not always fond, but they still come easily to the Perez brothers, Pascual and Melido, even though they seem so long ago and far away.
They are here now, together for the first time as teammates in the major leagues, starting pitchers for the Yankees, brothers and friends.
And competitors in some ways, too.
But as close as they seem, they also remain opposites in style and demeanor.


George Cree, 55, Dies; Was Theater Manager
George Cree, a theater manager and concert producer who worked at several New York City theaters and concert halls, died yesterday at North Shore Hospital, in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 55 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.
He died of AIDS, said his father, George S. Cree.


Essay; China's 'Hama Rules'
When Syria's dictator, Hafez al-Assad, decided to deal with an intifada of Muslim fundamentalists in 1982, he did not bother with rubber bullets, deportations or the killing of a neighboring terrorist leader.
On the contrary, he leveled his guns on the city of Hama and wiped out its center.
About 20,000 people were bulldozed into mass graves.
All such rules of firm dealing are now called "Hama Rules."


Be Presidential. Push Foreign Policy
Patrick Buchanan is a thorn in George Bush's side, and he will remain so.
In this season of political discontent, the President faces an almost automatic protest vote of 30-something percent.
But he is not the issue.
The Administration's political challenge, still, is to find definition and a clear raison d'etre for a second term.
The good news is that what was self-inflicted can be self-corrected.


CHRONICLE
Rabbi MENACHEM M. SCHNEERSON, the leader of the Lubavitch Hasidic movement, is recuperating at the group's headquarters in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, after suffering a stroke on Monday afternoon.
The Grand Rabbi, who is 89 years old, was visiting the grave of his father-in-law and predecessor in the position, Rabbi Joseph I. Schneersohn, at the Old Montefiore Cemetery in Queens when he became ill, according to Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, a spokesman for the movment.


Intelligent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Elster's Shoulder Is Still Not in Shape
The game was simulated. The concerns after it, though, were authentic.
The Mets, without a bona fide backup shortstop on their roster or in their system, have become increasingly anxious about the health of Kevin Elster's right shoulder, a fear that was underscored by Elster's failure to play the field today.
And so the club's misgivings about Elster's less than dramatic progress are deepening as the number of weeks separating them from the start of the season shrink.


Sulcus Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Records Show Mother's Neglect Preceded a 3-Year-Old's Death
The 24-year-old Brooklyn mother charged in the beating death of her 3-year-old daughter on Tuesday had a history of problems caring for her four children, an official with access to case records said yesterday.
Her children had been taken from her two years ago by city caseworkers because she had left them unattended for long periods and because they were filthy and infected with lice and ringworms, said the official, who insisted on anonymity.
A Family Court judge ordered the mother, Barbara Giraud, to attend a parental-skills class, find suitable housing and submit to random drug testing before she could get her children back.


Public Broadcasting Bill Is Sidelined
A bill to provide financing for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting has collided with conservative Senate Republicans, who say public television stations display a consistent liberal bias in their choice of programs.
The conservatives have threatened to prepare a flurry of amendments that they say would achieve "balance in programming." Today, faced with the introduction of those amendments, Democratic leaders pulled the bill from the Senate floor.
Debate on the bill could resume next week.


Compromise Crime Bill Lacks Toughness


Digital Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Filenet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gravano Recalls Sending Gotti $100,000 a Month
Testifying that he had controlled the Gambino crime family's business interests in the construction industry, Salvatore Gravano said yesterday that he gave $100,000 a month to John Gotti, portrayed as the family's boss.
Mr.
Gravano, one of the highest-ranking Mafia figures ever to turn informer, testified in Mr.
Gotti's murder-racketeering trial that he handled its interest in the construction industry, while various Gambino captains controlled parts of the garbage, garment and shipping industries in the New York area.


Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; AS FIELD NARROWS, 2 DEMOCRATS SPAR ON ECONOMIC PLANS
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas began fresh bids to sell their rival prescriptions for the ailing economy today after victories in Tuesday's elections -- a landslide for Mr.
Clinton in Georgia and three less sweeping successes for Mr.
Tsongas.
But as they began campaigning for the 11 Democratic primaries and caucuses scheduled for March 10, Super Tuesday, their head-to-head fight was complicated by the emergence of Edmund G. Brown Jr., a surprise winner in Colorado, as an iconoclastic challenger with appeal for young voters, environmentalists and other Democrats dissatisfied with the status quo.


Petrolane Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Michael Robertson, who joined McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc. in December as deputy chairman and chief creative officer, was named chief executive of the agency's advertising operations.
Robert H. Cherins, who had been chairman and chief executive of McCaffrey's advertising operations, was named chief executive of its direct-marketing operations.
The agency said the shifts were unrelated to its loss of the Mercedes-Benz of North America account to Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc. *
Robert M. Lynch was named executive vice president and chief operating officer at Carrafiello Diehl &amp; Associates, Irvington, N.Y.
He had been vice president of marketing at the consumer health products division of American Cyanamid Co.


Idec Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan to Get L. L. Bean's Outdoor Chic
The United States has a new weapon in its battle to reduce its yawning trade deficit with Japan: L. L. Bean's Maine Hunting Shoe.
After years of primarily relying on its catalogue, a big store in Freeport, Me., and three factory outlets to sell its products, L. L. Bean Inc. signed a distribution agreement today to sell its products in a new chain of retail shops -- in Japan.


Wisconsin Central Transportation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arden International Kitchens reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Growing
I HAVE discovered that I am a felon.
And so are a lot of you old-fashioned gardeners out there.
Anyone who grows that beautiful old poppy, Papaver somniferum, is breaking the Federal law.
Most of you probably know that, but don't care.
Gardeners are independent sorts obeying natural laws.


Martinez Signs Pact
Right-hander RAMON MARTINEZ, who had complained about the final offer he received from the Los Angeles Dodgers, abruptly changed direction and signed a one-year contract yesterday worth $725,000.
He had originally asked for $1.2 million.
Martinez was seven days short of being eligible for arbitration and it had been expected his contract would be renewed before the start of the exhibition season today.


Hemacare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Black Swan Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rescued From Flood Waters in Houston


Napco Security Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Harkin Is Struggling to Stay in Race
Out of cash and practically out of the running, Senator Tom Harkin's campaign regrouped here today with a strategy to stagger through next week's 11 contests so that the Senator can take advantage of his labor ties when the race moves to the industrial Midwest a week later.
Mr.
Harkin's advisers said they would try to keep the campaign alive first by concentrating on Saturday's primary in South Carolina, where they are aggressively courting black voters.


Hycor Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Tote Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Alan Mills, Anthony Telford, Jim Poole and Jim Lewis, pitchers.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Conine, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Announced that Dick Hackett, assistant to the president, is leaving his day-to-day duties but will be retained as a consultant.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Leius, third baseman; Paul Sorrento, first baseman; and Tom Edens, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Renewed the contracts of Kevin Maas, designated hitter-first baseman; Charlie Hayes, third baseman; Bernie Williams, outfielder; John Ramos, catcher; and Jeff Johnson and Wade Taylor, pitchers.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Mike Bordick, infielder, to a one-year contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Huson and Rob Maurer, infielders, and Jack Daugherty and Juan Gonzalez, outfielders, on one-year contracts.
Named Martin B. Conway vice president of marketing.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Juan Guzman, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Richard Fain, defensive back.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Named Lionel Vital area scout.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Named Rusty Hawley senior director of marketing.


Gulfstream Problem Persists
The dispute over racing dates and purses in Florida took a turn today when local trainers threatened to keep their horses out of Friday's races at Gulfstream Park.
But the president of the track, Douglas Donn, said later that the issues were being negotiated and that racing would be held as scheduled.
Harry Benson, the president of the Florida Horsemen's Benevolent and Protective Association, indicated today that he was not satisfied, and said the trainers would not file entry forms for Friday's races.
He did not say whether the trainers would extend their boycott to Saturday, when Strike the Gold and five other colts are expected to run in the $300,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap.
A similar boycott was called a week ago but was canceled after the trainers won assurances that their complaints would be heard by members of the Legislature.


Kleer-Vu Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hamburger Hamlet Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Field of Dreams Comes True In Baltimore
AMID the clattering forklifts, the welders' sparks and the huge cranes roaming downtown Baltimore like industrial brachiosaurs, something lost and precious is being unearthed.
"Every fan has a kind of memory of how a ball park is supposed to look," said the columnist and baseball writer George F. Will.
"This is a park that is bound to generate memories."
It will do so by design.
To many, the $105.4 million Oriole Park at Camden Yards, as the Baltimore Orioles' new old-fashioned ball park is officially called, is more than a building.
It is a red-brick repository of the history, myths and memories of baseball.
The park, built by the Orioles and the Maryland Stadium Authority, will officially open on April 6, when the Cleveland Indians come to town for the first game of the 1992 season.


Museum of Holography in SoHo Closes, Citing Finances
Crippled by budget cuts and mounting financial pressures, the Museum of Holography in Manhattan has been forced to close.
The museum, at 11 Mercer Street in SoHo, closed on Sunday after nearly 16 years of operation.
Sydney Dinsmore, the museum's curator, said yesterday that its collection of some 800 holograms and related materials -- a comprehensive archive of slides, photographs and videotapes detailing the history of holography -- has been placed in storage.


Civil Liberties Union Supports Hibernians
In the latest twist in the wrangle over the participation of a gay and lesbian group in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, the New York Civil Liberties Union yesterday joined the side of the parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, saying that the order has a right to choose who marches in the parade.
In an amicus curiae brief filed with Rosemarie Maldonado, the administrative law judge who will hear the discrimination complaint tomorrow that was brought by New York City against the Hibernians, the civil liberties union argued "that the application of the city anti-discrimination laws to the parade is unconstitutional" and urged Judge Maldonado to dismiss the complaint.


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


200 DEAD IN BLAST IN A TURKISH MINE
More than 200 miners were believed dead today after a methane gas explosion deep underground at a state-run Turkish coal mine, and rescue workers said tonight that they had abandoned hope for those still trapped.
Officials at Kozlu, in the Black Sea coal-mining area of Zonguldak, 170 miles northwest of Ankara, said that 82 bodies had been recovered and that there was no prospect of rescuing 150 to 200 men still unaccounted for after the explosion Tuesday night.


British Parties Await Signal for Start of Race
Neil Kinnock, the opposition Labor Party leader, who hopes to replace John Major as Prime Minister as soon as he calls a general election, already has the campaign meticulously planned.
Every day has its chosen issue, with the Labor Party shadow cabinet ready to fan out across the country to pound Conservative positions, says Glenys Kinnock, his wife, and she will be among them.
She fully expects to move into 10 Downing Street with her husband and their two children the day after the election.


Sounds Around Town
Scottish Folk Songs
Jean Redpath, Miller Theater, 116th Street and Broadway, Manhattan (212-854-7799).
The Scottish folk singer and guitarist Jean Redpath brings a glowing, long-lined lyricism to the performance of traditional Scottish folk songs.
Her 30th-anniversary concert, and her first New York appearance in several years, is a retrospective that will also include material from two recent albums.
One is the seventh volume of songs by Robert Burns.
The other, "Leaving the Land," blends Scottish folk and country-and-western songs.
Tickets are $15 ($8 for students and the elderly) and show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
An Azerbaijani Tenor
Nisim Nisimov Ensemble, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street (212-545-7536).
Nisim Nisimov, an Azerbaijani tenor who made his New York debut two years ago, returns to New York with a concert of music from his homeland.
Mr.
Nisimov, a popular performer on Baku Radio, sings in several dialects.
He will be joined by an ensemble of Azerbaijani performers, including Kamran Maharramov on lute, Rahman Zulfugarov on reeds and drums, and Ali Hussein Jarfarov on the garmon, a small accordion.
They will perform classical mughamat based on religious chants and sacred music, traditional folk dance numbers and popular urban songs.
Show time is tonight at 8, and tickets are $12.
Cabaret Series
Cabariety series, the Theater at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street (212-688-7253).
Richard Yanni, Baby Jane Dexter, Tom Andersen, K. T. Sullivan and Wayne Hosford will each perform a 20-minute set in the American Cabaret Theater's new Cabariety series.
Of particular interest is Ms.
Dexter, a down-to-earth performer with plenty of heart who recently returned to the New York cabaret world after a lengthy sabbatical.
The goal of the series, which is something of a grab bag, is to showcase a range of New York cabaret performers in a theatrical setting, with the roster changing each week.
Shows are tonight at 8, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.; tickets are $25.


Bird Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Deb Shops reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Holyfield And Holmes Show Off Their Slides
Here was Bob Arum, who promotes Larry Holmes, introducing the former champion as a "Doctor of Pugilism."
This was at a news conference in New York to announce the bout between his fighter and Evander Holyfield, the heavyweight champion, on June 19 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.


On Stage, and Off
Absent Stars and Audience Refunds
Stars on Broadway mean lots of excitement, and inevitably, when they miss performances, lots of disappointment. (Not to mention lost business.) Already, Glenn Close, co-starring in Mike Nichols's production of "Death and the Maiden" with Richard Dreyfuss and Gene Hackman, missed 10 preview performances because of pneumonia.
Actors' Equity mandates that audiences be notified of an absence a minimum of two out of three ways.
The information must be prominently posted in the lobby, included in the individual Playbills or announced on the loudspeaker.
Then watch out.


Many Teachers Oppose Walkout, Even in Crisis
Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the east Bronx has known turmoil in recent months.
A fire was set on Tuesday in an assistant principal's office, two shotguns have been confiscated and two months ago a mathematics teacher was beaten up.
Yet teachers at Stevenson and at many of New York City's other high schools were not sure yesterday that they would be ready any time soon to stage walkouts, a measure authorized on Tuesday by delegates of the United Federation of Teachers for schools where teachers feel imperiled.
Some said that it was the job of teachers to restore calm in schools.


Earlier Suits Cited Officer Over Force
A New York City Housing Police officer who shot and killed a 29-year-old man as he sat in his car in lower Manhattan early Tuesday morning has had charges of using excessive force brought against him in civil suits twice, court records show.
The officer, Jonas Bright, 38, approached Douglas Orfaly, of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, at the intersection of Houston and Pitt Streets about 2 A.M. and shot him once in the head, apparently after seeing him make a sudden movement with his hands, said Inspector James Ross, commander of the Manhattan housing police.
The internal affairs division of the housing police and the Manhattan District Attorney's office are investigating the incident, he said.


Art in Review
Charles Long  Elizabeth Koury Gallery 89 Greene Street SoHo Through Tuesday
Although at first glance many of Charles Long's works look like elegant and compact examples of abstract cast sculpture in a 1950's expressionist mode, they are actually based on images and techniques seldom associated with high art.
A piece called "Superfluity," for example, is covered with pennies; another has the names of half-forgotten television sitcoms impressed into its surfaces.


The New World Army
For years the United Nations has been notable mostly for its vocal cords.
That's changed.
Nowadays the U.N.'s muscle -- its blue-helmeted soldiers -- seems to be everywhere.
And costs have soared.
The bill for 11 peacekeeping missions could approach $3.7 billion this year.
Never before have so many U.N. troops been committed to so many costly and diverse missions.
Will that be money well spent?
Has the operation gotten out of hand?
Do U.N. structures need an overhaul?
Americans may well ask such questions in a year dominated by domestic concerns.
Critics still equate the U.N. with wind and waste -- hence the hostility in Congress yesterday to Secretary of State Baker's request for $810 million for U.N. troops due for deployment in Cambodia and Yugoslavia.


Pact Seeks Looser Curbs On Exports
The United States reached tentative agreement today with Europe and Japan to loosen international controls on exports of advanced telecommunications equipment, Administration officials said.
The pact represents a basic shift in American policy toward the former Soviet republics.
The officials said the products covered by the agreement included high-quality fiber-optic cables, which can be used for long-distance calls and computer data transmissions.
The Pentagon and American intelligence agencies have long opposed such sales.
But the United States has decided to strengthen the economies of the republics and lay a strong base for American business activity there, an official said.


Frozen Food Express Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Solt Signs With Colts
Guard RON SOLT, a former Pro Bowl player, signed on Wednesday with the Indianapolis Colts, who traded him four years ago after a contract dispute.
Solt, a Plan B free agent, was the Colts' first-round draft pick in 1984 and was with the team four years before being traded to Philadelphia in 1988.
He lost his starting job with the Eagles last season and was left unprotected.


Nanometrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lachance's Goal Lifts Islanders to Tie
The first goal of Scott Lachance's career was a classy little number that came at a pivotal moment for a team on the brink.
"Hopefully, it is the first of many," the Islanders' rookie defenseman said tonight, in a matter-of-fact way.
"I like to play the big games, the pressure games."


Standard Motor Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Strawberry Statement: Old History
BY virtue of being the worst team in baseball, the New York Mets were allowed to go first in the 1966 draft of amateur players.
They chose a catcher named Steve Chilcott and avoided an outfielder named Reginald Martinez Jackson, who would eventually hit 563 home runs.
To this day, there are people who feel the Mets chose a white prospect over a black prospect.
This memory from more than a quarter of a century ago helps explain some of the attitudes attributed to Darryl Strawberry in his new book, "Darryl," written with Art Rust Jr.


Restaurant Applauds An Agency's Victory
When an agency lands a big account, it is not unusual to receive congratulations from clients or from other agencies.
But it is a bit out of the ordinary when the neighborhood restaurant takes out an advertisement to say a job "well done."
Smith &amp; Wollensky, the Manhattan steak restaurant, wanted to salute its neighbors and loyal customers across Third Avenue at Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc. after the agency won the Mercedes-Benz of North America account from McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc.
So yesterday, the restaurant ran a full-page congratulatory ad created by Frankfurt Gips Balkind in The New York Times.


Laser Precision reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TURKS ARE STOIC AT MINE DISASTER
Without hope for miracles or survivors, the men gathered and talked today about the lost -- burned and buried far underground in Turkey's worst mine disaster.
"Perhaps," one man said to another, "God is great and there will be a voice calling for help from somewhere down there."


Spending for U.N. Peacekeeping Is Given Hard Look in Congress
The Bush Administration's pledges to support huge United Nations peacekeeping operations worldwide at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars over the next two years are coming under concerted attack in Congress.
Today, when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d appeared before a Senate subcommittee to answer questions about the State Department's 1992-1993 budget requests, he got the same message he heard in the House of Representatives on Tuesday: Congress is reluctant to grant large amounts of money to sustain international peacekeeping operations when the United States is in a recession.


U.S. Says Arab Posturing Stalls Talks on Mideast
The Bush Administration singled out the Palestinians today as being primarily responsible for the lack of progress in the latest round of talks with Israel, saying they were too preoccupied with political posturing and not prepared to engage in serious give and take with Israel.
Reporters covering the State Department were invited today for a briefing on the Middle East talks with the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, Edward P. Djerejian, who, speaking on the record, said the willingness of all the parties to continue the negotiations was "impressive."


2 Offerings Sought By RJR Nabisco
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation announced yesterday that its RJR Nabisco Capital Corporation subsidiary had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for two offerings of senior notes totaling $1.2 billion, to be offered through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Its operating unit, RJR Nabisco Inc., an international consumer products company, will guarantee the debt.


MUSLIM FAST IN U.S. HOLDS DIFFICULTIES
During Ramadan, the holy month that began with the new moon this week, Muslims abstain from food and drink from dawn to dark.
In many Islamic countries, this means that restaurants close throughout the day, governments and businesses trim working hours, children leave school early and people take daytime naps to stay awake for nighttime meals.
But for the Muslim minority in the United States, Ramadan must be observed amid fast-food outlets, coffee breaks and 9-to-5 working hours.
Some find that the non-Muslim environment adds to the physical difficulty of keeping the monthlong fast -- but also to the spiritual rewards.


Systemed Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; Next: Cold War Of the Capitalists?
THE easing of East-West tensions and the end of the cold war raised hopes for a long spell of world peace and economic development.
But in the wake of the disintegration of the Soviet empire have come political shocks, like the war in the Persian Gulf and the civil war in Yugoslavia, and a world economic slump.
Is this just a painful transition period the world is passing through before getting to what President Bush has called "the new world order" -- and, if so, how do we get there from here?
Or, to borrow from Gertrude Stein, is there a there there?


U.S. Urges Doctors to Fight Surgical Pain (and Myths)
The Government recommended today that doctors provide painkillers swiftly and aggressively to patients after surgery to decrease suffering and speed recovery.
Federal health officials said myths about pain and its management cause half of the patients who undergo surgery in more than 23 million procedures each year to suffer unrelieved, unnecessary pain.


U.N. Cites 22 Nations for Rights Abuses
A record 22 countries were criticized for human rights abuses during the last year and many others were placed under surveillance by the United Nations Human Rights Commission, which ended its annual session in Geneva today.
The results of the session dispelled fears expressed by some Western nations that the addition of 10 third world countries to the commission a year ago, raising its membership to 53 nations, would weaken the organization, diplomats said.


American Exchange to List Smaller Stocks
The Securities and Exchange Commission gave the American Stock Exchange permission today to list smaller, younger and more speculative companies that now trade in the over-the-counter market.
The immediate effect of today's action will be to increase competition among the exchanges for smaller companies.
For the American exchange, which recently began to reverse a steady erosion of its market share, the decision holds out the hope of new profits, if investors become interested in the new junior tier of stocks.


Jets Sign Staurovsky As Plan B Free Agent
JASON STAUROVSKY, New England's place-kicker for parts of the last four seasons, was signed by the Jets yesterday as a Plan B free agent.
Staurovsky, who will be 29 years old on March 23, was the leading scorer for the Patriots with 49 points last season before pulling a quadriceps muscle in the team's ninth game.
He spent the rest of the season on injured reserve.
He spent his collegiate career at Tulsa.


Iran-Contra Defendant Told He Cannot See C.I.A. Files
Ruling on the biggest case pending in the Iran-contra scandal, a Federal district judge has rejected a former senior intelligence official's request for access to a vast array of secret material, including Central Intelligence Agency documents describing its covert operations in the mid-1980's.
In a decision on Tuesday that was made public today the judge, Royce C. Lamberth, denied the sweeping motion by lawyers for Clair E. George, who as Deputy Director of Operations headed the agency's clandestine services worldwide from 1984 to 1987.


Citation Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diner's Journal
Oceana
Those who lament last year's demise of Le Cygne, the sumptuous French restaurant at 55 East 54th Street in Manhattan, may find solace in its successor, a seafood restaurant called Oceana.
Except for its decidedly American staff, the pastel-dappled town house restaurant looks exactly the same.
The new owners include John and Nickolas Livanos, father and son, who have a restaurant in White Plains, called Livanos, and six other establishments in the region.


Rates Rise on New Sign of Recovery
Prices of Treasury securities continued to slide and interest rates moved higher in active trading yesterday.
The market's defensive tone was reinforced by a drop in initial unemployment claims during the week ended Feb. 22.
The drop was bigger than expected and reinforced concerns among traders that February employment data scheduled to be released today by the Labor Department might provide further evidence that the economy is on the mend.


Total Pharmaceutical Care reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.S. Still Asks to See Church Records
The White House chief of staff, Samuel K.  Skinner, said today that the Bush Administration was still considering a proposal that would allow the Internal Revenue Service to scrutinize lists of large donors to churches, despite assurances by Vice President Dan Quayle last week that the proposal was dead.
The I.R.S. proposal, buried deep in the 1993 Federal budget recommendations that Mr.
Bush sent to Congress in January, angered many religious organizations when it was first publicized last month.


Initial Jobless-Benefit Claims Fell 21,000 in Mid-February
Unemployment lines were shorter in mid-February as the number of workers seeking jobless benefits for the first time fell by 21,000, the Government said today, offering further hope the economy was improving.
But some economists said the number of claims may have been distorted by the Washington's Birthday holiday, when unemployment offices were closed.


Role of the Press in the Hill-Thomas Case
To the Editor:
It's understandable that William Safire would be dismayed by the apparent persecution of his journalistic colleagues Tim Phelps and Nina Totenberg by the special counsel for the Senate committee investigating the leaks in the Anita F. Hill-Clarence Thomas affair (column, Feb. 17).
However, I think Mr.
Safire misreads the situation.
If the Hill-Thomas story was simply false and damaging to innocent people, then Mr.
Phelps and Ms.
Totenberg (or their editors), like all responsible journalists, had a clear duty to suppress it.
Although Mr.
Sa- fire states that "we are not in the business of withholding what we learn," I'm sure that this happens all the time in the journalistic-editorial process, and I see nothing wrong with it.
This is the basis on which we say tabloids like The National Enquirer and The Star are irresponsible.


Airlines Offer Discounts to Europe
Despite an improvement in transAtlantic traffic, airlines are faced with lagging advance bookings to Europe, so they are again offering discount fares for spring and summer.
Yesterday, American Airlines advertised fares of $448 round trip from New York to London and $548 to Paris, Brussels and Zurich for travel in April, May and September.
For an additional $100 round trip, passengers can travel in June, July and August.


U.S. Says It Will Speed Gene-Product Approvals
After months of demonstrating that the Food and Drug Administration can be tougher in regulating drugs and medical devices, Commissioner David A. Kessler today announced his second major thrust since taking office: a new program of rapid approval for biotechnology products.
The products, mainly produced through genetic engineering, are considered the next big breakthrough area for the pharmaceutical industry, whose leaders hailed Dr.
Kessler's announcement.


Intergroup Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What Offends Muslims
To the Editor:
Re in "What About Rushdie?" (Op-Ed, Feb. 13) by Paul Theroux: One must realize that Muslims consider the wives of the Prophet Muhammed to be the mothers of all Muslims.
Then if it is still difficult to understand (not necessarily to justify) the fury expressed by Muslims all over the world toward the highly abusive portrayal of their mothers in "The Satanic Verses," one should simply imagine one's own mother being stripped and then laughed at in front of oneself.
IRFAN A. OMAR Hartford, Feb. 20, 1992 The writer is a student at the Hartford Seminary.


Mary Osborne, Electric Guitarist Lauded in Jazz World, Dies at 70
Mary Osborne, one of the few women to gain jazz stardom as a guitarist and the first woman to play the electric guitar professionally, died on Wednesday at Mercy Hospital in Bakersfield, Calif.
She was 70 years old.
She died of liver failure as a result of cancer, said her son Ralph Scaffidi Jr.


Topics of The Times; : Not Funny
There's nothing funny about 200,000 human beings incinerated by nuclear weapons.
Ernest Hollings, usually a sensible Senator, shamed himself Monday by tastelessly quipping to South Carolina workers: "You should draw a mushroom cloud and put underneath it, 'Made in America by lazy and illiterate Americans and tested in Japan.' "


Grace Deal With Du Pont Canada
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company, the conglomerate with diversified interests, has acquired Du Pont Canada Inc.'s food-service packaging business for about $20 million.
The deal gives Grace packaging operations that provide plastic containers for salad dressings, soups and sauces.
The company has acquired one large plant, as well as several operations in Canada and in the United States.


The Spoken Word
ARTIST'S TALK, Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
Ann Messner, a sculptor, will discuss her work, including an installation in Times Square.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Reservations and information: (212) 935-3960.
LECTURE AND TOUR, New York Transit Museum, 130 Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn.
A lecture on subway station design and ornamentation given by John Tauranac, an urban historian, followed by a tour of the abandoned City Hall station.
Saturday at 1 P.M.
Also on March 21 at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Reservations: (718) 330-5839.


CHRONICLE
The prospect of addressing more than 2,000 people at the United Nations might faze some people, but it seems to be having little effect on ADAM HANN-BYRD, the 10-year-old star of the film "Little Man Tate."
Along with DANICA McKELLA, a star of "The Wonder Years" on television, he is to discuss environmental concerns on Monday at a United Nations reception for delegates, environmentalists and corporate executives.
"I'm kind of nervous, but not too," he said calmly.


Sandoz Picks Leader Of U.S. Research Arm
The Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation yesterday named Jurg Meier, a longtime Sandoz researcher, to succeed Dr.
Robert I. Levy as head of drug research in the United States.
Dr.
Levy, a former vice president of Columbia University who won awards for cholesterol and heart disease research, is joining the Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories unit of the American Home Products Corporation as director of worldwide research.


Decision Time for Northwest Air
Three years after Northwest Airlines went private in a $4.6 billion leveraged buyout, the company that helped pioneer passenger air service must either sharply expand or fade into an also-ran.
The situation is not do-or-die.
Although voices ranging from politicians in Northwest's home state of Minnesota to Barron's, the weekly newspaper for investors, have predicted that continuing losses and heavy debts will lead to the airline's demise, Northwest still has enough financing options to keep flying for years.
But staying in business is one thing, prospering another.
While it is highly unlikely that Northwest will soon join Eastern, Midway, T.W.A., America West, Pan Am and Continental in bankruptcy proceedings or worse, it is uncertain whether Northwest can compete against aviation's Big Three: United, American and Delta Air Lines.


Samuel Marx Is Dead; Hollywood Writer, 90
Samuel Marx, a writer, film producer and story editor for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, died on Monday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 90 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his son, Richard, of Los Angeles.


Our Legal-Fees System Benefits Only Lawyers
To the Editor:
"Bashing Lawyers. Also Justice" (editorial, Feb. 15), which criticizes Vice President Quayle's proposals to change the civil justice system, characterizes as harmful among those proposals "requiring a losing plaintiff to pay the defendant's legal fees."
In other words, you support the so-called American rule, in which each side in a lawsuit pays its own legal costs, regardless of the outcome.
You state that while a loser-pays system would discourage frivolous lawsuits, it would also discourage legitimate but risky suits.


Immune Response Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on Feb. 25 about Eldon Cessna, an aircraft design engineer, misstated his role in the design of three aircraft.
He was a member of the design teams that worked on the Cessna Air Master, the P-51 Mustang and the F-86 jet fighter; he was not the chief designer.


Review/Film; Corruption And Racial Strife Take Their Toll
"Gladiator" is a totally familiar new film involving boxing, gangs, high school kids, first love, corrupt businessmen, racial harmony and the importance of loyalty among friends.
The mixture may be slightly unexpected, but it still manages to be predictable all the way.
Only the film's resolution has any spirit or novelty, and even that goes all the way back to the Roman Colosseum.
Quicker than you can say "Spartacus," two fighters figure out that their real enemy is outside the ring.
"Gladiator" begins with the arrival of new-kid-in-school Tommy Riley (James Marshall).
Tommy, who is either the strong silent type or just plain silent, encounters the usual troubles with local bullies. ("You're in my seat, boy," etc.) He has a teacher who encourages him to learn (Francesca P. Roberts).
He also has a father with serious gambling debts (John Heard).
And he has a talent for boxing, which is discovered by an unscrupulous talent promoter (Robert Loggia) who turns him over to a wise old trainer (Ossie Davis) and also to an even more unscrupulous promoter of illicit, underground bouts (Brian Dennehy).
Somewhere along the line, there is a nice girl (Cara Buono) who loves Tommy enough to try to keep him from becoming brain-dead.


American Reliance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exchanges in TriBeCa Approved
The New York City Council's land-use committee yesterday approved two scaled-down versions of a new building to house the city's commodities exchanges, but the troubled, city-subsidized project is still in danger of falling apart.
The project was dealt a severe blow in January when the largest of the city's five commodities exchanges, the New York Mercantile Exchange, pulled out of the project.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out; SHORT ON MONEY, KERREY QUITS RACE
As expected, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska ended his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination today, explaining that he did not have the money to go on.
"We were ready to go full throttle," he said at a news conference, "but unfortunately we ran out of gas."


Gap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


S.A.S. Sets Stake Sale In Hotels
The Scandinavian Airlines System said today that it would pull out of a venture to own Inter-Continental hotels with the Seibu Saison Group of Japan.
S.A.S. said it had signed a letter to sell its 40 percent stake in the Inter-Continental Hotels Corporation, which was acquired for $500 million two years ago, to Seibu Saison, which owns 60 percent of the hotel chain.


The Art Market
Art in Order
When the Philadelphia Museum of Art opened its doors 64 years ago, Fiske Kimball, the founding director, wanted to display the works of art in a chronological manner that he envisioned as a "walk through time." But while the Philadelphia originally intended to give the public an orderly historical look at 900 years of art, it has instead tended to group collections as they have been donated to the museum.


U.S. Will Expand Aid to Vietnam In Return for Help on the Missing
The United States pledged today to expand its humanitarian aid to Vietnam in exchange for additional cooperation from Hanoi in resolving the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.
At the same time, the United States said it was still not prepared to lift a 17-year-old trade embargo that has crippled the Vietnamese economy and angered American investors wanting to do business there.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Tsongas Mystified by His Own Magic
Some of Paul E. Tsongas's aides, still befuddled by their candidate's unlikely and uneven appeal, call his campaign The Magical Mystery Tour.
It is a good name for a campaign that just gets curiouser and curiouser.
The more excitement that surrounds the former Massachusetts Senator, the more his advance team blares campaign anthems like Marcia Griffiths's "The Electric Boogie Woogie" and the Rolling Stones' "Start Me Up," the less exciting Mr.
Tsongas appears.


California Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TV Weekend; Norman Lear's Comedy On Life in Washington
Washington certainly deserves a few good satirical pokes these days.
The targets are everywhere, ranging from loonily optimistic economic forecasts to shabby personal scandals, not to mention international vomiting incidents.
Yet prime-time television has been curiously hesitant about zinging politics and politicians.
For the most part, refreshingly nasty humor is relegated to late-night formats like NBC's "Saturday Night Live."
Things could be changing with this weekend's premiere -- on NBC tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. -- of "The Powers That Be," a new series from Norman Lear's Act III Television workshop.
The show, created by Marta Kauffman and David Crane, is in the off-the-wall mode of humor that worked so well for Susan Harris's "Soap" some 15 years ago.
It may very well be the only mode that can do Washington full justice.


Tangle of Issues in St. Patrick's Brouhaha
Sixteen months after the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization first sought to march in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade under its own banner, and 11 days before this year's parade is to step off, the dispute over whether they belong in the parade is as far from settled as ever.
Indeed, as time has grown short so have tempers.
Vitriol, threats and lawsuits are flying.
And though the question is now before the courts, the issue is not just legal.
It is political, moral, ethnic and religious.
And therein lies the explanation for its intractability.


Review/Television; Giving Snakes the Respect They Deserve
Snakes can be beautiful.
If you have doubts, tune in Sunday night at 7 to "ABC's World of Discovery." Their shimmering colors and improbably textured skins enrich the tube.
"Realm of the Serpent" abounds in snake lore.
Long before getting a bad press from the Book of Genesis, the creatures were worshiped as gods by the ancient Egyptians, among others.
The tradition continues: a South African tribe is seen doing a fertility dance in honor of the python.


Mobley Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; Duke Plays to Empty Houses As Spotlight Trails Buchanan
After a career spent reveling in the white hot glare of the media, David Duke came here today facing a political fate worse than death.
Indifference.
On the Republican Presidential ballot for the first time, in Saturday's South Carolina primary, Mr.
Duke is facing a race where Patrick J. Buchanan has taken many of his themes and supporters and may be monopolizing the slot of conservative challenger to President Bush.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  FROM RUSSIA WITH ENERGY
Seeking help to harness the vast energy of nuclear fusion, the United States is hiring more than a hundred scientists from Russia, which pioneered the field.
This is the first known case in which the Federal Government has tapped Russia's scientific talent.A1
A journal is published in Moscow 13 years after being suppressed.
A12  THE HIGH COST OF PEACE
Congress is making a concerted attack on the Bush Administration's pledges to support United Nations peacekeeping operations at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars.
With the United States in a recession, lawmakers are reluctant to grant large amounts of money for international peacekeeping.
A1  WEIGHING THE MILITARY OPTION
The Administration is considering whether to board two North Korean cargo ships that are heading for Iran loaded with ballistic missiles for Syria and Iran, Administration officials said.
A10  SOME HELP FOR A FORMER ENEMY
The United States pledged to increase humanitarian aid to Vietnam for more cooperation from Hanoi in resolving the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.
But the U.S. said it was not prepared to lift its trade embargo.
A2  U.S.
BLAMES PALESTINIANS
The Bush Administration singled out the Palestinians as being primarily responsible for the lack of progress in the latest round of talks with Israel, saying they were too preoccupied with political posturing and not prepared to engage in serious negotiations with the Israelis.
A10  RIGHTS WATCHDOG BARKS
Dispelling fears that the organization would be weakened by the addition of 10 third-world nations, the United Nations Human Rights Commission ended annual deliberations by criticizing a record 22 countries for human rights abuses.
A3  ABORTION RULING EXPLAINED
The Irish Supreme Court justices who voted to allow a 14-year-old girl to go to England for an abortion said they feared the girl would kill herself if they refused.
They appeared to broaden the legal grounds for an abortion, which has been allowed in Ireland only when the life of the mother is in immediate danger.
A8  SETBACK FOR POLISH GOVERNMENT
The lower chamber of Parliament rejected the economic plan of Prime Minister Olszewski's Government.
The Government said the plan would ease some of the sting of free-market reforms; opponents said it would rekindle inflation.
A6  British politicians await the scheduling of a general election.
A5
Miners in Turkey mourn the deaths of comrades in an explosion.  A3
Prague Journal: A Harvard graduate leads the rush to capitalism.  A4
National A14-21  SHOWDOWN IN FLORIDA
Among the 11 states that will vote in the Presidential race next Tuesday, Florida is shaping up as the most important for Governor Clinton and former Senator Tsongas.
A1
For Mr. Tsongas and Pat Buchanan, Texas poses a big challenge.  A18
Mr. Tsongas is set for an advertising counteroffensive.  A18
The Tsongas campaign just gets curiouser and curiouser.  A19
Former Governor Brown enjoys his new "status of wild card." A19
As expected, Senator Kerrey bowed out of the race.  A19  DUKE'S OPPONENT: INDIFFERENCE
In South Carolina tomorrow, David Duke will be on the Republican Presidential ballot for the first time.
But political analysts and some of his own supporters there say his thunder has been stolen by Pat Buchanan.
A1
President Bush is still having trouble with his message.  A20
An I.R.S. proposal may mean more trouble for the White House.  A20
U.S.
ADVICE ON PAINKILLERS  The Government recommended that doctors swiftly and aggressively provide painkillers to patients after surgery to decrease suffering and speed recovery.
It said myths about pain management caused half of all surgical patients to suffer unrelieved, unnecessary pain.
A1  LOS ANGELES BEATING TRIAL BEGINS
A year after a black motorist's beating by a group of white police officers was captured on videotape, testimony began in the officers' assault trial.
A14  THE MICHELANGELO VIRUS
The nation's personal-computer users scurried to try to escape a malicious computer virus timed to erase data and programs today.
A14  NEW HEAD OF UNITED WAY
The board of the United Way of America, grappling with the resignation of its president and new disclosures that he agreed to the destruction of some financial records, named an I.B.M. official, Kenneth W. Dam, as interim president.
A15  A TRYING DIFFICULT OBSERVANCE
For the Muslim minority in the United States, the observance of Ramadan can be a difficult one.
A21  The Government restored some water for California farmers.
A15  Law Page B8  A judge rejected an Iran-contra defendant's bid for secret files.
A16
A student group asks to sue Harvard.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 REDISTRICTING PLAN RELEASED
Heading toward a confrontation with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a state legislative committee released a final redistricting plan intended to increase the number of seats held by black and Hispanic politicians while cementing the Democrats' control of the Assembly and the Republicans' lock on the State Senate.
A1  GRAVANO IS QUESTIONED
On the first day of cross-examination, a defense lawyer fired tough, sarcastic questions at Salvatore Gravano, a former Mafia underboss and the crucial prosecution witness against John Gotti.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-34  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Sources say Yankees pitcher Pascual Perez recently failed a drug test.
B9  Torborg's opening lineup.
B9  Obituaries B7  Mary Osborne, jazz guitarist  Wheeler McMillen, a pioneer in industrial use of farm crops  Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials A32  The New World Army.
Anonymous sources.
Topics: Not funny.
Letters A32  A. M. Rosenthal: The political disease.
A33  Leslie H. Gelb: Banana republic, U.S.A.
A33  Marlon T. Riggs: Meet the new Willie Horton.
A33  Marvin Miller: Baseball's bottom-line logic.
A33  Burton G. Malkiel: How to cut long-term interest rates.
A33


MC Shipping reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gap Report for 4th Quarter: Net Up 48.5%, Sales Up 28.6%
Continuing to defy the recession, the Gap Inc. today reported sharply higher sales and earnings for its fourth quarter and year.
But the price of Gap shares declined after the company advised securities analysts that sales growth would moderate in 1992.
Based in San Francisco, the Gap is the No. 2 clothing brand in the United States, after Levi Strauss.
For the quarter ended Feb. 1, the Gap said it earned $83.9 million, or 59 cents a share, up 48.5 percent from $56.5 million, or 40 cents a share, in the period a year ago.
Sales rose 28.6 percent, to $803.5 million, from $624.7 million in the 1991 fiscal year.


Computer Users Plot to Evade Virus
The nation's personal computer users scurried yesterday to try to escape a malicious computer virus timed to erase data and programs today.
But despite a growing level of worldwide concern, computer experts say that until desk-top computer users actually switch on their machines this morning there is no reliable way of telling how widely the virus has spread.
The new virus, which was apparently first detected in Germany last year, was given the name Michelangelo because it was set to erase data on computers made by the International Business Machines Corporation and on compatible computers when the virus program detects the date March 6, the Italian artist's 517th birthday.


INSIDE
Another Rise in Retail Sales
Americans increased their buying in February, giving the nation's largest retail chains their second straight monthly sales gains after the bleak Christmas season.
Page D1.
New Leader for United Way
The United Way of America, still grappling with issues surrounding the resignation of its president this week, named an I.B.M. official, Kenneth W. Dam, as interim president.
Page A15.
Churches and the I.R.S.
The White House said a proposal to allow Internal Revenue Service scrutiny of church donor lists was still alive in spite of opposition by Vice President Dan Quayle.
Page A17.
Taped-Beating Trial Opens
The defense argued that police officers charged in the beating of a black motorist were frightened by his bizarre and violent behavior.
Page A14.


National Semiconductor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23


Review/Art; Seeing Infinity in Little Dots of White
As an artist, Vija Celmins is loyal in the extreme.
For more than 20 years, this idiosyncratic realist has remained true to a handful of meticulously rendered images.
She draws and paints endless expanses of star-studded galaxies, calm ocean waves and parched desert floors that all seem to provide fragmentary glimpses of infinity.
At once overwhelming and startlingly intimate, Ms.
Celmins's small, visibly handmade images are as abstract as they are realistic.
Reticently painted, with tones of gray or black predominating, they can seem virtually blank from a distance, but they reward careful attention with a quiet, almost Zen-like emotional intensity.


Swimmer's Death Prompts Lawsuit
The parents of a Notre Dame swimming team member killed in January in a bus crash filed a wrongful death lawsuit today against the bus company and the driver.
Gordon and Kathy Beeler of Granger, Ind., filed the lawsuit in St.
Joseph Circuit Court on behalf of their daughter, Margaret (Meghan) Beeler.


Drawing a Symbol For New Musical
The producers of a Broadway musical are hoping to make a heart drawn by Keith Haring as familiar a symbol to theatergoers as a Phantom's mask or a French urchin.
The drawing, which shows a heart surrounded by three human figures, is being used to symbolize the musical "Falsettos" in print advertisements that began running this week.
The ads hope to copy the success of the producers of "The Phantom of the Opera" and "Les Miserables" in establishing recognizable symbols for their shows.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


He's Out! But Coach Appeals Call; Confusion in the Stands as Board Ejects a Baseball Coach
It is axiomatic here that in March, when the temperature hits 40 degrees, baseball is just around the corner and Gordon LeMatty, the Union High School varsity coach, is not far behind.
In 33 seasons he has compiled the best won-lost record in the state, with an aggressive style of play that is the envy of athletic directors in and out of Union's conference.


New Post at Syracuse
Syracuse, which recently acknowledged at least 15 National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violations in its basketball program, has appointed an N.C.A.A. official to its newly created position of compliance director.
JOHN HARDT, a senior compliance representative with the N.C.A.A., will assume his new duties on March 30, Athletic Director JAKE CROUTHAMEL said yesterday.
Hardt's salary was not disclosed.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.12
3.00
6.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.04
4.02
6.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.11
6.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.18
7.08
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.96
7.90
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.02
9.00
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.75
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Saskatchewan Oil reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New York Water Tunnel Work Increased
In a move that is expected to create 200 new jobs, the city's Department of Environmental Protection plans to speed construction of the city's third water tunnel by awarding $250 million in additional contracts for the project in 1993, city officials said yesterday.
Officials of the environmental agency said they planned to increase the amount of water tunnel contracts scheduled to be let next year to $350 million from $100 million to help stimulate the region's sagging economy and to save money on construction costs, which are now extremely low because of the weak economy.


Study Faults No-Bid Contracts
Despite recent changes in New York City's contracting policies that were intended to increase competition, nearly 41 percent of the city's $4.4 billion in contracts were awarded without competitive bidding in the fiscal year that ended last June, according to a study released by the City Comptroller yesterday.
The report found no significant improvement in the level of competition for city contracts between the 1990 and 1991 fiscal years.
The study is based on an examination of all city contracts worth more than $10,000 for goods and services and more than $15,000 for construction.


Pay-Per-View Olympics Just One Day at a Time
The Olympics Triplecast -- NBC and Cablevision's pay-per-view gamble that viewers will pay up to $170 for three channels of 24-hour-a-day coverage of the Summer Olympics -- made a concession to the stumbling economy yesterday by offering a one-day-at-a-time rate of $29.95.
So rather than being required to pay $95 for seven days of Olympics coverage, $125 for all 15 days, or $170 for all 15 days (a package which includes various promotional material), consumers will now be offered a daily option.


Accused by Anonymous Sources
Senator Brock Adams of Washington has abandoned his campaign for re-election because of anonymous accusations of sexual misbehavior.
The Seattle Times's devastating account of the charges has raised critical questions about the use of unidentified sources.
Senator Adams flatly denies the charges, but the available evidence supports the decision to publish.
If just one woman complained anonymously, with no corroboration, reputable newspapers would treat the charge as unsubstantiated and unprintable.
Even with eight complaints, which The Seattle Times says it has, responsible editors do not rush out with the story.
The editors in this case appear to have acted cautiously.


Silcorp Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BMC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dalmy's (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 23


Trainers Pull Their Horses From Gulfstream Program
Gulfstream Park today canceled its Friday program of 10 races after local trainers refused to enter their horses to dramatize their opposition to new racing dates being considered by the Florida Legislature.
But the trainers promised to enter horses for the 22 races scheduled this weekend and said they would not disrupt the $300,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap on Saturday.
It is the premier handicap race of the Florida season and features Sea Cadet, the winner of the Donn Handicap last month, and Strike the Gold, winner of the Kentucky Derby last year.


Federal Officials See Sharp Rise Of Hepatitis Among Gay Men
Cases of Hepatitis A among gay men rose sharply in New York City and other cities during the first six months of 1991, possibly because of a return to unsafe sexual practices, Federal officials said.
In a report made public yesterday, officials from the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta said that cases of Hepatitis A rose 42 percent -- to 631 cases -- in New York City from January to June of last year.
Increases were also reported in Denver, San Francisco, Canada and Australia.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


GTE Rules Out Acquiring Centel
The GTE Corporation said it was not interested in buying the Centel Corporation, despite speculation of a possible GTE bid for the telephone company.
"Centel is an excellent company with strong management at the helm, but we do not believe this is an economic opportunity for GTE at this time," said James L. Johnson, GTE's chairman.


Sanfilippo &amp; Son reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trenton Gives Rate Details For Insurance
New Jersey officials told automobile insurers today that they would have nearly two years to phase in new regulations banning the use of sex, age and marital status in setting rates.
But if the Republicans who are newly dominant in the Legislature have their way, the changes will never go into effect.
In a bulletin issued to all automobile insurers in the state, Insurance Commissioner Samuel F. Fortunato said the new rate-setting procedures, which have generated a storm of protest from insurers, would be phased in gradually by January 1994.


Our Legal-Fees System Benefits Only Lawyers; Whose Deep Pockets?
To the Editor:
You characterize Vice President Quayle's civil justice reform proposals as focusing too much on the burdens our legal system imposes on "richer Americans, like manufacturers, municipalities and doctors" (editorial, Feb. 15).
As the inclusion of municipalities in the list shows, these groups are "richer" only in the sense that they can pass along the costs of lawsuits and excessive damage awards to consumers in higher prices, to taxpayers and to patients and the governments that pay doctor fees.
The Robin Hood mentality that reasons that those with deep pockets are fair game to salve every real or imagined hurt ignores that at the bottom of those deep pockets is the public in general.


Hartford Plan on Welfare Is Met With Tales of Woe
Joseph Comfort, a former carpenter for the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, fell 125 feet from a catwalk at the New Haven Coliseum in 1980.
He came to the Capitol today to plead with state lawmakers not to cut the welfare program, which he said had saved his life over years of recovery and the fruitless search for a job.
"I'm a licensed plumber, I'm a carpenter," said Mr.
Comfort, 38 years old, who said he has been repeatedly turned down even for dishwashing jobs, because employers fear his medical problems will recur and force them to pay worker's compensation.
"I'd clean toilets if somebody would reach down and say, 'Joe Comfort, here's a job,' " he said in an interview.


Corrections
A chart on page A6 yesterday with an article about a campaign to change the lyrics of "La Mar seillaise" omitted the last line of the proposed chorus in some editions.
It is "Fassent taire tous les canons" ("Silence all cannons").
In addition, the end of the proposed first verse was mistranslated.
It should have read, "One day all rights chose France as their cradle" -- not "will choose."


Review/Dance; Architectural Ideas In Alison West's Work
Alison West calls herself an "art historian turned choreographer," and visual images predominated in the startling and rich dance theater piece she presented Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
"Columns I: The Palace at 4 A.M.," whose title comes from a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti, banks on theatrical devices and surreal motifs that are overly familiar.
But the piece as a whole is a meditation with a confessional tone that recalls contemporary confessional poetry.
That tone and Miss West's confident play with formal elements, including architectural ideas, make for many surprises and the work's originality.


Barry (R.G.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown Basking In His New Role As a Wild Card
It was not the kind of question likely to be asked of other Presidential candidates.
"Do you still sleep on the floor?" the young voter asked Edmund G. Brown Jr.
"I don't sleep anymore," the former Governor of California replied.


CHRONICLE
It has been 16 years since JOHN GOODMAN pledged his loyalty to Sigma Phi Epsilon at his alma mater, Southwest Missouri State University, in Springfield.
Now he will finally become a member.
The actor, a 1975 graduate of the university, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying that he was never inducted into the brotherhood because "I ran out of money."


Scope of U.S. Storm Aid Disappoints Monmouth Officials
New Jersey officials said today that the Federal disaster aid promised this week by the Bush Administration to help repair damage that three coastal counties suffered in a January storm will insure that shore resorts are ready for the summer tourist season.
But they said they were disappointed that the Federal Government had reaffirmed its earlier denial of aid in the wake of a storm that struck the coast on Halloween, causing even more damage to beaches, boardwalks, homes and businesses than the one nine weeks later.


Students' Lives, Improvised on Stage
THE students gathered in the auditorium for 75 morning minutes of chemistry experiments.
But these two periods had nothing to do with Bunsen burners, breakable beakers and sulfurous smells.
The basic elements were 85 middle school pupils -- seventh and eighth graders -- mixed with 16 high school juniors and seniors.
The catalyst was Barry Halpin, a former comedian and joke writer turned social worker using improvised drama.
It looked like fun.
It sounded like fun.
It certainly couldn't be a palatable setup for learning.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Waived their rights to Derek Strong, forward.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Jeffery Stephenson, defensive end-linebacker.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Manny Hazard, wide receiver.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Ron Solt, guard.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Named Steve Wetzel strength coach.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Jason Staurovsky, placekicker.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Named Stuart Morton Jr. assistant strength and conditioning coach.


IRISH HIGH COURT EXPLAINS DECISION
Explaining its decision in a case that caused an international uproar, the Irish Supreme Court appeared today to have broadened the grounds on which abortion may be legal.
Until now, abortion was allowed only when the life of the mother was in immediate danger.
Today the justices explained their decision to permit a 14-year-old who said she had been raped to travel to England for an abortion, saying the high court feared she would kill herself if they refused.


Holly Stevens, 67; Edited Father's Work
Holly Stevens, an editor who devoted much of her career to writing about and editing the work of her father, the poet Wallace Stevens, died on Wednesday at her home in Guilford, Conn.
She was 67 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said Ruth Hein, a friend.


Topics of The Times; Unhappy Harbinger
The welcome harbingers of spring are all around -- the red-winged blackbirds sounding shrill
ter-rees ter-rees
, the sandwich eaters in shirt sleeves on the library steps.
And with them comes an unwelcome harbinger, the wild onion, showing up in gardens like a clump of chives that has lost its way from the herb patch.
For months the wild onion has been lying dormant in the frozen ground, waiting for the faintest thaw to send its strong juices up its hollow stems.
It offers a hopeful touch of green though it makes tired grass look even more tired and empty flower beds even more forlorn.
It has to be pulled out promptly and painstakingly; one tiny overlooked bulb will multiply into a dozen.


Public Service Spots Produced by Dole
In what could be seen as a novel way to get children to eat fruits and vegetables -- and possibly increase sales as a result -- the Dole Food Company has produced a public service announcement recommending the virtues of those foods.
A 30-second television commercial, intended to run during Saturday morning children's programs, features smiling children, dancing to a rap tune.
The message of the spot, created by Ketchum Communications in New York, is that youngsters should eat five servings of fruits and vegetables daily.


The Duel In the Pool Goes to Biondi
Swimming's longest-running battle, the Matt and Tom Show, resumed tonight in the United States Olympic trials.
Matt won, Tom finished second and the rivalry will be renewed this summer in the Barcelona Olympics.
Matt is Matt Biondi of Castro Valley, Calif.
Tom is Tom Jager of Tijeras, N.M.
The battleground was the 50-meter freestyle, the shortest, most explosive, most exciting race in Olympic swimming.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly OUTER SPACE COMMITTEE -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
WORKING GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS OF ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF THE CENTER ON TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Thomas Fleming Jr., A Library Expert, 83
Thomas P. Fleming Jr., a library expert who specialized in scientific and medical material, died on Monday at his home in Leonia, N.J.
He was 83 years old.
He died after a three-year respiratory illness, his family said.


Thousands Will Suffer From New York City Plan for Watershed
To the Editor:
We read with fury "Drinking From Sewers" by Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (Op-Ed, Feb. 7), on the New York City water system and the need to insure its quality by installing filtration systems and imposing septic rules in the upstate watershed area, the city reservoir source.
There is another side to this story that no one down here wants to report on or think about.
There is an elitist attitude that urban New Yorkers seem to have, that they are somehow more important than and should be served by their upstate brethren.


In Repression, China Outdoes Its Neighbors
To the Editor:
Prof.
Bruce Reynolds suggests (letter, Feb. 18) that the degree of political-military repression in China is only marginally different from that found in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore.
The comparison is outrageous.
True, there was a bloody slaughter in Korea in 1971.
But that's more than 20 years ago, and South Korea has moved substantially toward greater democracy in recent years.
There was another slaughter in Taiwan in 1947, no less than 45 years ago, and Taiwan has also moved a long way toward political democracy.
The real outrage, however, concerns Hong Kong and Singapore.
To compare Hong Kong or Singapore to China is like comparing Denmark to Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
Indeed, the overwhelming majority of Hong Kong's six million residents are political refugees, or children of refugees, from that China Mr.
Reynolds extols.


Lambert Somec reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


Vallone Calls for Abolishing Council Presidency
Urging a big change in New York City government, the City Council leadership proposed yesterday to abolish the independently elected citywide post of Council president and its ombudsman's powers in favor of a vice mayor, who would run on a single ticket with the mayoral candidate.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, runs the Council but is often mistaken for the Council President, Andrew J. Stein, who presides over it but can only vote in case of a tie.
Mr.
Vallone said he wanted to end the confusion, as part of a grab bag of proposed changes in the City Charter that would widen the Council's already broad powers.


Review/Film; Fassbinder And Gloom And Doom
"Shadow of Angels," which opens today at the Public Theater, is the 1976 film version of a suicidally grim play by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, who appears in one of its principal roles.
Fassbinder plays a sad pimp who lives with an even sadder prostitute named Lily (Ingrid Caven), who is so beautiful that no man will hire her.
Lily is so despondent that she strangles a kitten, which in this film's scheme of things amounts to an act of kindness.
The pimp is so glum that when Lily returns home a little while later, she finds him lying on the floor, playing with the kitten's corpse.
As directed by Daniel Schmid, the Swiss-born film maker whose work is currently being featured at the Public, "Shadow of Angels" is extremely stagebound, with characters staring stonily into the distance as they recite the bitter aphorisms that constitute Fassbinder's dialogue.
Some samples: "Where there is no contempt, there is no love." "Ugly persons despise the sweat on beauty's forehead." "When no one sings, silence reigns." "The thought of death makes me smile. What else can one do?"


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; President Goes South, Tooting His Own Horn
With apologies to his mother, who taught him never to toot his own horn, President Bush was bragging the other day, sort of.
"My mother's living up the coast here in Florida," he declared in Miami, "so I've got to be careful, but I think I've been a good President."


Larson-Davis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Stock prices rose in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the day up 128.57 points, or 0.62 percent, to close at 20,992.99.
For the week the Nikkei was down 345.82 points.


Market Place; Power Behind the Windsor Fund
John B. Neff believes in buying stocks cheap, and he doesn't believe in diversification.
Mr.
Neff's Windsor Fund is one of the largest equity mutual funds in the country, so he often ends up holding large positions in stocks that most people on Wall Street hate, or at best have given up on.


Tech-Sym Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart yesterday giving results of Tuesday's primaries and caucuses reversed references to two states for which no figures were shown.
Minnesota held a nonbinding straw poll; Washington held caucuses.


Retailers' Sales Up In February
Monthly sales reported by the nation's largest retail chains, one of many factors in the fever chart of a troubled economy, indicated yesterday that an unusually large number of Americans were buying again in February, a sales month that is normally sparse.
Sales were strong not only at traditionally robust retailers like Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, but also at stores with more checkered records, like the J. C. Penney Company and Federated Department Stores Inc., which operates Bloomingdale's and other chains.


All This and Brooke Astor, Too
The headlines that day were about Reginald Vanderbilt, who claimed to owe taxes on only $11,000, not the $1 million the city was dunning him for.
Bloomingdale's was selling shirt waists for $1.98 and $2.98 -- "two specially chic styles," the ad said.
Not mentioned in the newspapers of March 1902 was someone who came to dominate the society pages later in the century: Brooke Astor, whose exuberant, single-minded concern for New York City made her a doyenne of philanthropy.
But last night, with television crews taking pictures for a medium that had not been invented back in 1902, Mrs.
Astor got a head start on celebrating her 90th birthday.


Petrolite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


At Moscow Book Party, Memories Of a Time of Repression Flow Freely
Several of the writers and intellectuals who gathered today to celebrate the publication of the Literary Almanac Metropol pointed with some satisfaction to the fact that they were meeting in the former Soviet Ministry of Culture on the anniversary of Stalin's death in 1953.
These were the very forces that had delayed the publication of the almanac in Moscow for some 13 years.
Back in those now-distant days known as the "period of stagnation," the collection by 23 writers, many well known and quite "official," provoked so strong a response from the jealous state that Metropol became something of a benchmark for literary repression.


F.D.I.C. Rejects Settlement To Recover Drexel Losses
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said yesterday that its board rejected the $1.3 billion settlement that its lawyers reached last month with Michael R. Milken, the former junk bond chief at Drexel Burnham Lambert, and hundreds of his former colleagues.
But the agency left some room to negotiate.
The agency, which had accused Mr.
Milken of causing the savings and loan industry to lose billions of dollars, wavered all week on whether to approve the deal.
Its last-minute announcement, on the eve of an important court hearing today, stunned many of the lawyers who had rushed to Washington to patch up the agreement and who left work yesterday thinking it was on track.


A Final Goodbye in Azerbaijan


Of, By and For Women
March is Women's History Month. Here are some performances
this weekend in New York City.
A calendar of events for the month is available from the New York City Commission on the Status of Women, 52 Chambers Street, Suite 207, New York, N.Y. 10007.
Information: (212) 788-2751.
Tomorrow
WOMANSONG, a concert featuring Mara Goodman, Debbie Shelton, Ellen Davidson and Barbara Barnes.
Tomorrow at 8 at the Brecht Forum, 79 Leonard Street, Manhattan.
Tickets are $6.
Information: 941-0332.
Sunday
STORYTELLING, stories from different cultures about women, told by women.
Sunday at 3 P.M. at the Ceres Gallery, 91 Franklin Street, Manhattan.
Suggested donation: $5.
The gallery is also exhibiting sculptures and paintings by Carol Harnay and Ruth Ingeborg Andris, through March 21.
Free.
Gallery hours: Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 6.
Information: (212) 226-4725.
FOUR GENERATIONS OF MUSIC BY WOMEN, music by Fanny Mendelssohn, Clara Schumann, Lili Boulanger, Isabella Leonarda and others.
Sunday at 7 P.M. at Grace and St.
Paul's Church, 123 West 71st Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 645-1750.
ONCE UPON A BUS, a storytelling play with music about five women's-rights supporters on their way to a conference.
Sunday at 5 P.M. at the Y.W.C.A., 30 Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn.
Tickets: $10; students and the elderly, $8.
Information: (718) 875-1190; ext. 212.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about tax legislation misstated the numbers of Democrats and Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee.
There are 11 Democrats and 9 Republicans.
The article also referred incorrectly to a provision of the 1990 budget act.
It requires that for an entire fiscal year, all new Congressional legislation taken together provide at least as much in new revenues as it does in new spending -- both for the first year affected by the legislation and over a five-year period; it does not require a balance in each of the five years.


Plainfield Man In Standoff Held in Murder
A Plainfield, N.J., man who barricaded himself inside a mansion Tuesday afternoon with the body of his mother-in-law, holding the police at bay for 18 hours, has been charged with strangling the woman.
The man, Mark Masters, 29 years old, was charged with murder yesterday after an autopsy showed that the woman had died of suffocation by strangulation, said the Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
An unusually large number of Americans were buying again in February, a sales month that is normally sparse, retail sales figures indicated.
Sales were strong not only at Wal-Mart but at stores with more checkered records, like J. C. Penney.  [ Page D1. ]
A program of rapid approval for biotech products was announced by the head of the F.D.A.  [ D2. ]
Initial claims for unemployment benefits fell by 21,000, the Government said.  [ D12. ]
Personal computer users scurried to try to escape a computer virus timed to erase data and programs today.  [ A14. ]
The Government is hiring more than 100 Russian scientists to help America harness the energy of nuclear fusion.  [ A1. ]
New Jersey told auto insurers they would have nearly two years to phase in new regulations, but the changes may never go into effect.  [ B1. ] Companies
The $1.3 billion settlement with Milken and his former Drexel colleagues was rejected by the F.D.I.C. board.  [ D1. ]
Westinghouse won a contract to build a Philippine nuclear plant in 1974 by paying a Marcos associate more than $17 million to be a "special sales representative," documents indicate.  [ D3. ]
Macy's said it would shutter 5 of its 24 I. Magnin outlets and 52 other specialty stores by June.  [ D4. ]
The Gap reported sharply higher sales, but its stock fell after it said its growth would moderate in 1992.  [ D4. ]
The S.E.C. told Exxon it must allow shareholders to vote on a proposal to set up a special panel representing big shareholders to oversee the board.  [ D6. ]
Three years after Northwest Airlines went private, the company that helped pioneer passenger air service must either expand sharply or fade into an also-ran.  [ D1. ]
Airlines are offering discount fares for spring and summer because despite an improvement in transatlantic traffic, they are faced with lagging advance bookings.  [ D16. ]
S.A.S. said it would pull out of a venture to own Inter-Continental hotels with Seibu Saison.  [ D3. ] International
Shifting its policy toward the former Soviet republics, the U.S. reached tentative agreement to loosen international controls on exports of advanced telecommunications equipment.  [ D1. ]
American semiconductor executives are beginning to express concern that their Japanese competitors might be selling computer chips below production cost.  [ D3. ] Markets
The American Stock Exchange got S.E.C. permission to list smaller, younger and more speculative companies that now trade over the counter.  [ D1. ]
Stocks closed sharply lower in heavy but cautious trading.
The Dow dropped 27.06, 3,241.50.  [ D6. ]
Prices of Treasury securities continued to slide and interest rates moved higher in active trading.  [ D12. ]
Confusion in the coffee market sent futures prices down.  [ D13. ]  The dollar gained.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
John B. Neff, who runs the Windsor Fund, is not shy about offering opinions.
His latest: Chrysler should quickly name a successor to Iacocca.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Is a "new world order" on its way after a painful transition period?
Leonard Silk: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
The language of the streets is becoming the language of Madison Avenue, as advertising slogans veer toward the vernacular.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ]


Review/Film; Three Cases Of Mistaken Identity In Venice
There's more method than inspired madness to "Blame It on the Bellboy," but this scenic, fast-paced farce by a first-time British director is still effervescent fun.
Mark Herman, a film school graduate who both wrote and directed this comedy, has concocted a witty mistaken-identity plot and done an able job of keeping it in motion.
Bronson Pinchot, happily mangling the language as he plays the Venetian hotel employee of the title, has Messrs.
Horton (Richard Griffiths), Orton (Dudley Moore) and Lawton (Bryan Brown) to contend with, and pronounces all three of those names in the same way ("Or-tone").
Very quickly, the upshot is what the bellboy labels a "big misunderstood."


The Reading as an Occasion for Romance
IN a bar, she might never have been so forward, so vulgar.
But at a reading not long ago at Brentano's on Fifth Avenue, surrounded by the young and the bookish, the woman in the front row was inflamed by the dual pleasures of the written word and erotic flirtation.
She lost control.
"I have to admit that I fell in love with your jacket photo," she announced to the evening's performer, a young novelist from Louisiana named John Ed Bradley.
"What hotel are you staying at?"


On My Mind; The Political Disease
In the very recent past, most intellectual conservatives understood, named and fought against a political disease they called moral equivalency.
Now a sad number of them are suddenly suffering from it.
Moral equivalency is a disorder of that part of the mental process that governs ethical political thought and conduct.
Those afflicted exhibit certain specific symptoms.


How to Cut Long-Term Interest Rates
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, says he is worried about the "exceptional measure of uncertainty" regarding economic recovery in 1992.
Consumers are overextended, investment is restrained by overbuilt commercial real estate and weakened lending institutions, and Government spending is constrained by large deficits.
Despite stimulative monetary policy, long-term interest rates remain stubbornly high, especially in relation to inflation.
Mortgage rates, for example, are around 9 percent.
These high rates restrain home building and productivity-boosting business investment.


U.S. Weighs Boarding Korea Arms Ships
The Bush Administration in recent days has examined the military option of boarding two North Korean cargo ships heading for Iran loaded with Scud-C ballistic missiles for the arsenals of Syria and Iran, Administration officials said today.
The boarding option, which has been discussed in the Pentagon, the State Department and the White House, is still under active consideration by President Bush and his senior national security aides, but no decisions have been made, the officials said.


Americans Fear Chips Are Dumped
American semiconductor executives are beginning to express concern that their Japanese competitors might be selling computer chips below production cost, a practice that would violate the semiconductor trade agreement between the nations.
The reappearance of such charges, which still lack substantial proof and are denied by Japanese executives, could further stir up tense relations over trade in electronics.


Orbital Sciences Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baby Boomers Impose Cultural Thuggery on a New Generation; Play It Again
To the Editor:
"The Nashville Anthem" by Jory Farr (Op-Ed, Feb. 12), on why "the hillbilly sound has taken root," evokes the question: What do you hear if you play a country music song backward?
Answer: The singer gets back the wife (husband), job, house and car.


Review/Film; A Magical Mystery Tour of One Man's Mind, in 'Toto'
"Toto the Hero" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 21.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway at 63d Street, in Manhattan.
If "Toto the Hero" ("Toto le Heros") is an indication of things to come, then Jaco van Dormael, a 34-year-old Belgian writer and director, is a bright new talent to celebrate.


Ex-Salomon Executive Named to Lehman Post
Lehman Brothers yesterday scooped up the latest defector from Salomon Brothers, naming C. Daniel Tyree as vice chairman of Lehman Brothers International.
Mr.
Tyree, who quit as head of Salomon's junk bond division in late January, will be based in London at the headquarters of Lehman Brothers International, the European investment banking arm of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., which is owned by the American Express Company.


Stocks Down Sharply, With Dow Falling 27.06
Stocks closed sharply lower yesterday, in heavy but cautious trading.
Investors were tentative in advance of today's February employment data and because of pressure from a weak bond market and concern over rising interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 27.06 points, 3,241.50.
The February unemployment report is the first of the key economic numbers due out this month that are expected to give the market a sense of the economy's strength.


Thousands Will Suffer From New York City Plan for Watershed; Conserve, Conserve
To the Editor:
"Drinking From Sewers" (Op-Ed, Feb. 7) by Robert F. Kennedy Jr. makes a number of good suggestions on the proper path for protecting New York City's drinking water.
The one he leaves out, however, should be first among them: conservation.
At two recent informational hearings I held on New York City's endangered water supply, many of the expert witnesses pointed to conservation, in tandem with pollution prevention, as the key.
The average New Yorker consumes about 208 gallons of water a day, 32 more than the average American.


Collins Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Democratic Budget, Slashing at Military, Is Passed by House
The House, by a vote of 215 to 201, tonight passed an $1.26 trillion Democratic budget intended to cut military spending sharply in favor of shaving the deficit and increasing the financing of domestic programs.
The Democratic budget would cut Pentagon spending by $15 billion in 1993 and $91 billion through 1997.
Such cuts are about double what President Bush had proposed in his budget, which was overwhelmingly defeated on Wednesday night by a vote of 370 to 42.


Art in Review
Samuel F. B. Morse  National Academy of Design 1083 Fifth Avenue (at 89th Street) Through Thursday
As a painter, Samuel F. B. Morse (1791-1868) lived and worked through a crucial juncture in American art.
His teachers, Washington Allston and Benjamin West, practiced an older tradition of history painting; his friend Thomas Cole pioneered the landscape painting that was to become the wave of the future.
Morse, however, unable to proceed comfortably in either direction, concentrated on portraiture.
He also taught art theory and helped found the National Academy of Design (he became its first president in 1826).
In the 1840's he abandoned art for scientific study, and he is, of course, best known today as the inventor of the telegraph.





Clothestime reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Westbridge Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wheeler McMillen, 99, a Pioneer In Industrial Use of Farm Crops
Wheeler McMillen, a noted chronicler of the vast changes in 20th-century American agriculture, died on Wednesday at the Heritage Hall Nursing Home in Leesburg, Va.
He was 99 years old.
Mr.
McMillen was a pioneer in finding industrial uses for agricultural crops and previously wasted byproducts.
It was a cause that led to a new science when he and Henry Ford formed a lobby to champion it in 1935.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DEFENSE, OFFENSE
Derisively and disdainfully, a defense attorney tore into Salvatore Gravano, attacking the character and credibility of the stoic Mafia turncoat who is the government's main witness in its racketeering case against John Gotti.
A1.


For Children
'Making Art History'
Mark Twain Junior High School 2401 Neptune Avenue Coney Island, Brooklyn (718) 265-7123 Recommended ages: 5 and up Through June
Coney Island's public-school children have their own museum -- in the Mark Twain school for the gifted and talented -- and have linked the past to the present with the theme "Making Art History" in a show sponsored by BACA/Brooklyn Arts Council.
The children's talents are revealed in soap carvings, black-and-white photographs, quilling, American Indian petroglyphs, African shields and Impressionist paintings, among other forms and styles.


Buffets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


A Scornful Defense Questions Chief Witness Against Gotti
Firing questions with derision and disdain, a defense lawyer yesterday tore into Salvatore Gravano, attacking the character and credibility of the stoic Mafia turncoat who is the prosecution's crucial witness against John Gotti.
On his first day of cross-examination, Mr.
Gravano seemed coldly composed in general but a bit edgy at times as he leaned back in his seat and stared at his inquisitor, Albert J. Krieger, in the racketeering-murder trial at Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Excerpts From Statements: How Judges Reasoned
Following are excerpts from statements today by two Justices of the Irish Supreme Court on its ruling last week that a 14-year-old girl may travel to England for an abortion.
Chief Justice Thomas A. Finlay supported the ruling; Justice Anthony Hederman dissented.
STATEMENT BY THOMAS A. FINLAY  Chief Justice
I accept this submission made on behalf of the Attorney General in this case, that the doctrine of the harmonious interpretation of the Constitution involves in this case a consideration of the constitutional rights and obligations of the mother of the unborn child and the interrelation of those rights and obligations with the rights and obligations of other people and, of course, with the right to life of the unborn child as well.


In the Catskills, Retro Upon Retro
IN a bar called the Deep End, at 4 P.M. last Saturday, Peter Fonda could be seen loading contraband into the gas tank of his Captain America motorcycle.
Absolutely no one was watching.
Row after row of empty chairs faced the bar's gigantic television screen, and the only customer in the place sat with his back turned to "Easy Rider." At long last, he noticed.
"I forget," he said idly to the bartender.
"I know one of them dies. I think the other one lives, though."
This was a 60's oldies weekend at Kutsher's Country Club, a Catskill hotel that has a 50-cent take-your-own-blood-pressure machine in its lobby, and is thus a place where "60's" and "oldies" usually have other meanings.
For someone who hadn't seen the Catskills in 30 years and had deliberately suppressed all memories of ever having been there, this weekend was guaranteed to be nostalgic one way or another.


Exit Academy, Enter Dragon: Police Seek Martial-Arts Edge
It was a routine Sunday afternoon recently at Modern Warrior, a martial-arts academy here, where students grunted, punched, kicked and catapulted each other in ways that might have been choreographed for a late-night movie fantasy.
But in Lindenhurst, fantasy is not what it seems.
All the students in the Sunday class, like 2,000 before them, were police or correction officers who had invested their own time and money to learn self-defense techniques that go far beyond what is taught in the police academy.


Quotation of the Day
"We were ready to go full throttle, but unfortunately we ran out of gas." -- SENATOR BOB KERREY.
[ A19:6. ]


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Cigna Corp., Philadelphia, an insurance and financial services company, named John K. Leonard president of its special benefits division.
He succeeds Gordon L. Murphy, who will retire. *
GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn., a unit of General Electric Co., named Patricia D. Yoder vice president for corporate public relations and advertising.


Cheni Gold Mines reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


ALBANY PLAN ADDS MINORITY DISTRICTS
Veering toward a confrontation with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a state legislative committee released today a final redistricting plan intended to increase the number of seats held by black and Hispanic New Yorkers while cementing the Democrats' control of the Assembly and the Republicans' lock on the State Senate.
The reapportionment plan is all but assured of passage in the Legislature next week since it is the legislative leadership's own plan.


Review/Theater; 'Marvin's Room': Life, As It Is and Could Be
"Marvin's Room," initially produced in New York by Playwrights Horizons, has reopened at the Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Manhattan.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 6, 1991.
The title character of "Marvin's Room," who is seen only as a blurred shape behind the glass-brick wall of his sickroom, has been dying for 20 years.
Eaten up by cancer and crippled by strokes, he turns for entertainment to the simple pleasure of watching his lamp's light bounce around the walls and ceiling when it is reflected at bedside from a compact mirror.


Art in Review
'Scandal, Outrage and Censorship Controversy in Modern Art'  Galerie St.
Etienne 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
With the National Endowment for the Arts once again under attack, the timing of this exhibition devoted to censored art couldn't have been better.
Jane Kallir, the gallery's director, has assembled three groups of work that have caused controversy: from turn-of-the-century Vienna, where erotic artworks by Egon Schiele and Gustav Klimt were suppressed; from Nazi Germany, where a broad range of modernist art was attacked both for its content and its style, and from the United States today.


Luther Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westhead Out of Suit
The former Loyola-Marymount coach PAUL WESTHEAD was dropped yesterday from a lawsuit filed by the family of Hank Gathers, the Loyola Marymount star who died after collapsing during a game two years ago.
Superior Court Judge J. GARY HASTINGS approved dismissal of Westhead from a negligence lawsuit filed by the Gathers family.
Earlier this month, a lawsuit filed on behalf of Gathers's 8-year-old son was withdrawn.


BRIEFS
Debt *
General Nutrition Inc. said it had offered $135 million of 11 3/8 percent senior subordinated notes, due in 2000, through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The company, based in Pittsburgh, is a retailer of vitamins and other nutrition and personal-care products.
Common Stock


At the Movies
Oliver Stone's Quest
"I think Congress deserves an Oscar."


Accounts
*
Zotos Corp., Darien, Conn., narrowed its review for an agency to handle a $5 million product introduction.
The hair-care company said the finalists included these New York shops: Altschiller Reitzfeld Tracy-Locke, Libby Daniel &amp; Associates, Lois U.S.A. and Peter Rogers Associates.
A decision is expected late this month. *
Peninsula Group, Hong Kong, a hotel marketing and management company, to Albert Frank-Guenther Law Inc., New York, for the first national advertising campaign for its two American luxury hotels, the Peninsula New York and the Peninsula Beverly Hills.
An agency spokesman said that an estimated $1 million print campaign would start this month. *
Mexico's Tourism Secretariat announced the annual review of its advertising, direct marketing and public relations account, now at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


North Amer Biologicals reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Appeal for the Son of the Former Romanian Dictator


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Tsongas to 'Fight Back' With TV Ads
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas likes to say that he is "one Greek who fights back." This weekend he is hoping to prove it with an opening volley in what promises to be a spirited advertising war in the Southern states whose voters go to the polls on Tuesday.
The decision to mount a counteroffensive comes just a few days after Mr.
Tsongas issued a vigorous plea -- and one that some of his rivals complained was sanctimonious -- to avoid attacking one another by name.
It was prompted, aides said, by Gov.
Bill Clinton's insistent, and possibly effective, assaults.


Critic's Choice/Theater; A Husband's Memories
In his brave confessional monologue "Time Flies When You're Alive," the popular television actor Paul Linke ("Chips," "Parenthood") tells the true story of his first wife Francesca Draper's heroic losing battle against breast cancer.
Adopting the folksy tone of a next-door neighbor, Mr.
Linke confides the most intimate details of his life during the 10-year marriage, from his final LSD trip to the home birth of his first child to his tasting of his wife's final tear at the moment she died.
The bulk of the story is about her illness, her desperate pursuit of nontraditional treatments, and how Mr.
Linke and the couple's two children (a third was born a year before she died) dealt with the crisis.
Although the actor throws in too many show-business references, and the script's moments of comic relief ring a little too pat, the play, which has toured around the country and was shown on Home Box Office four years ago, is still very gripping.
One leaves the theater surprisingly uplifted.


Season Has Begun. Bulletin, No It Hasn't.
It is rising from the south like a noxious gas, a radon of the soul, and it is seeping into our consciousness with the pit-patter-patter beat of an arrhythmic heart.
Call it Spring, call it Hardball, Statball or A Second Chance for Me and Dad, it is the exaggerated report that the baseball season has begun.
It has not begun.
It is a whole month away.
The boys are merely practicing down there, stretching muscles cramped at card shows, reading their paternity suits, criminal charges, ghosted bios.
They are confiding to reporters how hard it is to relate to left field after sacrificing their lives to right, and they are baking out the booze they never had to buy.
Don't misinterpret my complaint.
I love baseball.
It's the pastime of my nation.
It's what we have instead of Norse sagas and legends of the Samurai.
But why are March sports pages already wordlocked with rhapsodies in green, with rookie dreams and veteran's hopes and those charts, endless charts?
No wonder we're behind in math and science; everybody is trying to find a new method of measuring the relationship between deferred income and times at bat with men on base.


Equitable of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BP Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Selas Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Technology's Erosion of Culture
Technopoly  The Surrender of Culture to Technology  By Neil Postman  222 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
In such previous books as "Conscientious Objections" (1988) and "Amusing Ourselves to Death" (1985), the social critic Neil Postman has launched eloquent attacks against television as a corrupting influence on contemporary civilization and issued stern warnings about the decline of the written word and the sorry state of American education.


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Photography; Eadweard Muybridge Revisited, With Others
For a brief moment last summer, "Motion and Document -- Sequence and Time: Eadweard Muybridge and Contemporary American Photography" flared into prominence as yet another casualty in the art-censorship wars.
Elizabeth Broun, director of the National Museum of American Art in Washington, where the exhibition was about to appear, decreed that a 1963 work by Sol LeWitt was offensive to women and should not be shown.
Ms.
Broun later reversed herself, but lost in the furor surrounding her action was any real discussion of the show as a whole.
The exhibition, which was organized by Jock Reynolds, director of the Addison Gallery of American Art in Andover, Mass., and James Shelton, curator of photography there, has come to the International Center of Photography Midtown.
New Yorkers can see for themselves what the controversy was about, and can experience the rest of this sprawling, provocative and frequently rewarding exhibition. (Mr. LeWitt's piece, a long box with 10 peepholes through which a viewer can see successive shots of a nude woman walking toward the camera, is apt to leave most viewers wondering what all the fuss was about.)


Exxon Told to Allow Vote on Holders' Panel
In a victory for shareholder activists, the Securities and Exchange Commission has told the Exxon Corporation that it must allow shareholders to vote on a proposal to set up a special panel representing big shareholders to oversee the performance of the company's board.
The proposal was offered by Robert A. G. Monks, who has long worked with large public pension funds to win more power for shareholders in corporate decision making.
Last year, Mr.
Monks unsuccessfully sought a seat on the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company board in a widely publicized campaign that was critical of Sears management.


Stepping Up Damage Control, United Way Picks Interim President
The board of The United Way of America, grappling with the resignation of its president and new disclosures that he agreed to the destruction of some financial records, named an interim president today to head the nation's largest charitable organization.
The appointment of the new president, Kenneth W. Dam, an academic and former diplomat who is a vice president at the International Business Machines Corporation, was the second management change since the forced resignation of William F. Aramony.
It also indicated that damage-control efforts by the organization's board are being stepped up to avoid a further erosion of trust.


Man Convicted in Sex Attacks Of Children Faces New Charges
A convicted child molester, released from prison one year ago, has been arrested on charges that he sexually attacked six more children in Brooklyn and Queens in the last six months, the police said.
It is the second time that the suspect, Jose Velez, 38 years old, of 1570 East New York Avenue in East New York, Brooklyn, has been arrested in sexual attacks of children while under state supervision for similar crimes.


Art in Review
Ray K. Metzker and William Eggleston  Laurence Miller Gallery 138 Spring Street SoHo Through April 4
In recent years, Ray K. Metzker has turned away from the stark photographic constructions for which he's best known to produce a remarkable series of landscape images.
The works here, made during an extended stay near Cannes, France, demonstrate Mr.
Metzker's ability to combine an interest in formal issues with a quiet lyricism.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"AND THE WORLD GOES 'ROUND," Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
A musical review by John Kander and Fred Ebb.
Final performance, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Remaining performances: today at 8 P.M., tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


At the Bar; From a Lonely Prison Cell, an Inmate Wins an Important Victory for Civil Liberties.
Somewhere in the bowels of Camp J of the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola, not far from where three guards kicked, punched and pummelled him nearly nine years ago, prisoner No. 91888, Keith J. Hudson, may be savoring something few lawyers anywhere have known in recent years: He took a civil liberties case to the Supreme Court of the United States, and won.
Last week, by a vote of 7 to 2, the Justices agreed with Mr.
Hudson that prison beatings can be unconstitutionally "cruel and unusual" even if they result only in split lips and bloody noses rather than concussions and broken bones.
"When prison officials maliciously and sadistically use force, contemporary standards of decency always are violated," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the High Court.


Eugene Boe; Author, 69
Eugene Boe, an author and a former columnist for Cue magazine, died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan and Fergus Falls, Minn.
He died of liver failure, said an associate, Jerome Agel.


Art in Review
Komar and Melamid  Ronald Feldman Fine Arts 31 Mercer Street SoHo Through March 28
In this exhibition by the team Komar and Melamid, there seem to be two entirely different shows.
The gallery's front room presents the artists' farcical version of a Sears department store, whose wares include canned freedom, wall paneling made of corrugated cardboard and leisure wear riddled with bullet holes.
The artists' proposition that there are only three viable styles left for contemporary art, "Modernism, Kitsch or Sears," is argued in dense and amusing visual detail, though many of their broader critical points seem too obviously stated.


Connecticut Water Service Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baby Boomers Impose Cultural Thuggery on a New Generation
To the Editor:
I was enjoying "The Nashville Anthem" (Op-Ed, Feb. 12), Jory Farr's article on the resurgence in country music's popularity, more or less agreeing that country appeals to a musically disenfranchised class of white adults.
But my pleasure was checked by his description of rock, pop and dance music as "the noisy domain of millions of alienated and self-infatuated youth."
"Noisy" is too unquantifiable to quibble with; "alienated" I would generally agree with, although I wouldn't apply it indiscriminately to "millions." "Self-infatuated," however, is where I draw the line.


Western Star reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Jan Bell Marketing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
With his lyrics that satirize the rich, powerful and social of New York and Washington, CHRISTOPHER MASON might seem an incongruous choice for Purim party entertainment.
But at the masked Purim Ball of the Jewish Museum at the Waldorf-Astoria on Tuesday night, Mr.
Mason, a performer and composer, will do songs about Queen Esther.
She was the Jewish wife of the King of Persia, and she saved the Jews there from the hand of the wicked Haman.
"At our first meeting, the ladies of the committee looked at me curiously over their spectacles," Mr.
Mason, who is often compared with Noel Coward, said yesterday after singing a sample of his songs over the phone.
"I could see they were wondering if I could pull it off. Yesterday, I sang the songs for the committee, and they were overjoyed. I was greatly relieved."


Police Beating Trial Opens With Replay of Videotape
Testimony in the Rodney G. King beating trial began today with defense lawyers asserting that four police officers accused of assault were following correct procedure in subduing a "bizarre" and violent suspect.
Arguments began with showings of the amateur videotape of the beating that was made a year and two days ago.
It depicts a group of white police officers repeatedly clubbing and kicking Mr.
King, a black motorist who was stopped for speeding.


Judge in Police-Beating Trial Sets Aside Confusion
By last autumn, the case of four Los Angeles police officers charged in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King, a black motorist, had become mired in confusion.
Because of his indecision on where the trial should be held and a controversy over a note that he had sent to prosecutors, Superior Court Judge Bernard Kamins had come under criticism.
An appellate court ruling removed him from the case over the issue of the note, which it deemed improper contact.


Relentless Defense Wins One For Knicks
During a 4-minute-27-second stretch of the fourth quarter last night, the Los Angeles Clippers did not score a point.
It wasn't that the Clippers self-destructed; the Knicks' defense was simply that good.


Organogenesis Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Banana Republic, U.S.A.
We have a Government of followers following followers, turning the United States inward and honing the mentality of a banana republic.
This week inside Congressional hearing rooms, you could have heard the whines and wails of weakness.
Secretary of State James Baker went there to make the case for $900 million over two years for U.N. peacekeeping operations in places like Cambodia and Yugoslavia.
Even that amount would fall far short of what the U.N. said it expected and needed from America.


Talley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Florida; Florida Becomes Main Battlefield For Democrats on Super Tuesday
Bill Clinton approaches the Florida primary on Tuesday with more money to spend and a stronger organization behind him than his main rival, Paul E. Tsongas.
But the demographics of Florida, which has millions of transplants from the north and a disproportionately large number of well educated, white professionals, may favor Mr.
Tsongas.


Corrections
A brief article on the Credit Markets page of Business Day on Tuesday about a stock buyback by the Laurentian Capital Corporation omitted the record date.
It is Feb. 17, meaning that stockholders who owned fewer than 100 shares on that date may participate in the buyback.
The article also misstated the month that will be used to calculate a payment term of the deal.
The company will pay either $5 a share, or 75 cents a share above the stock's average closing price on the American Stock Exchange during the month the shares are tendered, whichever is greater; the tender offer expires on May 31.


Idexx Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Lineup: Torborg Names Names
Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Mets, does not see his offense as some overpowering machine.
He likes it, though, and believes it should be feared as a uniquely puzzling, balanced and mercilessly creative generator of runs.
"We've got speed at the front end of the order, we got a host of guys who hit from both sides of the plate and our share of thunder," said Torborg.
"I like what I see on paper."


Miscellany
*
Times Mirror Magazines, New York, named NFL Properties, New York, the licensing and marketing arm of the National Football League, to be the licensing representative for five of its publications: Field &amp; Stream, Golf, Home Mechanix, Ski and Skiing.


Corrections
An article last Friday about Derrick Bell, a professor at Harvard Law School who is protesting the absence of a black woman among the school's tenured professors, misstated the number of those professors.
It is 59, including five women and three black men.


American Management Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; More Campaigns Are Taking a Less-Than-Perfect Tone
THE language of the streets is becoming the language of Madison Avenue, as advertising slogans veer toward the vernacular.
A growing number of broadcast commercials and print advertisements are affecting a breezy informality by borrowing colloquial expressions and slang terms from everyday speech.
Words like "gotta," "yo," "gonna," "hey" and "uh-huh" are becoming as important an ingredient in ads as catchy jingles or celebrity endorsers.


Onex Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Comparator Systems Corp., Irvine, Calif., a maker of desktop devices, acquired Largo Vista Inc., Orange, Calif.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Comverse Technology Inc., Woodbury, N.Y., which manufactures microprocessor computer systems, and Startel Corp., Irvine, Calif., a telecommunications concern, amended the terms of their merger plan.


A Westinghouse Memo Tells of Payment in Philippines
Internal Westinghouse documents seized by the Philippine Government indicate that Westinghouse won a contract to build a nuclear plant in that country in 1974 by paying a close associate of President Ferdinand E. Marcos more than $17 million to be a "special sales representative."
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation and the Philippines reached an out-of-court settlement earlier this week, on the eve of a trial over Philippine accusations that Westinghouse and another American company, Burns &amp; Roe Enterprises, won the contract by paying bribes to the Marcos Government.
Last year the Philippine Government pressed the same case against the companies before a Swiss arbitration panel, using the same documents, and lost.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Texas; Tsongas and Buchanan Enter Enemy Territory
President Bush comes from Texas, among other places.
Gov.
Bill Clinton comes from Arkansas, just next door, and people here have always had a predilection for backing friends and neighbors.
So this Tuesday's Presidential primary in the nation's third-largest state represents a formidable challenge for their principal rivals, Patrick J. Buchanan in the Republican race and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts in the Democratic contest.
Not quite like selling refrigerators to Eskimos, but close.
Yet both challengers are trying, because the potential payoff is so big: 121 Republican delegates and 214 Democratic delegates, roughly a tenth of the number needed to win the nomination.


Pacific Nuclear Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Curiously, Missing Glove Enters a Murder Retrial
As if there were not enough intrigue in the murder trial of Carolyn Warmus, a new mystery surfaced this week in the form of a black woolen glove.
The glove turned up in January, and prosecutors say it could link Ms.
Warmus to the crime scene.
On Wednesday, with the jury out of the courtroom, Assistant District Attorney James A. McCarty told the judge of his intent to "connect the glove with the defendant during the course of this trial."


Review/Theater; The Burned-Out Days Of F. Scott Fitzgerald
Although F. Scott Fitzgerald was an embittered man during the last days of his life, he was deeply involved in writing "The Last Tycoon." It was, of course, that unfinished novel and not his patchwork career as a screenwriter that became his Hollywood legacy.
Fitzgerald's travail in the movies and how it eventually fed his artistry would seem to provide a rich subject for dramatization.
Sadly, John Kane's monodrama, "The Other Side of Paradise," is misguided and superficial.
The play, which opened last night at the Kaufman Theater, reduces Fitzgerald to a burned-out egotist who has lost his adrenalin along with his wit.
Loosely stitching together anecdotes from fact and legend, Mr.
Kane puts everything into the mouth of the author, who alternately talks to himself and chats awkwardly with the audience.
Occasionally there is an evocative story, but nothing the character says or does on stage persuades us that he could have written any of his books.
The discredit for the show is shared by the playwright and the actor Keir Dullea, who has rashly decided to go it alone in this slapdash vehicle.


Bonar Inc. reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Art Taylor: Improviser, Instructor, Inspiration
Miles Davis, Sonny Rollins, Thelonious Monk, Dexter Gordon, Bud Powell, Coleman Hawkins, Charlie Parker, John Coltrane, Hank Mobley, Jackie McLean: these are some of the people the drummer Art Taylor has cajoled, pushed, powered and sweet-talked, on record and in performance.
A quick look at the discographies of the Blue Note and Prestige labels has Mr.
Taylor, who is performing this weekend at the Village Vanguard in one of the jazz events of the season, playing in nearly 100 recording sessions in the 1950's alone.
There's a reason for all of this.
Mr.
Taylor is one of the great drummers to come out of the fertile Harlem be-bop scene, someone who helped define, along with Philly Joe Jones and Art Blakey, the sound of jazz made in the 1950's.
On brushes, he's extraordinary, creating a seamless hissing sound that propels a band.
And Mr.
Taylor is as interactive as any drummer alive; his performance is the desire to communicate, written in music.


Restaurants
Truffle sandwiches and Tiffany trinkets, King Juan Carlos and creme brulee.
Those are just a few of the images that float above Le Cirque, this city's most cosmopolitan and arguably best restaurant.
Sprinkling superlatives upon this celebrated institution soon becomes an exercise in tautology.
So the intention of this assessment is not to determine
if
Le Cirque is great, but why.
As with almost any outstanding restaurant, Le Cirque is the embodiment of one person's philosophy.
Sirio Maccioni, the owner and suave presence in the dining room, has his imprint on virtually every aspect of the operation, from the tricky seating arrangements to the innovative wine selection, the menu and even the angle at which silverware is placed on tables.
Add to that a dedicated and well-seasoned staff, which now includes two of Mr.
Maccioni's sons and a brilliant chef, and the stage is set for a spectacular dining experience.


Empi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rhode Island University Begins a Painful Inquiry
With its basketball team scheduled to participate in the Atlantic 10 Conference tournament on Sunday, the University of Rhode Island began questioning team members today to determine whether any were involved in an illegal gambling operation on campus.
The gambling operation, which also extended to nearby Bryant College, was the focus of a state police investigation that resulted in the arrest of three people last week, including a student at the University of Rhode Island.


Critic's Notebook; Welles's 'Othello,' Crowned in Glory
ORSON WELLES'S screen adaptation of "Othello" shared the top prize at the 1952 Cannes Film Festival with Renato Castellani's sentimental Italian comedy "Two Cents Worth of Hope," approximately four years, three Iagos and a half-dozen Desdemonas after Welles began production in Italy in the summer of 1948.
The Castellani film went on to please crowds in Europe and the United States.
"Othello," which had been listed as having Moroccan nationality at Cannes, enjoyed some success in Europe but pleased very few critics in this country when it opened in 1955.
It came and quickly went.


House Panel Proposes Short List Of Those Who Wrote Bad Checks
Hoping to control the damage to political careers and the reputation of Congress, the House ethics committee today proposed naming 19 representatives and five former representatives who regularly overdrew their House bank accounts by tens of thousands of dollars.
Several Republican lawmakers immediately attacked the recommendation as a whitewash of dozens of other members who they said also abused their checking privileges.
The panel's action set the stage for an explosive fight next week when the full House considers the committee's recommendation.
Four Republicans on the 14-member committee dissented from the recommendation, saying it set a standard of ethics far lower than what the American public expects from its lawmakers.


Prague Journal; Hot to Invest? Trust a Man With a Harvard Past?
What better way to make a fortune in Prague these days than to let an investment fund headed by a young Harvard graduate do it for you?
So over the last few months, about half a million Czechs and Slovaks, perhaps thinking they were putting their money in the hands of a company backed by the American university, did just that.
The Harvard Capital and Consulting Company, brainchild of a 28-year-old Czech-American, Viktor Kozeny, cornered 20 percent of the market for investment coupons that are at the heart of Czechoslovakia's campaign to privatize its state industries.


Chip Maker's Earnings Rise
The National Semiconductor Corporation today reported improved results that were helped by reduced operating costs and a special pretax gain of $8.5 million from patent licensing fees.
For the third quarter of National Semiconductor's 1992 fiscal year, the computer and semiconductor maker earned $14.5 million, or 11 cents a share, nearly three times the $5 million, or 2 cents a share, it reported in the comparable period a year earlier.
Per-share figures reflected an increase in the number of shares outstanding to 111.4 million, from 103.4 million a year ago.


Top-Ranked Courier Suffers Another Loss
Jim Courier, the player who has patterned his on-court facade after a brick wall, ran into one even more impassive than himself and was flattened by it this afternoon in the third round of the Newsweek Champions Cup.
Courier, the defending champion, has been the world's No. 1 player for the past month, a span in which he has failed to win four tournaments.
Today, with his game devoid of its usual whiplash panache from the baseline, he was eliminated, 6-4, 7-5, by 36th-ranked Andrei Chesnokov.


Sounds Around Town
Latin-Jazz Mingling
Jerry Gonzales, New Music Cafe, 380 Canal Street, Manhattan (212) 941-1019.
Latin-jazz usually means music-school fusion, a weakening of both Afro-Cuban music and jazz.
This is different: the Jerry Gonzales band brings together some of the best Latin and jazz musicians -- Mr.
Gonzales and his bass-playing brother, Andy, the drummer Steve Berrios, the pianist Larry Willis and the saxophonist Joe Ford -- who rip through adventurous modal tunes and pieces by Thelonious Monk.
The band makes the pieces evolve, moving slowly from section to section; at its best, it's thrilling music.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30; the cover is $15.
Improvisatory Charm
Arto Lindsay, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Arto Lindsay is convening a handful of fine musicians -- Dougie Bowne, Bernie Worrell, Marc Ribot and others -- to do what he wants, which is usually all over the place.
He might sing a bossa nova tune, then go directly to noise without passing anything.
And he'll do it all with charisma, relying on improvisation and charm to save his day.
Shows tomorrow are at 9 and midnight; there is a $10 cover.
For Dancing
Tabou Combo, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan (212) 243-4940.
Smooth and sensual, Tabou Combo floats along on bubbling rhythms, with guitars and percussion locking into profound grooves.
This is dance music at its best, in which a large group that plays regularly for dancers, knows exactly what it wants and how to get it.
What it wants is for the dance floor to be packed, and it knows that a certain type of grace will do the trick.
The shows tonight are at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M., and the cover charge is $16.
Incisive Post-Bop
Randy Sandke, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Mr.
Sandke will be running through a terrific piece he's been playing around town for the last few weeks called "The Mystic Trumpeter," based on a poem by Walt Whitman.
Though Mr.
Sandke has been tagged as a swing revivalist, this piece owes more to Charles Mingus and Booker Little than to swing players; there's tight and acidic writing and Mr.
Sandke himself is an incisive, post-bop player.
The show on Sunday night starts at 11, and the cover is $10.


U.S. PLANS TO HIRE RUSSIAN SCIENTISTS IN FUSION RESEARCH
The Federal Government is hiring more than a hundred scientists from Russia to help America harness the vast energy of nuclear fusion.
Russia pioneered the field, in which powerful magnetic fields are used to try to tame for constructive use the kind of thermonuclear fire that lights the sun.
The deal is the first known case in which the Government has tapped Russia's scientific talent, although private industry has already done so.


Kerrey Withdraws From Democratic Presidential Race


American Power Conversion reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pascual Perez in Peril After Report of Failed Drug Test
Yankee pitcher Pascual Perez recently failed a drug test, which if confirmed would result in a one-year suspension and possibly end his career, according to people familiar with Perez's case and with baseball's testing procedures.
A second test, taken from the same urine sample, is being used to confirm the initial test.
Results are expected by the end of the week.


R. H. Macy Plans to Close Five I. Magnin Stores
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it would shutter 5 of its 24 I. Magnin outlets and 52 other specialty stores by June, its first announcement of closings since the retailer filed for bankruptcy in late January.
Analysts said that while the move would have little impact on Macy's finances, it signaled that management was taking necessary steps to focus its operations by selling off less profitable stores.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L  Nordiques Rout Whalers  The Quebec Nordiques, without a victory in 38 consecutive games on the road, found a cure last night in Hartford, routing the Whalers, 10-4, behind Mats Sundin's five goals.
Sundin, whose five goals broke a Quebec record held by Peter Stastny and Michel Goulet, also had two assists.
The Nordiques had gone 0-28-10 away from home since beating the Whalers, 2-1, last March 10, and were 0-25-8 on the road this season. (AP) Bruins 2, Canucks 2: Defenseman Gord Murphy scored his first goal in nearly two months with five minutes gone in the third period to give Boston a tie with Vancouver on the Bruins' home ice.
Murphy's 50-foot shot went off Vancouver defenseman Jyrki Lumme's stick and eluded goalie Troy Gamble.
Nevertheless, the tie provided some comfort for Vancouver.
The Smythe Division leader needs just one more tie to guarantee finishing the season above .500 for the first time in 15 years. (AP) North Stars 4, Red Wings 2: Todd Elik had two goals and two assists and Mike Modano added two goals as Minnesota beat Detroit on the Red Wings' home ice.
It was the first time this season that the Red Wings had lost two consecutive games at home.
Modano and Elik each scored in the first and third periods, with Elik having a hand in all the goals. (AP) Maple Leafs 5, Flames 5: Doug Gilmour scored two goals and set up another as Toronto tied Calgary in Calgary.
It was the first game between the teams since the blockbuster trade earlier this season involving Gilmour and nine other players.
Calgary was leading, 4-2, with under four minutes to play, but the Maple Leafs rallied with Gilmour's help.
Gilmour was the player who precipitated the trade with his contract dispute with Calgary management. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Rice Is Rolling  Rice's Marvin Moore scored a career-high 26 points and the Owls took advantage of foul-prone Texas for a 103-97 victory in Houston that gave them 20 triumphs in a regular season for the first time since the 1953-54 campaign.
The Rice victory also kept the Longhorns from clinching a tie for the S.W.C. basketball title.
Texas is tied with Houston for first place in the conference.
Each has a 10-3 record.
Texas, 20-10 for the season, is seeking its first outright league title since 1974.
The Owls have an identical 20-10 season record.
With their 8-6 league mark, the Owls have the No. 4 seed in the post-season conference tournament. (AP) Michigan State 72, Northwestern 55: Shawn Respert scored 20 points and Mike Peplowski added 17 to lead 13th-ranked Michigan State to a Big Ten victory over Northwestern in Evanston, Ill.
The Spartans broke open a tight game with a 19-4 run sparked by Peplowski midway in the second half.
The victory was the fifth in the last seven games for the Spartans (19-6 over all, 9-6 conference). (AP) Arizona 100, California 77: Sean Rooks and Damon Stoudamire each scored 16 points and Chris Mills 15 as fourth-ranked Arizona continued its quest for a fifth consecutive Pacific-10 Conference title by defeating California.
Arizona (23-4, 12-3) used defensive pressure and superior height and experience to crunch the Golden Bears (8-17, 2-13), who started three freshmen.
The Wildcats trailed league co-leaders U.C.L.A. and Southern Cal by one game entering the contest.
The Wildcats finish their Pac-10 schedule at those schools next week. (AP) GOLF  Couples Has Share of Lead  Fred Couples, carving out an increasingly secure niche as America's top golfer, shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday in Miami and grabbed a share of the first-round lead of the Doral Ryder Open with Mike Smith, Steve Elkington and Loren Roberts. (AP) Five-Way Tie in L.P.G.A.: Donna Andrews birdied her final hole for a 69 to join a five-way tie for the lead after the first round of the L.P.G.A.
Inamori Classic at StoneRidge Country Club in Poway, Calif.
Judy Dickinson, Dana Lofland, Val Skinner and Barb Thomas also shot 69's. (AP)


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 591 money market mutual funds decreased by $13.72 billion, to $499.17 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 215 institutional funds decreased by $11.20 billion, to $168.69 billion.
The assets of the 285 general-purpose funds were down by $1.31 billion, to $180.58 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.21 billion, to $149.90 billion, the institute said.


Ticketing Merger Is Set
United Airlines said today that it would merge its computer reservation system, Covia, with the Galileo system owned by a group of European airlines.
The combination will create the world's largest computerized airline reservation system and the first global network.
It will be known as Galileo International.


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


People
*
Jane Gardner, a senior vice president at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, was named to the newly created position of director of strategic planning.
She had previously been group management supervisor. *
Marian Salzman, president of the youth marketing firm Bedford Kent Group, was named to the additional position of senior executive vice president and image director at the firm's parent, AFGL International, New York.
Also, Barry S. Roseman was named executive vice president and chief operating officer at Bedford Kent and its sibling advertising agency, Albert Frank-Guenther Law, New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and director of agency operations at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York. *
Jake Schroepfer was named to the new position of president at Tracy-Locke Promotional &amp; Regional Marketing, a unit of Tracy-Locke, Dallas.
He had previously been general manager. *
Judith Carpenito was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of client services at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct North America, New York.
She had previously been senior vice president and management director. *
Joel J. Klein was named senior vice president at Audits and Surveys, New York, and director of its national total-market audit division.
Mr.
Klein, previously vice president and associate director, succeeds Allan Beyer, who assumes other duties.


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Debate; Economy, and Brown, Are Focus of a Democratic Round Table
The remaining contenders for the Democratic nomination returned to the debate round table tonight, wrangling about who has the best plan to revive the nation's sluggish economy.
In the debate, broadcast by ABC, the expected two-man contest between former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas failed to materialize.
The candidates took aim instead at Edmund G.  Brown Jr., who won his first state primary this week.


BRIEFS
*
Boatmen's Bancshares Inc., St.
Louis, a bank holding company, agreed to acquire Sunwest Financial Services Inc., Albuquerque, N.M., also a bank holding company.
Terms were not disclosed. *
IDB Communications Group Inc., Culver City, Calif., a provider of satellite transmission and distribution services, agreed to acquire World Communications Inc., Worldcom and Houston International Teleport, all telecommunication concerns, from Telecombus A.G.
Terms were not disclosed.


U.S. Reportedly Let Pakistan Buy Arms From Private Sellers
A Bush Administration official said today that the United States had issued licenses for over $100 million in commercial sales of military equipment to Pakistan in 1990 and 1991 despite concern over their legality, The Washington Post reported in its Saturday issue.
The Post, following an article in Friday's Los Angeles Times, said the State Department's inspector general had questioned the sales and that Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, had said, "Many in the State Department are aware that commercial sales to Pakistan do violate the law."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate climbed to 7.3 percent in February, the highest since mid-1985, the Labor Dept. reported.
But other data, notably a gain of 164,000 payroll jobs, pointed to a slight upturn in the economy.
Most private economists said they were encouraged by the sizable payroll jump, but Democrats seized on the higher jobless rate as evidence of continued economic weakness and worker hardship.  [ Page 1. ]  Unemployment in New York City, a dismal picture throughout the recession, hit 10.9 percent in February, the highest level for that month in 16 years.  [ 43. ]


Patents; A Possible Aid For Gehrig's Disease
Cephalon Inc., a biotechnology company in West Chester, Pa., obtained a patent this week on a possible treatment for Lou Gehrig's disease and other nervous-system illnesses.
The patent covers the use of Insulin-like Growth Factor, or IGF-1, a hormone that is being evaluated by a number of biotechnology companies for its role in healing wounds and treating osteoporosis and dwarfism.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; Smaller States Also Figure In Super Tuesday Strategies
Gov.
Bill Clinton established himself as the favorite son in several states that border his native Arkansas so early in the Democratic Presidential campaign that now, as Tuesday's voting approaches, he is running against high expectations.
In Oklahoma, Tennessee, Mississippi and Missouri, Mr.
Clinton wrapped up the endorsements of the local Democratic leaders and set up considerable campaign organizations before any of his rivals established a presence in those states.
As a result, even a strong second-place finish by another candidate could embarrass Mr.
Clinton.


Libraries Safeguard Our Right to Know
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your charming Feb. 13 article on the kinds of odd questions librarians have to field at the Public Catalogue Room of the New York Public Library, but I am concerned readers will get the impression that the library is a frill, about as quaint and useful as an antimacassar.


Religion Notes
Lent and Ramadan
In an unusual coincidence of calendars, two religious periods of fasting and reflection began this week.
The 40-day Christian season of Lent began with Ash Wednesday; the 30-day Muslim month of Ramadan began Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, depending on when the new Moon was sighted by believers.
The two periods do not normally come at the same time of year because the Muslim calendar, based on the Moon, and the Western calendar, based on the Sun, do not usually coincide.


La Lupe, a Singer, Is Dead at 53; Known as 'Queen of Latin Soul'
La Lupe, a singer who was known during the late 1960's as the Queen of Latin Soul, died on Feb. 28 at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 53 years old.
She died of cardiac arrest, a hospital spokesman said.


Edwards Still on Team
MICHAEL EDWARDS did not leave the Syracuse basketball team after all, Coach JIM BOEHEIM said.
What happened, the coach said, is that Edwards did not accompany the team to Connecticut for Wednesday night's game because he stayed in Syracuse to study for two exams.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Blacks; Clinton's Talk of Racial Unity Falls on Eager Ears
Oleta Hill, 36 years old, went to see Bill Clinton the other day in Jacksonville, Fla., in a quandary.
She had voted for Jesse Jackson in the past and had not yet heard enough about any of the candidates to form a hard opinion on whom to vote for next Tuesday.
So Ms.
Hill, an engineering clerk with BellSouth Telecommunications, was surprised when she heard the Arkansas Governor speak at a lunchtime forum.


William E. Simkin Is Dead at 85; Federal Labor Mediator in 1960's
William E. Simkin, who helped prevent national strikes and resolved thousands of labor disputes as the Federal Government's chief labor mediator and as a leading private arbitrator, died on Wednesday at his home in Haverford, Pa.
He was 85 years old.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


LaFontaine Does His Hat Trick
It did not vanish as quickly as you can say Pat LaFontaine, but the three-goal lead the Devils built against the Sabres tonight vanished nevertheless and LaFontaine had a lot to say about it.
The Devils opened a 4-1 advantage 3 minutes 3 seconds into the middle period, after two goals by Zdeno Ciger and one each by Claude Lemieux and Kevin Todd.
But with LaFontaine, the former Islander, getting his fourth hat trick of the season, Buffalo retaliated and came away with a 5-4 victory at the Aud.


News Summary
International 2-7 SEVERE DROUGHT ENGULFS AFRICA
Southern Africa is in the grip of its worst drought this century, and meteorologists warn that the dry spell is spreading north to engulf the eastern side of the continent from the Cape of Good Hope to Cairo.  1  U.N.
NEGOTIATOR WARNS SOMALIS


Bush Seeks Rules to Lift Sales of Gas
President Bush announced his support yesterday for four regulatory changes that he said would raise demand for natural gas and help an industry that has been badly hurt by low prices.
The gas industry applauded the announcement, which came shortly before the primary election in Texas, a leading gas-producing state.
But environmentalists and consumer advocates said it was not clear whether the changes, all of them under discussion in Washington for months or years, would mean that more gas would be sold, at least in the near future.
They also said that one proposed change could cut gas sales and increase pollution.


U.N., Halted by Somalia Shelling, Says Food Relief Could End
Exasperated by the unrelenting fighting in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, the United Nations official who has been trying to negotiate a truce and deliver food to the starving city has warned the combatants that they can no longer count on the world's efforts.
The official, Under Secretary General James O. C. Jonah, who left Somalia this week with a signed cease-fire pact but no peace, condemned the two sides in the civil war for shelling Mogadishu's port on Thursday as a ship with relief food was scheduled to enter.


Sports of The Times; Dred Scott's New Career In Baseball
During the last few days Darryl Strawberry has received an enormous amount of publicity for his new book and a fair amount of heat for not remembering the history of his politics.
He wrote in one part of his book that he sometimes felt as if he were playing baseball at Dred Scott Memorial Park in downtown Johannesburg rather than in the middle of New York City.


Floyd Tunes Out Distractions
Raymond Floyd put aside potentially distracting thoughts of advanced age and the fire that recently destroyed his home and shot a second consecutive 67 today to gain a one-shot lead at the Doral Ryder Open.
The 49-year-old Floyd, making his 24th appearance in a tournament he won in 1980 and 1981, made five birdies and no bogeys on Doral's Blue Monster to post a 36-hole total of 10-under-par 134.


Tokyo Journal; Trying to Undo the Ruling Class's Old School Ties
A few weeks ago Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, who graduated from the University of Tokyo in 1941, turned to his chief aide, Koichi Kato, who graduated from the same university in 1964, and declared that a nagging problem with the Japanese Government had got out of control: Too many of the country's powerful bureaucrats emerged from the same school.
So a few days ago Mr.
Miyazawa's Cabinet issued what passes for Japan's first affirmative action program, one intended to diversify -- within carefully proscribed Japanese limits -- the country's ruling class.


Guidepost
Cosmetics That Irritate
Bad reactions to cosmetics, like redness, itching and irritation, are relatively rare.
Still, for every million sales of such products, there are about 210 reactions requiring a doctor's care.
A study by the Food and Drug Administration and the North American Contact Dermatitis Group, a task force of the American Academy of Dermatology, found that the worst offenders are skin bleaches, creams, lotions, hair dyes, permanents and makeup.
Here are some things to do if you have a bad reaction.
First Steps Discontinue use of all cosmetics in the affected area.
A 0.5 percent hydrocortisone cream can be used several times a day to relieve itching.
If the reaction doesn't clear up in 7 to 10 days, see a dermatologist.
Whom to Tell Call or write the manufacturer and describe the problem.
In most cases, the purchase price will be refunded.
Also write to the nearest district office of the F.D.A.; a duplicate of the complaint can be sent to the agency's Division of Colors and Cosmetics, 200 C Street SW, Washington 20204.
The agency says it follows up by calling or writing the consumer.
Skin Tests If you don't know which product or products caused the problem, test the ones you use, first singly and then, if you don't get the reaction, together.
To test, put a small amount of cosmetic on a forearm and wait 24 hours.
Test products together if you normally use them together.
A bad reaction known as cross-sensitization can be set off by the use of two or more products together.


Kathryn B. Feuer, 65, Russian Literature Scholar
Kathryn Beliveau Feuer, a scholar of Russian literature who ruffled the Soviet authorities by befriending dissident intellectuals during the cold war, died Sunday at The Cedars rehabilitation center in Charlottesville, Va.
She was 65 years old and lived in Charlottesville, where she was a professor at the University of Virginia.
She died of complications after hip surgery, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Saying Clinton Is Cynical, Tsongas Goes on the Attack
Paul E. Tsongas unleashed his harshest attack yet tonight against Bill Clinton, assailing his Democratic rival as a "pander bear" who "will say anything, do anything to get votes."
Taking the offensive four days before Florida's high-stakes primary on Tuesday, Mr.
Tsongas landed here after campaigning in the West and immediately declared that "we're going to take the gloves off." He went on to say "the American people are going to find out how cynical and unprincipled Bill Clinton is."


Misguided Machismo on the High Seas
For the U.S. to board North Korean ships, even those delivering Scud missiles to Syria and Iran, would be an act of war.
The Bush Administration defies common sense to consider such rash action.
And it would make a mockery of international law to use American warships that are helping enforce a trade embargo against Iraq, sanctioned by the U.N., to search ships headed for other countries not subject to embargo.
The Administration is right to protest North Korea's missile shipments; they will inject new instability into an already unstable region.
The Administration is also right to warn that continued trafficking in such weapons jeopardizes improved relations with Washington, which Pyongyang needs to break out of isolation and reverse its economic decline.


Fight Sexual Misconduct Charges Or Quit, Adams's Constituents Say
From coffee shops to political circles throughout the state, as people debate accusations that Senator Brock Adams sexually harassed women, there is a great deal of agreement on one point: Mr.
Adams should either fight to defend his reputation or vacate his job.
So far, the Washington Democrat, whose term expires next January, says he plans to do neither.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the George Polk Award misidentified the most recent foreigners to have won it before the selection of two Russian reporters this year.
The previous winners were Michael Buerk of the British Broadcasting Corporation and Mohammed Amin, a Kenyan photographer of Visnews, cited as a team in 1984 for foreign television reporting.


Jackson Joins Brown in Mississippi


Reviews/Film; This Man Is Dangerous, And Armed With Science
Technology turns mean yet again in "The Lawnmower Man," a science-fiction melodrama based on a 1975 short story by Stephen King.
The film is about Jobe (Jeff Fahey), a sweet-natured, mentally retarded young slob who, as a result of experiments with a pink serum, begins to comb his hair.
He also turns into a brilliant megalomaniac.
Having once been happy mowing lawns, Jobe suddenly dreams of becoming one with a main-frame computer and ruling the world.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 18 about Robert Altman's new film, "The Player," misattributed the wardrobe of the character played by Tim Robbins.
The clothes for the film were designed by Alexander Julian.


Housing Head Vows To Finish Wall Repairs
The new chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority paid a visit yesterday to the St.
Mary's Park project in the Bronx to see for herself how cancellation of a contract last Friday had left gaping holes in the bathrooms of several apartments.
When the chairwoman, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, canceled a contract with a company installing bathtubs that in most cases required tearing out walls, some of the apartments at the housing project on Westchester Avenue in Mott Haven were left with open views of the bathrooms in adjacent apartments, where shared walls had been torn down and not replaced.


Classical Music in Review
'Tannhauser' Metropolitan Opera
What is an opera company to do?
Though fine tenors are in short supply nowadays and the less than fine are generally overtaxed and overworked, the great tenor roles keep coming around.


Alan Kellock, Publishing Executive, 77
Alan Kellock, a retired executive of McGraw-Hill in New York, died last Saturday at a nursing home in Seattle.
He was 77 years old and had lived in retirement in Sun City, Ariz., until last fall.
His family said he died of cancer.


Death Threat Is Admitted In Gotti Trial
Salvatore Gravano admitted under intense cross-examination yesterday that he knew Paul Castellano had threatened to kill him.
In an arduous day of oral fencing, a defense lawyer sought to show that it was Mr.
Gravano -- the prosecution's chief witness -- and not Mr.
Gotti, who had strong reasons to kill Mr.
Castellano and other Gambino crime-family figures who were murdered.
The murders are the central charges in Mr.
Gotti's trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Jobless Rate Increases to 7.3% In a Mixed Report
The nation's unemployment rate climbed two-tenths of a point in February to 7.3 percent, the highest since mid-1985, the Labor Department reported today.
But other job data, notably a gain of 164,000 payroll jobs, pointed to a slight upturn in the economy.
Most private economists said they were encouraged by the sizable payroll jump, as well as by a lengthening of the average workweek and a sharp rebound in total production hours.
Some contended that the recession -- by technical rather than popular definition -- probably ended last month if it had not done so previously.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
4.12
6.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.04
5.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.12
4.16
5.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.15
7.18
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.92
7.96
8.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
9.02
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.75
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Checking on Insurance Has Risks
State insurance departments around the country are facing increased demand from the public for consumer information.
The public's questions about the financial health of companies and their rates are increasingly important, as more and more consumers recognize the need to shop for insurance intelligently.
The demand comes amid growing public interest in and worry about insurance after the recent and highly publicized failures of several major insurance carriers.
With rising insurance rates, shoppers are finding more of a need than ever to compare policies and rates on the market.


Devils' Burke Is a Hot Topic
The Devils are actively seeking to trade Sean Burke, and one of the teams involved is the Sabres, who played host to the Devils tonight.
Lou Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, said he had been talking with several teams about Burke, but he refused to say whether he was close to a deal.


Vance Ends Yugoslav Trip Confident That U.N. Plan Will Proceed
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations envoy, concluded his latest mediating mission here today.
He said he remained confident that the United Nations could proceed with its plans to deploy a 14,400-member peacekeeping force, despite ethnic tensions in the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the threat that such unrest could pose to the task of enforcing the cease-fire in neighboring Croatia.
Mr.
Vance's three-day trip opens the way for the arrival of Lieut.
Gen.
Satish Nambiar of India, the commander of the peacekeeping force who is expected in Belgrade on Sunday.
The general will be accompanied by about 30 field commanders and civilians, and United Nations officials have said they will be followed within days by an initial party of about 240 troops.


Your Taxes; New York State's Confusing Notice
AN ill-chosen word in a financial statement intended to make things easier for 600,000 New York State taxpayers has resulted instead in considerable confusion and a deluge of more than 4,000 calls to the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance.
Many of the callers mistook the statements tallying their payments for bills.
The department sent the statement of tax payments to all people who make quarterly estimated tax payments, because every year about 30,000 payments are credited to the wrong taxpayer or the wrong year.
Half the time, the department says, these mistakes are the taxpayer's fault and half the time the department's fault.


TRANSACTIONS
National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Mark Rodenhauser, offensive lineman, and John Wiley, defensive back.


Keycorp Bid For Puget Is Reported
Keycorp, the expansion-minded Albany-based banking company, has offered to acquire Puget Sound Bancorp of Tacoma, Wash., in a deal that could be worth $700 million or more, according to a report published yesterday.
Puget Sound officials had said on Tuesday that they were evaluating takeover proposals that they had not solicited.
Company officials declined to describe the offers, but on Wednesday the banking company stopped a radio and television advertising campaign in which it boasted of being "the last major independent commercial bank left around here."


The Season Ends for Perez Before It Can Begin
Yankee pitcher Pascual Perez was formally suspended from baseball today after a failed drug test that team officials said reflected their unsuccessful attempts to monitor him as he spent the winter at his home in the Dominican Republic.
The one-year suspension, effective immediately, was handed down by the office of Commissioner Fay Vincent after a second urine sample confirmed the positive result from an initial test taken shortly after Perez arrived in the United States last week for spring training.


Old College Try
STEVE STEIN, an attorney for the U.N.L.V. basketball team, filed suit in state court yesterday in an effort to allow the sixth-ranked Runnin' Rebels to play in the N.C.A.A. postseason tournament.
A judge granted a temporary restraining order on behalf of the players, and set a hearing for Wednesday on a request for a permanent injunction allowing the team to be considered for the tournament.
University President ROBERT MAXSON, however, said the school would turn down any invitation to the tournament.


Head of Porsche in U.S. Resigns Job Suddenly
Porsche Cars North America Inc. said yesterday that Brian Bowler, its president and chief executive, had resigned suddenly and that Frederick J. Schwab, a senior executive vice president with years of experience in international management, had been named as Mr.
Bowler's successor.
The company said Mr.
Bowler had resigned over "differences over the direction of the company's future efforts in the important United States market."
Mr.
Schwab, who is 52, has had responsibility with Porsche for finances, legal affairs, management information systems, personnel and administration.
A spokesman for the company said that Mr.
Schwab was in daylong meetings and was not immediately available for comment.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sabatini Loses in 3 Sets


Probert Is Suspended
One of Kozlov's new teammates, right wing BOB PROBERT, was suspended for three games by the N.H.L. yesterday for swinging his stick at St.
Louis Blues defenseman GARTH BUTCHER in a game last Saturday.


New York City Jobless: 10.9%
Unemployment in New York City, a dismal picture throughout the recession, hit 10.9 percent in February, the highest level for that month in 16 years, the Government reported yesterday.
With 89,000 more people joining jobless rolls, February unemployment in New York State and New Jersey also rose to their highest levels in nine years.
Experts said the grim unemployment figures reflected a continuing weak economic performance in the region and warned that the numbers were likely to get worse before getting better.


Dow Off 19.90, to 3,221.60, on Job Data
Stock prices closed lower yesterday after a stronger-than-expected February job report.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 19.90 points, to 3,221.60.
The closely watched market barometer lost 46.07 points for the week and is now at its lowest level since Jan. 13, when it was at 3,185.60.
Equities were pushed lower in the afternoon by bouts of program selling, which tend to exaggerate market movement on sluggish days.
Birinyi Associates, a Wall Street research firm that tracks program trading, plotted three buy programs and one sell program that combined to pull the Dow down by 17.67 points.


Treasury Prices Rise Despite Jobs Report
For a day at least, credit market participants did not see good news about the economy as bad news for interest rates.
Prices of Treasury securities rose, despite employment data that were interpreted in the bond market as far stronger for the economy than expected.
Initially, traders sold notes and bonds after the Labor Department reported a rise of 164,000 in non-farm payroll employment and a sharp rise of four-tenths of a percent in hours worked.
Before the report, most economists had been forecasting that payrolls would post a much more modest rise; most saw a gain of only a few thousand and some even expected a decline.
The market paid little attention to the unemployment rate, which rose to 7.3 percent in February from 7.1 percent in January.


No Burmese Persecutions of Muslims
To the Editor:
"Even Bleak Bangladesh Is a Haven to Muslims Fleeing the Burmese Army" (news article, Feb. 7) is a subjective and grossly inaccurate account of the situation on the Myanmar-Bangladesh border.


The Drexel Calculation; Political Pressure Seems to Count the Most As U.S. Says No to Settling for $500 Million
By rejecting a $1.3 billion settlement with Michael R. Milken and other former executives of Drexel Burnham Lambert because of political pressures, the Government is gambling that it can somehow do better than the $500 million it would have received from the deal.
Regulators may well have felt that they had little choice but to call off the deal.
Given the political climate in Washington, anyone who has an oversight role over the savings and loan industry has to expect Congressional second-guessing.


Patents; A Nail Polish That Dries Fast
Two inventors in New York City say they have patented a breakthrough for the fast-moving professional woman: nail polish that dries in less than a minute and yet has a high gloss and is tough enough to be worn for two or three days.
At the moment, cosmetics experts say that nail polishes capable of lasting that long require drying times of five to eight minutes.
Tough, long-lasting polishes that can be worn for about a week take somewhat longer.


Finally, a Day in Court In St. Patrick's Dispute
The two sides in the tortuous dispute over the St.
Patrick's Day Parade finally sat down in the same room yesterday to determine whether parade organizers will be legally compelled to admit a homosexual group that has applied to march.
What emerged at a hearing before an administrative judge for the Commission on Human Rights was the enmity between the two sides that has always been apparent but has been infrequently expressed.


BRITAIN TELLS ABC TO GIVE UP TAPES
British anti-terrorist police officers investigating the 1988 bombing of a Pan American World Airways jumbo jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, have demanded that ABC News and its senior European editor, Pierre Salinger, hand over tapes and notes of interviews with the two prime Libyan suspects, he said today.
ABC and Mr.
Salinger, who received a subpoena on Wednesday, said they would resist the demand.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Travelers Cheque Operations Center, Salt Lake City, a unit of the American Express Co., named David L. Boyles senior vice president of systems and operations.
He succeeds James F. Welch, who is retiring. *
CRI Inc., Rockville, Md., a hotel-management unit of Capital Hotel Group Inc., named Erich Huemer vice president for hotel asset management.


INSIDE
President of Azerbaijan Quits
The President of Azerbaijan resigned in the face of popular fury over his Government's failure to control an Armenian-populated enclave.
Page 3.
Roundup of Recording Stars
For nearly $1 billion, Thorn EMI is buying Virgin Records, adding the Rolling Stones and Janet Jackson to its roster of recording stars.
Page 39.
Yankee Pitcher Banned
Pascual Perez was suspended from baseball for a year after failing a random drug test and will not receive his salary of $1.9 million.
Page 33.


CHRONICLE
When LOUIS LANZA was a young boy, he loved lingering in the kitchen of his grandmother JOSEPHINA LANZA in San Mateo, Calif.
While his buddies were out playing ball, "I was in the kitchen, helping her, prepping, cutting vegetables; I was fascinated with food," he said.
That fascination led him into the restaurant business, and tonight he is to open Josephina, at Broadway and 63d Street, across from Lincoln Center in New York.
The restaurant, named for Grandma, has a menu laden with her recipes.


Suit Accuses District 9 Official of Corruption
School District 9 in the west Bronx embraces a ragged neighborhood of troubled schools where only 32.5 percent of the students read at an appropriate level for their grade and where corruption is a perennial ailment.
A principal was once arrested for buying crack, two married school board members admitted moving a school's baby grand piano into their home and another board member was accused of threatening an administrator with a gun.


Bridge
The Virginia Slims All-Star bridge tournament, played in Boca Raton, Fla., concurrently with the tennis championships now in progress, proved to be a triumph for the local community.
When play ended Wednesday, the top honors, and the first prize of $4,000, went to Richard Pavlicek Sr. of Boca Raton, and his son, 22-year-old Richard Pavlicek Jr., was fifth.
They outdistanced six players who have won world titles.
The event, an individual that is unique in the bridge calendar, was organized by Bridge Today magazine.
The final standings were: first, Richard Pavlicek Sr., 172 imps; second, Zia Mahmood, 148; third, Sabine Zenkel, 143; fourth, Benito Garozzo, 128; fifth, Richard Pavlicek Jr., 125; sixth, Drew Casen, 112.


Corrections
A news analysis article in Business Day on Thursday about a Government suit against a New York law firm for its role in representing a corrupt savings and loan association misstated the outcome of a case brought years earlier by the Securities and Exchange Commission against another firm, White &amp; Case, and a partner, Marion J. Eply.
Without admitting or denying guilt, that firm and Mr.
Eply settled the charges and agreed to take new steps to prevent securities law violations.


United Way Head Tries to Restore Trust
The board chairman of the United Way of America said today that the troubled organization, which coordinates the nation's largest charity network, would face financial hardship if local members continued to withhold dues.
But the chairman, John F. Akers, said that the former president, William F. Aramony, who resigned under pressure amid questions of his spending and management style, would continue to draw his $390,000-a-year salary until terms of his severance were complete.


Stage Fright and Miscues Doom First Met Rehearsal
The first six Expos reached base safely.
David Cone was tortured for four runs in the first inning.
The Mets loaded the bases in the second with none out and scored nothing.
Willie Randolph made an error at second base, one of three for the Mets.
Howard Johnson had an, uh, adventuresome afternoon in center field.
Well, spring training is for working out the kinks.


Senators, Shaken by Thomas Debate, Get a Lesson in 'Gender Dynamics'
Again and again, the men of the Senate have winced at the bitter cliche that when it comes to relations between the sexes, they "just don't get it."
So on Thursday evening, in the second of a series of seminars, many of them caucused with their wives -- and with the two female members of the Senate -- for a two-hour discussion led by Deborah Tannen, who wrote the best-selling book "You Just Don't Understand," a treatise on miscommunication between men and women published by William Morrow &amp; Company.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 20 about a type of genetic testing called DNA fingerprinting misstated an action by a Minnesota prosecutor, Stephen L. Redding, in a murder trial.
Mr.
Red ding wrote to a lawyer in April 1990 complaining about the billing practices of Dr.
Simon Ford, a scientist who has testified for the defense about DNA fingerprinting in a number of criminal trials.
But Mr.
Red ding did not accuse Dr.
Ford of fraud, did not write to judges to make such an accusation and never retracted it. (Mr. Redding's name did not appear in the article, but he identified himself as the prosecutor in a letter to The Times in January and sent supporting documentation recently.)


Polish Premier Plans to Stay And Redraft Economic Plan
Prime Minister Jan Olszewski, smarting from Parliament's rejection of his economic program, said today that his center-right Government would stay in office and continue its efforts to soften Poland's two-year austerity plan.


Critic's Notebook; A Bonding of Chekhov and Williams
The only debate raging among London critics about the Royal National Theater's new "Uncle Vanya" is this: Is the pairing of Ian McKellen and Antony Sher as Vanya and Astrov just as exciting as that of Michael Redgrave and Laurence Olivier 30 years ago, or is this merely the best "Uncle Vanya" since then?
Either conclusion amounts to high praise, for Chekhov's play receives a major production every few seasons in London, and nearly every major British actor, from Michael Gambon to Michael Bryant to Peter O'Toole to Albert Finney, has undertaken it within fairly recent memory.
The close-knit ensemble reflects the production's long gestation at the National Theater Studio, a subsidized offshoot that allows actors, writers and directors to experiment on pet projects without deadlines or even a requirement to give public performances.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Roots; Tsongas's Passion: Restoring Hometown to Glory
The day before the New Hampshire Presidential primary, Paul E. Tsongas, wearing a battered jacket and baseball cap, sat down in an ice cream parlor in his hometown here to review plans for a bookstore envisioned as the centerpiece of a downtown renovation plan.
When he learned that the project was stalled, Mr.
Tsongas was incensed, and immediately called the official who was holding it up.
Suddenly the logjam was broken.


Where Kids Get Their Guns
Murderous gunplay among students at Jefferson High School finally focused New York City's attention on a problem of adolescent gunslinging that began in the 1980's.
Plans to stiffen school security make immediate sense, but New York officials could do much more to limit the flow of illegal guns, locally and nationally.
This week a new hot line set up by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms opened for business.
New Yorkers may call 1-800-ATF-GUNS with confidential tips on people illegally possessing and trafficking in firearms.
Phone operators pass along the intelligence to a task force consisting of a dozen Federal agents and an equal number of city police officers.


The State of the Debates
One reason was that, with Senator Bob Kerrey's withdrawal, the field of Democratic Presidential candidates has shrunk to four.
Another reason was that the four, having practiced the art form since before Christmas, now possess well-honed messages.
And finally, there was the shape of the table at Thursday's Democratic debate: It was round, more conducive to conversation than the usual harshly separate lecterns.
The end result: The state of Presidential debates, as exemplified by the one Thursday on ABC, is good and getting better.


Cambodia Mission Chief Sees Team as a Catalyst
His job is unparalleled in the annals of the United Nations.
When Yasushi Akashi leaves New York this weekend for Cambodia as a special representative of Secretary General Boutros Ghali, his assignment is to bring new economic and political life to the killing fields.
As head of the newly created United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, Mr.
Akashi will lead a team of thousands of professionals and volunteers who will oversee every aspect of Cambodian life from the police to banking, while setting the stage for elections in 1993.


Great Stores of the 40's
To the Editor:
The list in "Where Are the Stores of New York in 1955?" by Robert Spero (letter, Feb. 15) brought a rush of nostalgia.
I too mourn the passing of New York City's finest, the variety of stores that clothed, furnished and equipped so many families.


Virus Barely Causes Sniffle in Computers
In contrast to the panic caused by warnings of its existence, the advent of the Michelangelo computer virus caused barely a sneeze among the millions of personal computers worldwide.


Rhapsody in Bohemia, Cookies and Gershwins
English Strunsky led a visitor to a small picture on the southern wall of his apartment just off Central Park.
It was a pencil drawing of him 65 years ago at the age of 18.
The clear signature was that of Ira Gershwin.
A treasured memento harking to a time -- the drawing is dated April 25, 1927 -- when hopes were risked that this century might turn out better than it has.


Brooklyn Youth, 15, Slain On Crowded Subway Train
A 15-year-old youth was shot to death on a crowded rush-hour subway car in Brooklyn yesterday by another teen-ager after an argument erupted between the two, the New York City transit police said.
He was the second victim of a fatal shooting on a subway train in a month.
The slain youth's mother said her son's death had apparently resulted from a trivial dispute.
Words may have been exchanged and then an armed youth shot the victim as he walked through the subway car.


Banks' Plea: Drop That Checkbook
For nearly 20 years bankers have tried to persuade consumers to put aside their checkbooks and pay their bills by phone.
And for nearly 20 years, despite technological advances and an expanding array of services, consumers have kept on writing checks.
But that is not stopping Citibank, Chase Manhattan and some of the nation's other biggest banks from trying again.
This time, the bankers are hoping that with postage stamps costing 29 cents, a new generation of customers who came of age with computers and automatic teller machines will embrace paying bills by phone.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Candidates' Big Hurdle: Conversation
The Democratic candidates for President were forced to confront a new and startling challenge Thursday night.
At the start of their nationally televised debate, Peter Jennings of ABC News said he wanted to curtail his role as moderator and let the candidates take charge.
"We have decided that this evening," he said, "as much as possible they shall conduct their own debate, that they should be the ones to press each other for specific answers."


Patents; Instant Matchmaker Uses Paging System
Singles searching for true love have tried personal ads, video dating services, computer bulletin boards and even fax machines.
Now an Israeli entrepreneur, Shmuel Shapira, has patented a new approach: a computerized beeper system to arrange on-the-spot introductions.
Mr.
Shapira, who now lives in Fairfield, Iowa, contends that all of today's matchmaking services lack immediacy.
People fill out long forms, speak into video cameras and then perhaps line up dates for several weeks later.


Review/Television; Three Music Specials With Images of Middle Age
Soft-spoken, bespectacled and wearing a well-tended salt-and-pepper beard, Eric Clapton at 46 has the demeanor of a cultural statesman.
David Crosby and Stephen Stills of Crosby, Stills and Nash are bulky, scraggly-haired and decidedly middle-aged in appearance.
And the image of 42-year-old Natalie Cole singing dreamy ballads that her father popularized in the 1950's is all but inseparable from that of the polite pop singers who were thrown off the airwaves by her generation of rock and soul stars in the late 60's and 70's.
These are some of the impressions conveyed by three pop music specials on television in the next few days.
Two of them, "Crosby, Stills and Nash: The Acoustic Concert" and "Unforgettable, With Love: Natalie Cole Sings the Songs of Nat (King) Cole," are awash in nostalgia.
Mr.
Clapton's appearance on the MTV series "Unplugged," is something else.
The legendary English guitarist explores his musical roots with a superb acoustic blues band and intersperses his performance with interesting commentary and personal reflections.


A Proposal to Integrate South Africa Cabinet
Black leaders could join whites in a transitional cabinet later this year under a draft plan that received preliminary approval this week at the negotiations on South Africa's future.
But the white minority Government and its foremost opponent, the African National Congress, differ sharply over how this potential breakthrough should be implemented.


Southern Africa Hit By Its Worst Drought Of the 20th Century
As cornstalks lie withered on baked soil and dams show perilously low levels of water, southern Africa is in the grip of its worst drought this century, and meteorologists warn that it is spreading north to engulf the entire eastern side of the continent.
While drought is commonplace in certain regions of Africa, weather and food experts say this year's dry spell is extraordinary for its sweep through food-exporting countries, which normally escape severe drought.
Kenya Needs Imports
"There is now a major drought from the Cape to Cairo that is really a serious, serious matter," said Harold Norton, the representative of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization in Kenya, who has worked in Africa for the last 25 years.
"All the countries from South Africa to East Africa, all the way to Cairo, will be importing grains this year."


New Actor in Role
David Margulies has replaced Richard Libertini in "Conversations With My Father," the Herb Gardner play now in previews at the Royale Theater.
Mr.
Libertini, who took over a role intended for Jose Ferrer after Mr.
Ferrer's death on Jan. 26, left the cast because of artistic differences with the director, Dan Sullivan, said the show's press representative, Jeffrey Richards.
The play is to open on March 22.


Temporary Sanctuary Tends to Get Permanent
To the Editor:
You offer in "Side With Refugees, Not Thugs" (editorial, Feb. 11) a resolution to the Haitian boat people crisis based heavily on giving "temporary" sanctuary in the United States.
You do not believe most of the Haitians should be allowed to stay for the long term, but never ask whether or not the United States has ever offered safe haven to a group that ended up being just temporary.


Classical Music in Review
Consort of Musicke The Church of St. Mary the Virgin
When the Consort of Musicke won its first international recognition in the mid-1970's with its recordings of John Dowland's complete works, fans of Renaissance music were impressed with the velvety homogeneity of the group's vocal blend and the expressivity and passion it brought to a distant but evocative literature.


Gorbachev Visits Germany on His First Trip Since Resigning


Spectators Stand in Line for History
They took the 10:43 P.M. train from Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and after a drink, finally made it to the glassy front of the United States Courthouse in Brooklyn.
At 2:15 A.M. yesterday, Frank Mora and Gary Dayton were the first in line to see John Gotti's trial -- but not by much.
The 17th person arrived at 5:10 A.M. -- and was the last yesterday morning to squeeze into the courtroom, leaving behind a daylong trail of disappointed Gotti watchers.


Song of the Dog Leads to the Hare
As the temperature slid to zero and dark clouds piled up overhead, I stood in the gloom of a spruce forest in midafternoon waiting for Brewster to begin his song of the chase.
Brewster is an affable, sturdy 2-year-old beagle owned by George Teidman, who had invited Art Woldt of Wynantskill, N.Y., and me to go snowshoe-rabbit hunting on his 1,200-acre spread in the foothills of the Adirondacks.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Another Candidate?; Billionaire in Texas Is Attracting Calls to Run, and $5 Donations
For the umpteenth time, H. Ross Perot is insisting that he does not want to be President.
But by opening the door a tiny crack to his possible candidacy in this election year, the Texas billionaire is attracting telephone calls, letters and money to his Dallas office -- all urging him to run.
Call it just one more sign of voter disaffection with Washington politics as usual.
In any case, Mr.
Perot will probably not be appearing in television commercials, kissing babies or standing in front of an American flag, bemoaning the Federal deficit.


Review/Pop; Just Can't Go On Without Her Man (Sob)
Old pop formulas never die; they come back with different haircuts.
Roxette, the Swedish band that made its New York debut on Thursday night at the Beacon Theater, has had six hits in the Top 10 since 1988, and it seems the band never heard a song title or a riff it couldn't borrow.
The band plays hymnlike ballads, modified folk-rock and guitar-driven rock marches.
Amid the mechanical tunes, the best are the hymns, especially "It Must Have Been Love." But with songs like "The Look" (after Prince's "U Got the Look") and lyrics like, "No place to hide, I got nowhere to run from you," Roxette won't be accused of too much originality.


Howard Golden Sees Things He Doesn't Like
In his 15 years as the lord of Brooklyn Borough Hall, Howard Golden has accumulated a formidable catalogue of grievances, slurs, slights and insults suffered by him and his much-maligned borough.
Last week he had a choice example for Mayor David N. Dinkins:


If Fire Strikes, Climbing Is Better Than Jumping
When the house is on fire, a fast exit is the key to survival.
The first few moments offer the best chance for escape.
That is why fire prevention experts recommend that families conduct fire drills at least twice a year.
"You should know the routine so well that you would follow it automatically even if you were barely awake," said John Ottoson, a senior analyst with the United States Fire Administration in Emmitsburg, Md.
The Fire Administration is a Federal agency charged with reducing the number of injuries and deaths caused by fire.


Amoskeag Fills Post Of President and Chief
The Amoskeag Company yesterday named W. Randle Mitchell Jr. president and chief executive.
The largest holding of the diversified Boston-based company is Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., a manufacturer of towels, bedding and carpeting.
Mr.
Mitchell succeeds James M. Fitzgibbons, who had the dual role of running Amoskeag as well as Fieldcrest Cannon, which accounted for the vast majority of Amoskeag's 1991 revenues of $1.2 billion.
Mr.
Fitzgibbons will now focus solely on running Fieldcrest Cannon, based in Greensboro, N.C.


Stich Wins Quickly and Easily To Create Time for More Golf
When it comes to his tennis, which is a subject that periodically bores him, Michael Stich doesn't question the source of his motivation.
Some days he's content merely to compete for the sake of winning, other days he's in a hurry to win because it's his passport to the golf course, the place where he forgets about tennis and fine tunes his 18 handicap.
His countryman Boris Becker may have a two-spot edge in the tennis rankings, but out on the fairways, the fifth-ranked Stich is building a reputation as the ace of every German foursome he joins.
Today, with showers forecast throughout the desert that frames the Newsweek Champions Cup, Stich was inspired to get through his morning quarterfinal against Sergei Bruguera of Spain in 53 minutes, a 6-1, 6-2 victory, in order to beat the rain to the back nine.


Temporary Sanctuary Tends to Get Permanent; Political Persecution
To the Editor:
The Jan. 22 decision of the United States Supreme Court in Immigration and Naturalization Service v.
Elias-Zacarias, which overturns the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth District in San Francisco, is deeply troubling.
The person directly affected is a young Guatemalan who fears persecution for his political opinion because he refused to join a guerrilla movement.


Yes, It's U.S.C. and the Game's Not Football
A timeout at the University of Southern California is hardly totalitarian: George Raveling, the Trojans' basketball coach, has his 20-year-olds vote on everything.
Last month, the score was tied against Cal, with only milliseconds left in the game, when Raveling caucused his players.
"Everyone in favor of a zone, raise your hand," he said.
"Everyone in favor of man-to-man, raise your hand.


Jury Selection to Begin in 2d Watkins Trial
The selection of jurors for the trial three of the four remaining defendants charged with the Manhattan subway murder of Brian Watkins will begin on Monday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said yesterday.
The defendants are Yul Gary Morales, 20 years old, who the police said wielded the knife that killed Mr.
Watkins; Anthony Anderson, 20, and Ricardo Lopez, 19, all from Queens.


CHRONICLE
When PETER BROOK travels, the director of plays, films and operas likes to make it worth his while.
"There is nothing better than a crowded journey with every minute full," Mr.
Brook said in a telephone interview from Paris yesterday, as he prepared for a trip to the United States that he predicted would be a "three-day talkathon."


Canadian Lumber Penalized
The Commerce Department issued a preliminary ruling today that Canada was subsidizing lumber exports.
The department increased temporary duties on Canadian products to force their prices up and help American companies compete.
The decision, which moves the department toward steep, permanent duties on the imported boards, studs and beams, further chilled the United States' frosty relations with the country's largest trading partner.


Quotations of the Day
"I've been on the bench ten years, and I've seen over and over, the moment these people are released back into society, the violence begins again." -- JUDGE MICHAEL MCsPADDEN, who advocates castration as a punishment for sex offenders.  [ 12.6. ] "This is not the answer. It sounds good. It makes you feel good, but in the long haul it doesn't deal in any way with the basic issues of sexual assault." -- CASSANDRA THOMAS, president of the National Coalition Against Sexual Assault.  [ 1:1. ]


Special Sadness for Nixon As His Friend Is Banned
Otis Nixon had just returned home Thursday night when he turned on the television set and learned the news about Yankee pitcher Pascual Perez.
Today, he acknowledged that it struck him immediately.
Nixon said the announcement that Perez had once again tested positive for illegal drugs left him sad.
But the emotions the Atlanta Braves outfielder felt were probably more complex than that.
Last season, Nixon went through his own drug-related episode, a positive test that resulted in a 60-day suspension last September and kept him from playing in the National League Championship Series and the World Series.


The Marriage May Be Over, But Tax Consequences Go On
Many elements of divorce have important tax consequences.
They include how property and retirement benefits are divided, whether payments from one spouse to the other are in the form of alimony or child support, and who claims dependency exemptions.
In its booklet "Divorce and Taxes," Commerce Clearing House, a tax information service in Chicago, says that though most decisions in a divorce are not made for tax purposes, good tax planning can save money during a stressful and costly period in people's lives.


Complaints About Wages Face Backlog
At a time when more workers are complaining that contractors on public works projects are paying illegally low wages, the New York State and City agencies responsible for enforcing labor laws have taken years to act on complaints, leaving thousands of workers with no recourse.
New York City's Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, and the State Labor Department have fallen behind in investigating complaints that contractors are paying wages that are significantly below prevailing rates, a review of their labor records shows.


Rhode Island to Play
An internal investigation of the University of Rhode Island's basketball team has uncovered no illegal gambling or violations of N.C.A.A. rules and the team will play in the Atlantic 10 tournament, school spokeswoman LINDA ACCIARDO said.
Acciardo said the investigative committee interviewed every person associated with the team -- from players to coaches to trainers to administrative staff -- and everyone answered all of the questions.
Still ahead are investigations of the school's other sports teams and of the problem of gambling in on-campus and off-campus housing.


Investors Quit Mexico Bank Deal
After a giddy $10 billion string of sales, the euphoria disappeared from Mexico's bank privatization effort today with the disclosure that a leading investor had overbid for a leading bank and had to back out of the deal.
The investor, Eduardo Creel Cobian, surprised the Mexican financial world only four days ago, when it was announced that he and 40 partners had bought control of Banco Mexicano Somex for $845 million.
The winning bid amounted to nearly 29 times what Somex, a medium-sized institution with a reputation for weak management and bad loans, had earned in the previous year.


It's Tough Enough for the Disabled Even With Transit Discount
To the Editor:
"A program that allows disabled New Yorkers to ride the city's subway and buses at half-fare appears to be riddled with abuses, inadequate supervision and possible fraud, an audit by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has found" (news article, Feb. 6).
Your report misses several important points.


24 May Be Named in House Bank Case
Hoping to control the damage to political careers and the reputation of Congress, the House ethics committee proposed on Thursday to identify 19 representatives and five former representatives who regularly overdrew their House bank accounts by tens of thousands of dollars.
Several Republican lawmakers immediately attacked the recommendation as a whitewash of dozens of other members who they said also abused their checking privileges.
The panel's action set the stage for an explosive fight next week when the full House considers the committee's recommendation.


Angry Azerbaijanis Impel Chief to Quit
The President of Azerbaijan resigned today in the face of rising popular fury over his Government's failure to control the largely Armenian-populated enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh and protect the Azerbaijani minority there from Armenian guerrilla attacks.
The resignation of the President, Ayaz Mutalibov, a 53-year-old politician, only six months after his popular election was a measure of the depth of Azerbaijan feelings over the republic's plummeting fortunes in the four-year-old fight to retain control of the tinderbox enclave and to block the Armenian majority's attempts at self-rule and alliance with the Armenian republic.


Republics' Clash Is Too Close for Turkey's Comfort
As fighting continues to the east, pitting their Azerbaijani kinsmen against Armenian militias in the former Soviet Union, the Turkish authorities are displaying increasing alarm that the conflict will draw them closer toward a war that seems to blight Ankara's vision of a new dominance in the region.
Until just a few weeks ago, Western diplomats said, Turkey had been enthusiastically pursuing the idea that the breakup of the former Soviet Union offered it an opportunity to spread influence, garner business and raise its diplomatic flag over the predominantly Muslim and Turkic-speaking republics of Central Asia stretching from Azerbaijan to the Chinese border.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY FADE-OUT IN ASTORIA


Special Prayers in Israel for Brooklyn Rabbi
Across this town of rigorously Orthodox Jews, special prayers rose this Sabbath evening for Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Brooklyn-based spiritual leader of the Lubavitch Hasidic movement and a man believed by many followers to be the Messiah.
Rabbi Schneerson -- the Rebbe, to his disciples -- suffered what was described as a slight stroke on Monday.


Free Nursing Home Patients
The easiest way to keep nursing home patients docile is to tie them down or dope them up.
Since 1985 the Federal Government has issued a flurry of laws and regulations designed to curb such abuses.
But nursing home operators, orderlies, nurses and even doctors routinely thumbed their noses at the laws or found loopholes.
Dr.
Louis Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services, has now proposed the tightest rules yet.
They are open to comment until April.
But if adopted, they would strongly reinforce the illegality of using physical or chemical restraints to discipline a patient or convenience the staff.


Census Bureau to Dismiss Analyst Who Estimated Iraqi Casualties
The Census Bureau said today that it intended to dismiss an analyst who had estimated that 13,000 Iraqi civilians were killed by American-led forces in the Persian Gulf war, an estimate more than twice the bureau's subsequent official calculation.
A census spokeswoman, Karen Wheeless, said the possible dissmissal stemmed not from the estimate itself but from the analyst's decision to make the information public without submitting it to proper "peer review."


Review/Dance; When the Choreographers Enter Their Private Worlds
There were good ideas in the works offered on Sunday afternoon as part of the final presentation of the Morningside Dance Festival at the Theater of the Riverside Church.
But the more those ideas were choreographically belabored, the less good they began to seem.
Rachel List and Mary R. Barnett created heartfelt dances that showed people supporting one another in times of trial.
Sondra Graff, Martha Hirschman and Kathryn Tufano moved with stoic fortitude through Ms.
List's "Home Fires."


Observer; Terms Of Surrender
General Buchanan, having lost every battle, demanded that the victorious General Bush meet him at the White House.
"But the White House is my house," said General Bush to his Chief of Confused Staff.


Classical Music in Review
Boston Camerata Merkin Concert Hall
Concerts by Joel Cohen and his Boston Camerata often have something of the history class in them.
Although the group has been known to present unadorned performances of Renaissance instrumental and vocal works, more typically its programs are built around a historical point.
At the heart of the program the group presented on Thursday evening, for example, was the notion that a great deal of familiar North and South American folk music has its roots in Medieval and Renaissance European music.


Brooklyn Man Slain in Police Drug Raid
A suspect in a police drug raid was shot and killed in his Brooklyn apartment yesterday, apparently by a bullet from his own gun, moments after officers broke down his door, the police said.
"At this time, we believe that the deceased either accidentally shot himself or intentionally shot himself," a police spokesman, Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, said late yesterday afternoon.
Sergeant Sweeney stressed that the finding was preliminary.


New Transit Police Chief Named
Michael F. O'Connor, the third-ranking officer in the New York City Transit Police, was named chief of the department yesterday, replacing William J. Bratton, who resigned in January to return to his native Boston.
Chief O'Connor, a 26-year veteran of the department, was described by an outside expert as Bratton's right-hand man during his 21 months in New York.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday with a review of plays by Alan Bennett in London misidentified the theater at which "Talking Heads" is playing.
It is the Comedy Theater.


The Talk of Paris; Dusting Cobwebs Off La Belle Epoque
La Toya Jackson's opening performance at the Bal du Moulin Rouge on Thursday, the first of a contracted year of twice-nightly appearances by this lesser member of the Jackson family as star of the famed dinner theater's current revue, "Formidable," was of perhaps less than epochal consequence, considered all by itself.
But her presence here seems part of a larger Parisian nostalgia for La Belle Epoque, in which the city's artists and institutions look back longingly to a time when Paris was truly a home for glamorous popular entertainers and vibrant artistic creativity.
Such nostalgia, even when tempered by an earnest scholarly apparatus, as in the comprehensive Toulouse-Lautrec exhibition at the Grand Palais, or by seemingly dispassionate cinematic realism, as in Maurice Pialat's film "Van Gogh," suggests an almost touching insecurity about the city's cultural role today.


Feared Computer Plague Passes With Very Few Infections
The Michelangelo computer virus came to life as scheduled yesterday, but from all reports the infection caused barely a sneeze among the millions of personal computers worldwide and led instead to an angry exchange about whom to blame for the dire alarms sounded in recent weeks.
There were scattered reports in a number of countries that the virus had destroyed data in some computer systems.
In the United States, most experts said the reports they had received about personal computer users losing data could be gauged in the dozens.


Eventually, All Things End, Even a Big Hit Like 'Cosby'
Theo Huxtable graduated from N.Y.U. yesterday, albeit on videotape, and like a lot of graduations it was a bittersweet occasion.
His father, Cliff, a doctor with a pride in his family that even his family finds a little excessive at times, was particularly miffed at the impersonal nature of the ceremony, in which 8,000 graduates merely stood up, flipped their tassels and sat down.
"A hundred thousand dollars to practice the Wave?" Dr.
Huxtable complained to the horde of relatives he had armed with binoculars and cameras and shepherded to the event.


Sanders Qualifies for 4th Olympic Spot
Summer Sanders stood on the starting block, put her thumb in her mouth and cried.
Finally, she calmed down, swam her race and finished third.
No, this did not happen here at the United States Olympic trials, which ended tonight.
It happened in her first race.
She was 4 years old.


Study Backs New Jersey's Growth Plan
New Jersey's pending growth management plan would not harm the state's economy, according to a comprehensive study released by the State Planning Commission here today, but would rather save billions in coming decades by discouraging scattered development.
The study concluded that the state would add about the same number of people and jobs with or without the broad land-use plan that is expected to be published this summer.


Buffalo Braces for Renewal of Abortion Protests
A little more than three years ago, throngs of anti-abortion protesters from a local Operation Rescue chapter took to the sidewalks and created havoc here.
Hundreds of protesters were arrested for blocking the entrances of local abortion clinics.
Thousands of others, called "prayer warriors," picketed outside the clinics trying to dissuade women from having abortions.
And a local minister pulled what he claimed was an aborted fetus from a plastic container during a live radio show, after which he was asked to leave the station.


Samuel Victor Abraham, Ophthalmologist, 92
Dr.
Samuel Victor Abraham, a prominent ophthalmologist who practiced in Los Angeles for more than 50 years, died on Feb. 20 at his home in Encino, Calif.
He was 92 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Arthur Babbitt, 85, Artist Who Created Cartoon Characters
Arthur Babbitt, an animator who created many memorable scenes and characters for Walt Disney, Hanna-Barbera and other studios, died on Wednesday at the Queen of Angels-Hollywood Presbyterian Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 85 years old.
He died of kidney failure, said his wife, Barbara.


Temporary Sanctuary Tends to Get Permanent; Parole Asylum Seekers
To the Editor:


Yale Panel Faults Plan To Cut Costs
A committee of Yale University professors has criticized a proposal to cut the Yale faculty by 10 percent and eliminate several academic departments to reduce a growing budget deficit.
The committee's report, presented at a crowded faculty meeting Thursday night, reflected widespread distrust, fear and anger toward the administration among Yale's 600 Arts and Sciences faculty members.


Life at 'Jeff': Tough Students Wonder Where Childhood Went
New Yorkers and indeed the nation were shocked when two students were gunned down in the hallway of Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York, Brooklyn, on Feb. 26.
Khalil Sumpter, a 15-year-old student, was arrested and charged with the slayings of Tyrone Sinkler, 16, and Ian Moore, 17.
For the 1,800 students who attend "Jeff," in one of the poorest and most violent sections of the city, murder and mayhem are as much a feature of teen-age life as pep rallies and proms.


Anthony Smith, 86, Environment Leader and Labor Lawyer
Anthony Wayne Smith, a onetime labor lawyer who became an environmental leader at the forefront of efforts to preserve seashores and national parks, died last Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 86 years old and lived in Washington and on a farm that he and his wife ran near Mercersburg, Pa.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Yankees Keep Cool; Trade Talks Heat Up
Amid their latest distraction, the Yankees opened their exhibition season today with a delicious victory and a tasty trade rumor.
The victory came in a 13-hit, 11-6 rout of the National League champion Atlanta Braves at Fort Lauderdale Stadium that was tempered somewhat by the announcement that pitcher Pascual Perez had been suspended for one year after testing positive for drugs.


Thorn EMI Is Buying Virgin Music
The British conglomerate Thorn EMI said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Virgin Music Group for $:560 million, or roughly $960 million, a deal that would put some of world's best-known record labels and singers under a single umbrella.
Under the agreement, Thorn EMI, which currently records the likes of Garth Brooks and Tina Turner, would add stars like Janet Jackson and the Rolling Stones to its roster.
The acquisition would lift Thorn EMI into the top three companies in terms of market share, along with Polygram and the Warner Music Group.
It might also be the last major deal in the industry, because there would be no large independent record companies remaining.
Owner Makes $695 Million
In the record industry, as elsewhere, big companies snapped up smaller ones in rapid succession in the 1980's.
But it is by no means clear that the big companies' quest to gain more leverage with star artists, important distributors and essential suppliers will pay off in the 1990's.


Lightening Scales of Justice: High Court Trims Its Docket
The Supreme Court issued its final schedule of arguments for the current term the other day, and while the choice of April 22 for the Pennsylvania abortion case made news, the real story was the April calendar itself.
Bearing only 8 cases for a schedule designed to accommodate 24, the calendar is the most compelling evidence yet of the extent to which the Justices, for reasons known only to themselves, are shrinking the Court's docket.
The new calendar made it clear that the Court was headed for its lightest term in 21 years.
The term will produce, at most, 109 decisions, matching the 109 issued in the 1970-71 term.
This is a decline of nearly one-third from the peak workloads of the 1980's, when two consecutive terms produced 151 decisions each, and most terms yielded in the 140's or the high 130's.


Congress Can Put Executives on a Diet
President Ronald Reagan said a rising tide lifts all boats.
But that is not the case when it comes to the salaries of American executives: their salaries have skyrocketed in the last decade, while the pay of average workers has stagnated.
To try to reduce that discrepancy, the Income Disparities Act would link the pay of executives and subordinates for the purpose of tax deductions.
Recession-weary Americans find it hard to understand why, for example, Paul Fireman, Reebok's chief executive officer, earns $14.8 million a year, and Michael Eisner of Walt Disney pulls in $11.2 million.
More unseemly is the $78.2 million that Steven Ross of Time Warner made in 1990 when stock options are included.


Helmet With a Pump Is Literally Fitting for Bikers
The pump technology that allows basketball players to squeeze air into their shoes for a better fit or allows softball players to pump up their fielders' gloves is now also being applied to bicycle helmets.
Bell Bicycle Inc. of Norwalk, Calif., has created a helmet with two air-pump buttons at the back.
By reaching around with your hand, even while riding, you can add air to the interior bladder of the helmet with one button and release air with another.


Officer's Blows Unprovoked, Jury Told
A police officer acted without provocation and against accepted procedure when he struck Rodney G. King in the head with his baton, a California Highway Patrol officer testified today in the trial of four white Los Angeles officers charged with assaulting Mr.
King, a black motorist.
Under questioning by Terry L. White, a deputy district attorney, Melanie Singer, the highway patrol officer who helped arrest Mr.
King, said that on March 3, 1991, Officer Laurence M. Powell repeatedly used a "power swing" to the motorist's head.
When Mr.
White asked if the blows were justified, she said, "In my opinion, no sir. There was no reason for it."


Texas Court Agrees to Castration For Rapist of 13-Year-Old Girl
A Houston man charged with sexually assaulting a 13-year-old girl won judicial approval yesterday to undergo surgical castration.
The decision would allow him to avoid a prison sentence.
If the castration takes place, the man, Steve Allen Butler, 28, who has a previous conviction for molesting a child, would be the first sex offender in recent years to be punished by surgical castration.
The date of the procedure was not announced at a hearing yesterday in Harris County District Court in Houston.


Voices of Jefferson High


Group's Lottery Payout Is Postponed in Virginia
An Australian syndicate that tried to guarantee itself a jackpot in a $27 million Virginia Lottery game on Thursday turned in a pink ticket bearing the winning numbers.
But state officials here say they will not pay the prize until they investigate the ticket's validity.
The Lottery Department said Thursday night that it would rule on the matter by the end of next week.


Judge Rules Kozlov Can Play in N.H.L.
The latest in a string of former Soviet players has joined the Detroit Red Wings after a judge in Michigan yesterday issued a preliminary ruling in his favor.
The player, VYACHESLAV KOZLOV, had sought to be freed from a five-year contract he signed last year with the former Soviet Red Army team to begin fulfilling a three-year $750,000 contract with the National Hockey League club.
MICHAEL LEWISTON, his attorney, argued that Kozlov, now 19, had signed the contract in the former Soviet Union under duress.


Giants Stadium Is Closer To Landing Cup Games
A ruling by soccer officials in Zurich has all but guaranteed that Giants Stadium will play host to World Cup soccer games in 1994, probably through the late rounds.
Guido Tognoni, a spokesman for FIFA, the sport's world governing body, said yesterday that the organization had decided to waive its strict requirements on the width of fields.
Alan Rothenberg, the World Cup USA president, met with FIFA officials earlier this week in Switzerland to explain to them that such a liberal interpretation was necessary to assure the participation of Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Bush Brings Largess of Office Along on the Campaign Trail
If conservatives should be grateful to Patrick J. Buchanan for pushing President Bush to the right on issues like welfare and taxes, then state officials who have been waiting for Federal largess may also have to send Mr.
Buchanan thank you notes.
As Mr.
Bush charges across the country, his campaign forced out of the White House by Mr.
Buchanan's challenge and showing new signs of fear and confusion, the President ends up at times looking like a political rich uncle visiting his poor relations.


Gulfstream Quiet Amid One-Day Protest
The sun was shining, the track was harrowed and 1,375 horses lolled in their stalls at Gulfstream Park today.
But none of them went to the races, because their trainers had "gone fishing" to protest the new racing dates proposed for the three tracks in South Florida.
All 10 races were canceled.
The 80 or 90 horses who might have run in them got the day off.
The customers stayed home with the $2 million they bet here on an average afternoon.
The state lost $65,000 in parimutuel taxes.
And the owners and trainers lost $175,000 in purses.


Bedroom Fire in Tuckahoe Apartment House Kills Man
A fire in a 10-story apartment building in this Westchester County village this morning killed a man, and his elderly mother was critically injured when she jumped from their third-floor balcony in panic just as firefighters were coming to her rescue.
Four other residents suffered minor injuries, and five firefighters were treated for smoke inhalation.


Patents; A New Drug May Be Help For Cataracts
SCIENTISTS at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have patented what they say could be the first drug to prevent and treat cataracts, the cloudy formations of protein on the lens of an eye that obscure vision in about half of people older than 65.
Although surgery to remove cataracts has improved immensely in the last two decades, it is costly and doctors usually wait until the obscurity has reached an advanced stage.


Review/Film; Lost Dachshund and Other Complications
The cast of "Once Upon a Crime" performs energetically, as if the material was funny, although most of the time it is not.
As a general rule, films whose plots revolve around lost dogs are apt to be short on comic inspiration, and this one is no exception.
The dog is a dachshund, and it is first found by a jilted waif named Phoebe (Sean Young) and an unsuccessful actor named Julian (Richard Lewis) in Rome.
Joining forces to trade insults and collect a reward from the dog's wealthy owner, Phoebe and Julian take a train for Monte Carlo.
On board, they meet Augie Morosco (John Candy), a ridiculously suave fortune-hunter who has landed a rich, gorgeous wife (Ornella Muti).


Koch Accuses Baker of Slur on Jews
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d found himself at the center of a political tempest today after former Mayor Edward I. Koch of New York wrote a newspaper column asserting that Mr.
Baker had recently dismissed American Jews with a four-letter obscenity.
Mr.
Koch, in his weekly New York Post column Friday, wrote that when Mr.
Baker was criticized recently at a meeting of high-level White House advisers "for his belligerent attitude toward Israel," he used a profanity and added that most Jews did not vote for President Bush.


An Original Knick Makes His Return
"The last time I played for the Knicks, I was a lot younger," said 72-year-old Ralph Kaplowitz yesterday, and so were the Knicks.
After a 45-year absence, Kaplowitz will return to Madison Square Garden tonight to participate, lightly, in the Knicks Legends Game after the Atlantic Division-leading Knicks play the Charlotte Hornets.


Ailing Gun Industry Confronts Outrage Over Glut of Violence
Improbable as it may seem at a time of escalating drug wars and senseless schoolyard shootouts, the American gun industry is staggering after a decade of sluggish sales.
This is not to say that guns are about to become scarce.
In each of the last several years, four million to five million firearms -- including two million handguns -- were added to a vast civilian gun supply believed to total close to 200 million.
And through the industry's recession a few companies have thrived by selling hundreds of thousands of $70, pocket-sized pistols each year to frightened people for self-protection, and sometimes to criminals.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
Nov. 18, 1949, was a red-letter day for me -- the day I finally worked a Sunday Times crossword puzzle and the day my son was born.
I've had fun, stimulation, frustration and mental exercise from your puzzles for at least 48 of the 50 years they've been appearing.


Election-Law Revisions: The Time May Be Now
After years of unsuccessful attempts here to make it easier for candidates to get on the ballot, two issues have converged to put New York's cumbersome election laws so immediately before lawmakers that they may not be able to ignore it this year.
One issue concerns Paul E. Tsongas, who has become "the poster child of election law reform," as one critic said earlier this week.
The tortuous, line-by-line challenge from the New Alliance Party to the signatures on his petitions to be placed on the Democratic Presidential primary ballot reached a state courtroom on Friday.
A decision is expected in a week or two on whether Mr.
Tsongas's name will appear on that ballot.


Ann McQuilling to Marry in May
Thomas Merrick McQuilling of Manhasset, L.I., has announced the engagement of his daughter Ann Louise McQuilling to Laurence Keith Denihan, a son of Irene Denihan, also of Manhasset.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
McQuilling, 26 years old, graduated from Villanova University, and is a merchandising assistant in the Armani jeans division of Simint USA Inc., a clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her father is the president of McQuilling Brokers Inc., an oil tanker broker in New York.
She is also the daughter of the late Patricia Daly McQuilling.


Chloe Montgomery to Wed in June
S.
Phelps Montgomery of Palm Beach, Fla., and Harriett Q. Giordano of Middletown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Harriett Chloe Montgomery, to David Allen Smeed, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Smeed of St.
Paul.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Montgomery, 33 years old, is known as Chloe.
She graduated from Tufts University and is an account executive at Corporate Report Minnesota, a business magazine in Minneapolis.
Her father, a former senior vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, retired as the president of the Morgan Trust Company of Florida in Palm Beach.


Does Power Tennis Make Poor Tennis?
Suddenly power tennis is swirling around this austere sport like a Hydra, and the only thing anybody agrees on is that simple evolution has created a modern-day monster that has probably grown too big to be killed.
Power tennis stands accused of snuffing the dialogue on the court, where the artistry has been rendered all but obsolete by strength and technology.
It's blamed for shoulder and elbow injuries linked to the stress overload on joints and muscles unable to withstand high-impact tennis.
Traditionalists insist the staccato points that masquerade for playmaking are alienating spectators interested in watching more than the radar gun.
And everyone seems worried about the next generation of tennis players, lest power replace play and the basics of the sport are forgotten in the quest for pure speed.


Susan Boreen Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry I. Boreen of Meadowbrook, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Tobey Joy Boreen, to Eric Hailman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Hailman of Madison, Wis.
No date has been set.
Ms.
Boreen, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was a Benjamin Franklin Scholar, and has a master's degree in Soviet studies from Harvard University.
She is a graduate student in accounting at Pace University and is an assistant to the controller of the tax division of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company in New York.


Making a Difference; 'Mr. Enforcement' for the Defense . . . Going After The Lawyers
Harris Weinstein made few new friends in Wall Street and Washington legal circles last week, although in Congress some lawmakers applauded his latest effort.
As the top lawyer for the Office of Thrift Supervision, Mr.
Weinstein has overseen many of the Government's cases against savings and loan executives.
On Monday he brought the mother of all cases, as far as lawyers are concerned, when the O.T.S. sued the former lawyers for Charles H. Keating Jr. for a record $275 million and moved to freeze their assets.
Many lawyers see the case as a threat to their ability to counsel businesses because it accuses the lawyers of failing to blow the whistle on their client.


The Care and Feeding of a Mafia Turncoat
As a reward for testifying against John Gotti, Salvatore Gravano will get a new name, a fictitious family history, unprecedented protection and much pampering from the government.
But before prison doors open for the highest-ranking turncoat in the American Mafia's history, Mr.
Gravano faces periods of virtual isolation in special Federal penitentiaries known in the trade as rat units.
These days, Mr.
Gravano is encircled by protectors.
When not in the heavily guarded Brooklyn courtroom where last week he unfolded a chilling catalogue of 19 murders and other crimes he said were committed for Mr.
Gotti and other mob leaders, he is in a secret sanctuary -- possibly a military base -- under the constant watch of Federal Bureau of Investigation agents.


Off-Target Business Proposal for New York City
New York City has paid little attention to economic development in recent years, spending far less than other cities and focusing its efforts poorly, government and business leaders say.
In recent years it has aimed, with little success, at propping up sagging businesses, and all but ignored growth industries that might generate more jobs.
This state of affairs, the leaders say, leaves the city particularly vulnerable, not just in this recession, but in future years.
The lack of support for promising local companies, public amenities and commercial projects that might stimulate economic growth leaves New York City sorely disadvantaged just when competition with other cities is intensifying.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
In his article "Bambi Is a Stag and Tubas Don't Go 'Pah-Pah,' " Richard F. Shepard mentions several noted musicians who are avid crossword solvers and puzzle constructors.
There is a parallel in the congruity of the horizontal and vertical structure of the notes in musical notation and the across-and-down structure of the letters in a crossword puzzle.
To a musician, the words of the crossword fit together like the harmony and melody of a symphony.
STEVEN WIDERMAN
New York, N.Y.


F-15 Sale: Wrong New World Order
Why should the U.S. stimulate competition to sell advanced fighter planes to the Middle East when it could instead promote international cooperation to shut down arms sales?
Congress has to face that question now that the Bush Administration says it intends to sell 72 F-15 fighters to Saudi Arabia.
The sensible answer is to delay the sale and instruct President Bush to seek agreement from Britain and other leading arms merchants not to sell such planes to the Middle East.
That would give Mr.
Bush a chance to fulfill his previous pledges to curb arms sales to that volatile region.


Review/Music; Previn Conducts Dvorak and Mahler
One domino did not tumble in the music world's recent chain reaction of substitutions.
June Anderson, whose physical distress deprived the recent Rossini celebration of her presence last weekend, made it to Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night.
She sang the soprano solos at the end of Mahler's Fourth Symphony.
Andre Previn conducted the New York Philharmonic.
Apparently not fully well, Ms.
Anderson treated her voice with more than usual tenderness.
The top notes were guarded; every successfully negotiated passage brought a sense of small triumph mixed with relief.
Yet even at less than top form, Ms.
Anderson imposed her personality on the music.
Like her Gilda at the Metropolitan Opera, it was not the work of a tinkling ingenue.
Indeed, Mahler's "Heavenly Joys" took on added muscle: broader at the shoulders, stronger in its turn of mind.


Joe Pesci? That Guy Is Some Kind of Character
Joe Pesci whispers "I love you" into the phone during a break in filming "My Cousin Vinny." Cutting the call short to accommodate a visitor, he quickly puts to rest any assumption that he is talking to his wife.
"That was my mother," the 48-year-old actor explains.
"I try to call her and get her to do things with me. But our lives are so spread out."


Struggle Continues Over Remarks by Mental Health Official
Mental health groups, Bush Administration officials and members of Congress are engaging in a quiet struggle over the fate of a top Federal mental health official who made remarks that many consider racially insensitive.
Professional societies, scientists, patient groups and others concerned about mental health issues have been discussing the statements of Dr.
Frederick K. Goodwin and lobbying for or against his continuing as director of the National Institute of Mental Health, a post to which the 55-year-old psychiatrist was appointed only two weeks ago.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
I greatly admire Beverly Sills's remarkable ability to strike each Sunday puzzle like a rattlesnake and subdue it in 15 or 20 minutes.
But I prefer my own technique, which is more catlike -- I make the encounter last at least an hour, often two, worrying my prey to a slow death.
May I suggest to Sills that if she would like to prolong the ecstasy of warring with the
alais
and the
esnes,
she work the puzzles Scrabble-style?
Start anywhere on the puzzle.
Then build on the word played until the puzzle is completed.


Edy Krakauer and Ian Grusd Wed
Edy Elka Krakauer, a daughter of Vera Krakauer of Highland Beach, Fla., and the late Sidney Krakauer, was married in New York on Feb. 29 to Ian Martin Grusd, a son of Neville and Velma Grusd of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Nathan Benjamin officiated at the Pierre.


Topics of The Times; Archibald Cox's Careers
He's best known as the Watergate special prosecutor whom President Nixon fired in the 1973 "Saturday Night Massacre" for refusing to drop a subpoena for incriminating White House tapes.
But that's only one of Archibald Cox's contributions to the rule of law and the continuing quest for honest government.
A distinguished law professor, and one of the nation's premier labor relations experts, Mr.
Cox served as U.S.
Solicitor General under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, gaining respect for his skillful advocacy before the Supreme Court.
Now that he's stepped down after 12 years as chairman of Common Cause, he is entitled to yet more gratitude.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  ONE SUPERPOWER, PLEASE


CAMPUS LIFE: Duke; Student Teachers Protest a Switch To 8 A.M. Classes
Teaching assistants in the Trinity College of Arts and Sciences at Duke University are protesting the university's decision to hold the 150 sections of a required writing course at 8 A.M. starting this fall.
A majority of the 100 teaching assistants for the course, all graduate students earning $3,500 for each course section they lead, said the university was wrong to schedule the courses so early in the day and particularly wrong to do so without seeking their opinions.


Marybeth McCleery and Gerald Caruso to Wed
Frances D. Robertson of Morrisville, Pa., and Robert B. McCleery of Oakmont, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Marybeth McCleery and Gerald Caruso, a son of Anne and George Caruso of Newton, Mass.
Miss McCleery, 30 years old, is a teacher at the Children's Own School in Winchester, Mass.
She graduated from Antioch College and the Ohio Montessori Training Institute.


3 Ways to Cook Chicken in the Oven
ONE of the most reliable and simplest ways to prepare chicken is oven braising.
The well-seasoned succulent results make for a good family dinner yet also suit a dinner party.
While a basic principle applies to this type of dish, oven-braised chicken allows for infinite variation, making it adaptable to a variety of menus and cuisines.
The number of servings can also be extended, simply by doubling or even tripling the ingredients and using a large pan or a big casserole for the cooking.


Guaranteeing That Americans Pay the Most
To the Editor:
Don E. Newquist (Letters, Feb. 23) states that United States dumping laws "seek to remedy the situation where foreign producers, free from significant competition at home, use their surplus profits from domestic sales to subsidize low-cost export sales that injure American companies and their workers."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE!
ITALIAN PAGEANT
"Il Viaggio della Madonna Nera," "The Voyage of the Black Madonna," will be performed in Italian with English narration by I Giullari di Piazza today at 2:30 P.M. at the Yale Art Gallery in New Haven.


Brazil Welcomes Drop in Population Growth
For the first time in half a century, Brazil's population growth rate has dipped below 2 percent, according to preliminary results of the country's latest once-a-decade census.
The falling growth rate, part of a trend in developing nations, is being welcomed by officials here because, they say, it gives Brazil, Latin America's most populous nation, more time to catch up with a yawning social deficit of schools, sewers and clinics.


Using Correct Hammer To Nail Things Down
FEW tools for home repairs are as basic or as widely used as hammers.
Like most hand tools, many kinds of hammers are available, and choosing the most suitable can be confusing.
For general carpentry and tasks like driving nails to hang pictures, the best hammer to use is a 16-ounce, bell-faced carpenter's hammer with a curved claw.
If you own only one hammer, it should be that type.


Natalie Chetlin, Lawyer, Weds
Natalie Kim Chetlin and J. Kenneth Moritz, lawyers in New York, were married last evening in Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Richard Marcovitz officiated at B'nai Israel Synagogue.
Ms.
Chetlin Moritz, 26 years old, is an associate with Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
Both she and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and have law degrees from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart Chetlin of Pittsburgh.
Her father is chief of surgery at Central Medical Pavilion in Pittsburgh.


Marcy Tarnoff Has Wedding
Marcy Jane Tarnoff, a daughter of Jerome Tarnoff and Rica F. Tarnoff, both of New York, was married last evening to Henry Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Klein of Cape Town.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Klein, 29 years old, is a manager of marketing planning at the Cunard Line in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University, as does the bridegroom.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Berger Steingut Tarnoff &amp; Stern and the vice chairman of the New York County Democratic Committee.
Her mother is a real-estate broker at Alice F. Mason Ltd. in New York.


'Great Disservice' To Earl Manigault
To the Sports Editor:
In "Gaining World and Losing Soul" (The Times, Feb. 7), Robert Lipsyte depicts Earl (the Goat) Manigault as a destitute schoolyard basketball legend ravaged by drugs and jail, and in need of a heart transplant.
Reducing his life to only these dreary facts does a great disservice to Earl and all the people he has helped.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


The Executive Life; Meet Me for a Veggie Down in Beverly Hills
Soon after a studio production head had turned down a director's pet project, he spotted the film maker across a crowded restaurant here and invited him to lunch.
"How can I, when you squelched a picture that lost me millions?" asked the director.
"That's business," replied the production head.
"Now let's have lunch."
So goes the story.
And, whatever the details, in Hollywood it is recognized that the dialectics of dining are complex indeed.
For those who double-book their breakfasts and also conduct business over lunch, "drinks" and dinner, an expanding waistline is an occupational hazard.
That may explain why nobody in the entertainment industry ever orders anything that they might actually enjoy; it's raw vegetables, grilled fish -- and no martinis -- for this crowd.


The Shattered Vision of the Booming 90's
HAD the world turned according to plan -- or, at least, according to environmental-impact statements -- a desolate patch west of Ninth Avenue behind the General Post Office would now be shaping up as a center for some 10,500 workers in two new office towers.
Instead, it remains mostly an open cut, 60 feet below street level, through which a network of tracks runs to Pennsylvania Station.
North of this cut is an Edison parking lot ("Garden Events -- Fast In -- Fast Out") and to the south there is a Kinney parking lot.
Between them, about 12 people work on the site, or 10,488 fewer than envisioned in the late 1980's.


Emily D. Lustig Has Wedding
Emily Diane Lustig, the daughter of Barbara Lustig of Brooklyn and the late Neil M. Lustig, was married last evening to Mark Stanley Sowa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Sowa of Morristown, N.J.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Sowa, 24 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is a marketing and public relations assistant at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan.
Her mother is a senior vice president at Kadilac Mortgage Bankers in Great Neck, L.I.


Crocuses Poke Through to Herald Spring
WHEN the crocuses bloom, spring is here.
Gardeners know this in their hearts, even though the calendar may say otherwise.
There is something about this beguiling springtime flower that sets the emotions astir and reassures those who have been waiting through the long winter that the new season has arrived.
This kind of response is especially noteworthy when the crocus brave late winter snow and poke through the white blanket anyway.
The crocus foliage is stiff and grasslike with white stripes.
The flowers, with their six shiny petals, are often described as having the shape of a chalice or a vase.
Three or more crocus flowers are rewarding to see, but a mass display of hundreds of them in bloom is an inspiration for the poets.


Ms. D'Angelo to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Natale D'Angelo of Garden City, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Catherine D'Angelo, and Michael Cronin, the son of Lillian Cronin of Coconut Creek, Fla., and the late Ambrose J. Cronin.
Ms.
D'Angelo, 38 years old, is a special-education teacher at George Washington Elementary School in West Hempstead, L.I.
Mr.
Cronin, 50, is the president of the Federal Sample Card Corporation, a textile sample concern in New York.


Jennifer Norton Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Norton of Charlotte, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne Norton to Stephen Herbert Courtney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian F. Courtney of Redding, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Norton, 26 years old, is the manager of convention services at the New York Vista Hotel.
She graduated from Haverford College.
Her father is the senior manager of communications for the Charlotte office of Hoechst Celanese, a German chemical and textile manufacturer.


On the Home Front
"It is old and little, and altogether delightful." With those words, E. M. Forster described Howards End, the red-brick cottage at the heart of his 1910 novel, "Howards End." Forster based the fictional house on Rooks Nest, the rustic manse in Kent, England, where he spent his childhood.
Rooks Nest still stands, but the director James Ivory refused to film his adaptation of the novel there.
"I always find that sort of thing a little creepy," he said.
"Superstitious, I guess."
He did film at Peppard Cottage (in photograph), a vine-covered dwelling just west of London.
That house belongs to Roger and Caroline Shapland, silversmiths who are friends of the production designer for "Howards End." Built in the 1700's, Peppard Cottage looks so much like Rooks Nest that Mr.
Ivory himself has confused the two in photographs.
"But Peppard is more photogenic," Mr.
Ivory said.
"It's the epitome of the picturesque cozy house."


We Must Restore Higher Tax on Top Incomes
To the Editor:
"Fake Fixes for the Economy" (editorial, Feb. 25), while assessing the tax proposals of Congress and the Administration, makes no alternative proposal.
Last weekend, while doing calculations preparatory to filing my income tax, I came across some figures that I believe accurately reflect the problem of the middle class.


Cuttings; A Primer for Pruning: Timing and a Few Facts
To prune or not to prune, that is the question.
Should I prune my lilac now or wait until after it blooms?
What about the mock orange, the chaste tree, the quince?


Perez Arrived Late and Left a Year Early
The guard at the front gate said he hadn't seen Pascual Perez all morning.
The woman who answered the phone said he wasn't home, then hung up.
The limousine was parked on the street of the enclosed community in Coral Springs, Fla., but it remained there, unoccupied, with no driver or passenger in sight.
Where was Perez?
It's a question the Yankees spent two seasons asking themselves.
He was either late, hurt or pitching somewhere else in an attempt to come back from an injury.
He was here, then gone, then back again, saying he was ready to pitch but eventually explaining how he had broken down once more.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Students Pick Cuomo to Run On Ticket Headed by Clinton
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came this morning to the mock Democratic convention at Washington and Lee University, which over the years has compiled a remarkably accurate track record in forecasting Presidential nominees, and told a raucous group of students that "the next President of the United States should be the candidate you nominate before the Virginia sun goes down."
It was all over by 1:30 P.M.
The winner on the first ballot was Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


CHIANTI'S CLASS ACTS
In his "wine atlas of Italy," Burton Anderson tells how, in 1944, a Tuscan wine maker, the Marchese Mario Incisa della Rocchetta, planted some vine cuttings from Chateau Lafite-Rothschild on a hillside near Bolgheri just to see how they would fare.
The sloping vineyard was in the Maritime Hills, west of Siena and close to the sea.
The first wines were rough and tannic, virtually undrinkable, but a few were put away each year to see if and how they would develop.
As time passed, those savage wines were tamed; they became richer, almost elegant.


This Week
I saw corn salad, that hardy green also known as mache, coming up in a raised bed on Long Island.
So why not scatter some mache seeds, as well as spinach, curly cress and other cold-loving greens, in a protected area like a raised bed on the south side of a wall, or in a cold frame?
Seeds are cheap, it's fun to push against the outer edges of the season and those first greens of spring are like a tonic.
Seeds of hardy annuals and vegetables, like broccoli, cabbages, lettuce and asters, can also be sown in a cold frame, if it gets plenty of sun and is out of the wind.


Correction
An article on Feb. 23 about Baltimore misstated the telephone number for 8K Home Run, an eight-kilometer road race.
It is (410) 882-5455.


Chess
The improbable governed the key play of the final round of the Melody Amber tournament at the Vista Palace Hotel in Roquebrune/Cap-Martin, Monaco.
The games were played at a speed of 30 minutes a game for each player.
Going into the final round, Viswanathan Anand of India, a rising star, held a half-point lead over his counterpart from Ukraine, Vasily Ivanchuk.
Anand was paired with a falling star, Bent Larsen of Denmark, who now lives in Buenos Aires.
That figured to be a victory for the Indian, but that is not how it turned out.
Despite Larsen's coming in last in the event, he made one last fine effort and defeated Anand.


The Executive Computer; Apple-I.B.M. Venture, With New Leaders, Searches for a Soul
Taligent Inc. officially opened for business last week with 170 experienced employees, two new leaders, the most impressive venture backing in Silicon Valley and one of the toughest challenges faced by any computer software company.
Taligent is an independent joint venture of Apple Computer Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation, with a mandate to develop operating system software that will be the foundation for business computers in the mid-1990's and into the 21st century.


48,000 Motorists May Face Delay In Injury Awards
ON a Friday afternoon in July 1989, 16-year-old Jaclynn Pazur was a passenger in a Ford Thunderbird when the car collided with another vehicle in Sayreville.
Ms.
Pazur's injuries included a fractured pelvis, fractured vertebrae and knee injuries that required surgery.
She sued both drivers, who were insured by the state-run Joint Underwriting Association, and her case was settled last December for $155,000.
About a week later, on Dec. 18, the State Department of Insurance issued an order deferring for one year such payments for pain and suffering arising from bodily injuries.
As a result, Ms.
Pazur will not receive her settlement until, at best, December 1992.
Under a 1990 law that dissolved the bankrupt Joint Underwriting Association, deferments could last up to four years.


Iraq Outwitting Bomb Inspectors
"About this big," a United Nations official says, holding his arms out in a circle.
"About a yard across, weighing about a ton."


Popular Eurocrat Sees Job Openings in Paris
Having enjoyed more power and popularity than any of his predecessors as president of the European Community's executive commission, Jacques Delors is now wrestling with a problem born of his success in leading the 12-nation bloc to greater unity over the last seven years.
His second four-year term as "Mr. Europe," as he is often called, will end as the community becomes the world's largest trading bloc at midnight on Dec. 31, 1992.
And while possible successors wait in the wings, several European nations would like him to remain at the head of the European Commission, the community's day-to-day administrative body in Brussels, for two more years.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 16 about Academy Award nominations for best soundtracks misstated the date of Barbra Streisand's Oscar for "Evergreen" and misattributed the score of "Fried Green Tomatoes." Ms.
Streisand won in 1977.
Thomas Newman wrote the score for "Fried Green Tomatoes."


American Teams Show They Are Coming of Age
The United States Olympic swimming team, the 40 survivors of the high-tension trials here this week, is strong, promising and also puzzling.
The women's team should win more medals than anyone else this summer in Barcelona, Spain.
The men's team is not as strong as the women's, and while it may lead all other nations in medals, it may also be shut out in many events.


Whistle-Blower Gains a Pentagon Reprieve
The Army has postponed a decision on whether to dismiss a scientist who has complained of mismanagement in the Pentagon's "Star Wars" antimissile program.
The scientist, Aldric Saucier, had been told that the notification of his dismissal by the Army Strategic Defense Command was being reviewed to see whether his removal was improper and that a final decision would be made on Friday.
But while that two-week review was under way, a broader inquiry into Mr.
Saucier's accusations was ordered by a Government office that protects whistle-blowers.


Jan Purpi Weds Steven Barnett
Jeanne Marie Purpi, the director of accounting at Time Warner Enterprises, and Steven Lawrence Barnett, a lawyer, both in New York, were married last evening in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joyce Fuchs-Gioia, an interfaith minister, officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill, a catering establishment.
Mrs.
Barnett, 28 years old and known as Jan, graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is the vice president and general manager of Nepera Inc., a chemical company in Harriman, N.Y.
Her mother, Lillian Purpi, teaches chemistry at Ramsey, N.J., High School.


Mutual; Expenses Up on Money Funds
Money market mutual funds are getting more expensive, according to data recently released by the IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report, a newsletter in Ashland, Mass.
In 1990, only 5 percent of all taxable money funds required their investors to pay expenses totaling more than eight-tenths of 1 percent of assets.
This changed drastically in 1991, when nearly one-quarter of all taxable money funds exceeded that amount.


Mencken and Dreiser: Friends, When Speaking
THEODORE DREISER once inscribed a book, "To H. L. Mencken, my oldest living enemy." Those exasperated words summed up one of the most seminal and longest friendships in American letters.
Literary friends walk on eggshells.
The demons of jealousy, envy, competitiveness always lurk, and an honest critical opinion is very likely to be taken as a personal affront.
William Dean Howells never reviewed a Mark Twain book he didn't like; perhaps this explains the even tenor of their comradeship.
Mencken, however, blasted what he thought were Dreiser's subpar performances, accounting for some of the precipitous ups and downs in their relationship.
Religious, political and temperamental differences accounted for the rest.
Those differences were so marked that it is surprising that they remained friends for nearly 40 years -- minus the time when they weren't speaking to each other.


Left Out
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN LEFT
By John Patrick Diggins.
Illustrated. 432 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Miss Shaw Marries
Gwendolyn Whitfield Shaw, a daughter of Gloria Courtney Shaw of Basking Ridge, N.J., and Wesley Warren Shaw of Westwood, N.J., was married yesterday to Patrick Daniel Collar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Collar of Valencia, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert Kaumeyer, a Christian Congregational minister, officiated at the Stouffer Chapel at Pepperdine University in Malibu, Calif.


Recital or Opera, a Focus on Voices
A SPATE of intriguing concerts featuring vocal music is being offered this week in Connecticut.
This afternoon there are three events: a "Vihuela and Voice" recital at the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford, opera at the Norwalk Community College Theater and vocal chamber music at the Greenwich Public Library.
The vihuela, a six-string guitar-like instrument of Renaissance Spain, went out of style around 1700 but had its own renaissance some 30 or 40 years ago with the birth of the "original instruments" movement; it is now widely used by early-music ensembles.
In a lecture and concert starting at 2 P.M.
Frank Wallace, a founder of Live Oak, will speak about and demonstrate pieces from the repertoire of self-accompanied vihuela and lute songs of the 16th century. (For information call 249-7041.)
At 3 P.M. in Norwalk it's "Opera, from Grand to Threepenny," the latter, of course, referring to Kurt Weill's "Threepenny Opera." The popular Connecticut soprano Betty Jones is joined by the tenor Sigmund Jasinski and the pianist Donald Comrie for a far-ranging assortment of arias, duets and spirituals (857-7271).


Legacy


ABOUT CARS: Jumping on Language, Prices and Such; A Floor Model?
Dear Sir,
Reading your article on the Olds Touring Sedan, I was absolutely floored by the price.
Thirty-two thousand dollars for an Oldsmobile?
And not even a light in the ashtray.
How are those fat cats in Detroit going to know where to park their cigars at night?
At a time when there are major rollbacks in everything from consumer electronics to food to clothing and even housing, where does Detroit come off with prices like this?


Photography and the Sin of Voyeurism
The world is full of jolly voyeurs, and they happen to be us: not just solitary types training telescopes on the neighbors but men and women of respectable mien and resume, lawyers, teachers and postal clerks, all happily, guiltily participating in the human condition.
Everyone loves to look, and just about everyone thinks it a bit more delicious if it's a little bit forbidden.
Voyeurism has been around from time immemorial, but after the invention of photography it expanded exponentially and embedded itself in the culture as socially acceptable behavior.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
-0.1
0.2
Non-farm productivity, percent change
1.1
1.0
Thursday
Retail sales, percent change
0.6
0.3
Initial jobless claims, thousands
437
450
Friday
Producer price index, in percent
-0.1
0
Business inventories, percent change
0.4
0
Auto sales, annual rate
5.9
6.1
Tuesday: Super Tuesday Presidential primaries *
The Senate considers economic-stimulus legislation  Wednesday: World agriculture supply and demand estimates *
The House considers China's trade status  Thursday: World agriculture production  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


At Odds


Soviet Trade Unions Retool for New Era
To the Editor:
While I applaud your coverage of events in the former Soviet Union, I am surprised that hardly a word has appeared about the emerging independent, democratic trade unions.


Johnson, Finding His Game, Gags On the 'Rookie' Tag
At 3 o'clock in the morning one day last week, as he dreamed of high-arcing jump shots with perfect rotation, Greg Anthony was startled into consciousness by the ring of the telephone.
"It's Larry," said the voice at the other end.


Rangers Slip, Then Slide Again
There was no reason to be nervous, Mark Messier said.
This hockey team was too steady to do it again, Coach Roger Neilson said.


On Stage in London
WHAT is a contemporary play?
The obvious answer is a work that was written very recently.
But the London theater continues to suggest that the truly contemporary piece may be the one that first appeared 100, 200, even 400 years ago, yet still has impact and point today.
It may be "Richard III" or "King Lear" and not the latest denunciation of the evils of capitalism or the woes of the consumer society.
At any rate, the revivals that flooded into London in 1991 mostly seemed more interesting and eloquent than the new plays that came trickling along in their wake.
Nobody will be astonished if that also proves to be the case in 1992.
The most unmissable event this spring certainly promises to be "Heartbreak House," which Shaw wrote 75 years ago.
Not only is a strong cast headed by Paul Scofield, a major actor seldom seen on the stage nowadays, and the evergreen Vanessa Redgrave, but the director is Trevor Nunn, who is something of a professional necromancer when it comes to reanimating work regarded by the less imaginative as hopelessly dated.
With Mr.
Scofield as Shotover, Shaw's sardonic self-portrait, and Miss Redgrave playing Hesione, his sly parody of Virginia Woolf, there is every chance of his attack on a divided, aimless nation echoing powerfully down the decades.
The play opens on March 19 at the Haymarket, one week after an eagerly awaited revival of Farquhar's "Recruiting Officer" arrives at the National Theater and two weeks before the Royal Shakespeare Company transfers a well-received production of "Henry IV" from the company's Stratford-on-Avon headquarters to its London home, the Barbican.
Then come Moliere and a series of Jacobean dramatists, the Spanish dramatist Lope de Vega and Sophocles and plenty of Shakespeare.


GROUPS QUESTIONED ON HILL DISCLOSURE
The special counsel heading the Senate investigation into the disclosure of accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas last fall during hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court has recently questioned officials of some of the interest groups that opposed the nomination.
People involved in the investigation said that in the last two weeks the special counsel, Peter E. Fleming, had questioned officials of groups involved with lobbying for civil rights and abortion rights and a lawyer for the woman who made the accusation, Professor Anita F. Hill of the University of Oklahoma Law School.


George Bush's Real Enemy
The stench of failure hangs over Ronald Reagan's White House.
New York Times editorial, Jan. 9, 1983


Who Shot J.F.K.?
To the Editor:
Although I am not a Kennedy assassination buff, I feel compelled to suggest one more explanation in addition to the ones Stephen E. Ambrose catalogued in his excellent essay.
One of my favorite books is "A Journey Amongst the Good and the Great" by Andy Kerr, a naval officer who served, among other things, as counsel to John Connally when he was Secretary of the Navy.
In 1961, Mr.
Kerr processed an emotional letter from Lee Harvey Oswald to Mr.
Connally, demanding that his discharge from the Marine Corps be upgraded from undesirable to honorable.
Mr.
Kerr carefully investigated Oswald's complaint and concluded that he had no case.
He had been a lousy marine and defected to the Soviet Union in the bargain.
Mr.
Connally agreed with Mr.
Kerr's estimate.


Unidentified Woman Found Slain in Queens
An unidentified, elegantly dressed woman was found shot to death near the boardwalk by the Atlantic Ocean in Rockaway, Queens, early yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The woman, who the police said was in her 20's or 30's, was shot once in the back of the head, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Norris Holloman.


The Philosophical Fight Over What Insurance Should Be
Critics of the health insurance industry like to collect horror stories.
There was the group of 1,600 real estate agents in New Jersey who were dropped by Blue Cross.
The company said their health claims were too costly.
There was the executive of Aetna Insurance who left to start a small company, only to discover that he could not get insurance for himself and his employees because a woman who worked for him had heart disease.
And there is the more recent case of Kathleen Renshaw of Leucadia, Calif., whose family's annual health insurance premiums soared to $16,000 after her daughter was found to have only one kidney with about 60 percent of its normal capacity.
These critics say that such stories indicate that at least some sectors of the insurance industry have lost their sense of what insurance is supposed to do: spread the risk around.
The Health Insurance Association of America counters that despite some problems, the system works well for most Americans.


Malibu
To the Editor: I want to offer a few comments about Susan Spano's article, "Malibu: The Golden Strip with Split Personality" (Jan. 5).
I wrote a book and produced and directed a documentary video, "A Historical Documentary on Malibu: The 1920's through the 1980's." It was commissioned by the Malibu Lagoon Museum and Historical Society.
California history is dominated by the rail magnates Huntington, Stanford and Hopkins, who captured fortunes by laying down railroad tracks on just about every inch of California coastal land.
The Rindge family, which easily could have followed suit, instead fought to preserve the beauty of the land.


New Yorkers, etc.
Only a dolt would fail to appreciate a gift sent with the best of intentions.
Still, it must be admitted that there are times when the thought is more appreciated than the gift.
This can happen when the giver takes the easiest way out.
It also happens when the recipient is particularly difficult to please or the interests and preferences of the person are either unknown or difficult to fathom.
Very often, 10 men and women know little about the personal side of business colleagues.
More surprisingly, some friends are equally unknowing about the likes and dislikes of the person.


Sorting Out the Bill For Cellular Phone Calls
In a decade of pell-mell growth, more than 7.5 million Americans use cellular telephones, born-again radio transmitters that enable users to make wireless phone calls from almost anywhere.
But the phone's headlong expansion came despite a huge obstacle: a cellular phone user pays not only for the call he makes, but also for any he receives, whether he wants it or not.
With air time priced at 10 or more times that of a regular call, unsought cellular calls can quickly fatten an already hefty bill.
Nationwide, cellular bills average $80 a month, with calls costing anywhere from 20 cents to 60 cents or more per minute.
Small wonder that even the most committed cellular enthusiast tends toward terseness and whispers his phone number to a chosen few.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Texas Town Sees the Race as Remote
Living in the shadows of oil refineries, the people of this Houston suburb are accustomed to economic booms and busts.
Now, even though many express nagging worries about the future, they seem almost disconnected from the Presidential candidates who are trying so hard to address their concerns.
Stuffing her clothes into a washer at the Suds n' Suds coin laundry a few days before the Texas primary election, Alice Lawson, 56 years old, said: "I see that they're on TV a lot now, and I guess I'm interested, yeah. I've seen that a couple of them have had this sex stuff going on about them, but you know what I am really interested in is whether any of them will do anything to help the elderly, especially with our health care."


THE WORLD: Armenians and Azeris; A Blood Feud Only Worsens
The latest communal atrocities in the former Soviet Union have again thrown the spotlight on the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, a feud as bloody as it seems insoluble.
Last week, it was Armenians slaughtering Azeris in Khodzhaly, one of the last villages in the enclave in which Azeris still lived.
Armenia said the operation was needed to halt the shelling of Stepanakert, the enclave's capital.
Azerbaijan was enraged over images of dead infants and mutilated civilians, and in the tumult President Ayaz Mutalibov resigned.
The bloodshed first flared in February 1988, when the Nagorno-Karabakh parliament called on Armenia and Azerbaijan to transfer the autonomous mountain region from Azerbaijan to Armenia.
Nagorno-Karabakh's population of 188,000 was then three-quarters Armenian, though the enclave was in Azerbaijan.


Sunday Dining; Sojourning in SoHo Today? Two After-Strolling Choices
SoHo is one of Manhattan's most popular neighborhoods for strolling on a Sunday.
Many of the art galleries and trendy clothing stores are open and more restaurants are keeping Sunday hours, offering either a long, late brunch or early dinner.
Here are two worth investigating.
Amsterdam's Grand
454 Broadway at Grand Street, Manhattan, (212) 925-6166 -- This downtown branch of the original Amsterdam's on the Upper West Side is a long, two-tier space done in sharp-edged shades of black and white, with a bar along one side and an open rotisserie grill on the other.


Dancing Across the Land
SPRING and summer are good times to catch up on home-grown European dance, which increasingly and happily has come to include indigenous, often distinctive modern dance as well as classical ballet and folk dancing.
Although Spain is not known for its dance, with the exception of flamenco, there will be a good deal of dancing throughout the country this summer, in a variety of performance spaces in and out of doors.
The Olympics in Barcelona, Seville's Expo '92 and Madrid's role as cultural capital for the year have sparked this festive outburst.


IN SHORT/BUSINESS
SCHUMPETER A Biography. By Richard Swedberg. Princeton University, $24.95.


Albania's Economic Fall Devastates Hospitals
The intensive care ward at Albania's largest children's hospital has only one respirator, and now it is pumping air into the lungs of a small girl who is temporarily paralyzed.
She is not chronically ill, doctors here say, and she is expected to regain consciousness soon if she can be kept on the respirator.
But she may not make it until then.
"If the electricity fails, the child will die," said Dr.
Luljeta Serbo, the head doctor at the pulmonary clinic, adding that one child has already died this year during one of this capital's frequent power cuts.
"Or if another child who needs oxygen arrives, then we will have to choose which one will live."


Beth Binder to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Binder of Armonk, N.Y., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Beth Rachel Binder, and Dr.
Scott Bruce Berger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Berger of Pittsburgh.
Miss Binder is the manager of wholesale operations at Lillian Vernon, a mail-order company in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
She graduated from Boston University.
Dr.
Berger is completing studies for an M.D. at Cornell University, from which he received a Ph.D. in neuroscience.
He graduated from Emory University.


Desperately Seeking Instant Status
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger has got to be kidding.
Has he really been hoodwinked by the hype merchants of Madison Avenue?
Ralph Lauren worn by the old money of Southampton and Palm Beach?


Ueberroth Makes The Call: I'm Out!
The former baseball commissioner PETER V. UEBERROTH, again rejecting overtures from Republican kingmakers, has ruled out running for the United States Senate in California, declaring that a bruising multimillion-dollar race would be "a waste of money."
The 54-year-old Ueberroth, who also achieved prominence for his stewardship of the financially successful 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, made the announcement Friday only minutes before a filing deadline.


Cruise Ships Are Taken Over
Five shipping companies have formed a new company, Seaquest Cruises Limited, to take over two small luxury cruise ships, the Frontier Spirit from Frontier Cruises and the Caledonian Star from Salen-Lindblad Cruising.
The takeover took place last month.
Seaquest is a joint venture of NYK Line, Mitsubishi Corporation, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Caledonian Steamship and Hapag-Lloyd.


Senators Seek Full Cutoff of Arms to Pakistan
Senators of both parties said today that they were pressing the Bush Adminstration to stop all private arms sales to the Pakistani Goverment, arguing that the practice violates a law barring American military aid there because of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program.
Administration officials assert that the cutoff applies only to Government-sponsored arms sales and not so-called commercial sales by companies that are licensed by the State Department.


Is 'Local Content' The Smartest Way To Judge Imports?
Back when Detroit first woke up to the dimensions of the Japanese challenge in automobiles in the early 1980's, its leaders said they needed three concessions to compete fairly.
First, the Japanese would have to build many of their cars in America, so that they would face the same costs and restrictions that dog American auto makers.
Second, they would have to put numerical limits on their exports from Japan.
And third, those import limits would have to stay in effect for a number of years, so that the Big Three would have time to get their act together.
They got all three, and a decade later Detroit is in worse shape than ever.
Now the Bush Administration is raising a new set of "local content" hurdles and, to hear the Japanese tell it, systematically harassing Japanese business interests in America with regulations and investigations.


Ms. Lobel Wed To M. T. Esrig
Marci J. Lobel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Lobel of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Marc T. Esrig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Esrig of New York.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman officiated at Temple Israel of Great Neck.
Ms.
Lobel-Esrig, 25 years old, is a third-year law student at New York University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a lawyer in private practice in New York.


The Citizen as Customer
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT
How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the Public Sector.
By David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. 405 pp.
Reading, Mass.: A William Patrick Book/ Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.


OUT OF THE JUNGLE
I commend James LeMoyne for making it clear that the war in El Salvador was fought over issues of economic and political justice and was not simply a Marxist insurrection against a democratic Government ("Out of the Jungle," Feb. 9).


Moving On
The White House undercut him left and right, but Richard Schifter says that had nothing to do with his announcement last week that he was resigning as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr.
Schifter, a 68-year-old lawyer whose parents were killed by the Nazis in Germany, had served in the post six years and was known to advocate a policy of taking strong positions with the Governments of China and Kuwait.
His resignation came a day after President Bush vetoed a bill that would have linked human rights conditions to trade status for China and on the same day that the United States cast a United Nations vote against appointing a special human rights monitor for Kuwait.
In the case of Haiti, where the Administration has taken a firm stand against granting haven for refugees, Mr.
Schifter's department never had a say.
For all that, he was adamant that his departure was "not motivated by any disagreement as to our policy."


Picking a Package for the Music Festival Season
DRAWN by the promise of stirring performances amid celebrated surroundings, travelers from around the world descend upon the music festivals and concert halls of Europe each spring and summer, hoping to immerse themselves for a few days in opera, symphony, jazz and sightseeing.
But for many travelers, the charms of a famous music festival or an intimate Baroque opera house may be overshadowed by difficulties in getting to the event or in obtaining seats.
Tickets, which can cost well over $100 for many events, are often sold out months in advance and schedules may be complicated.
Language can be a problem, particularly for people going to out-of-the-way cities.
And, as with tickets, hotels in the area of the event may already be reserved.


In Praise Of Minnie Pearl
To the Editor:
In her article "On the Tube, Country Music Can't Go Down-Home Again"  [ Feb. 9 ] , Karen Schoemer wrote "there's no barn backdrop, no dancers in fringed boots . . . no Minnie Pearls." I hope she wasn't meaning to disparage Minnie Pearl.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advocates; Gay Groups React Mildly to Ad for Buchanan
Since Patrick J. Buchanan began broadcasting a commercial suggesting that the Bush Administration was too indulgent of homosexuality, he has been heckled and denounced by gay and lesbian groups, but only mildly.
Though some gay leaders have expressed concern that Mr.
Buchanan's appeal could resound in the general election, making gay life styles the "Willie Horton" issue of 1992, that does not appear to be an overwhelming fear.


Erin Go Baa
It's easy to develop a certain sympathy for Irish mysticism -- and some understanding of traditional Irish cooking -- when driving the narrow ribbons of road that twist along Ireland's Atlantic coast.
There are places along the Ballinakill Bay in Connemara where the road rises like a straggly kite string for hundreds of yards up a rocky precipice.
And as the road rises to meet you, the wind whips the back of your car.
Fog settles like a spontaneous case of blindness for a few miles and then lifts.
And herds of sheep appear, unannounced.


Focus: California; Struggling to Provide Affordable Homes
THE struggle to introduce low-income housing into a working-class neighborhood in the coastal city of Santa Monica, just west of Los Angeles, illustrates the difficulties of providing such housing throughout the state.
The Community Corporation of Santa Monica, a nonprofit home builder, bought four separate parcels in a working-class neighborhood and planned a total of 30 apartments for renters of very low, low and moderate incomes.


Mr. Spock's Ears at Smithsonian
A retrospective exhibit on issues and themes of the 1960's that were incorporated into the "Star Trek" television series opened last month at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum in Washington.
It will run through Sept. 7.
Original props and costumes used in the series are on display, including weapons, uniforms, Mr.
Spock's Vulcan ears, and models of the Enterprise and other space ships.
The exhibition also includes photographs of scenes from the original 79 episodes shown in the 1960's and a section devoted to the Trekkie culture that grew up around the show.
A 25-minute video documentary about the program is also screened.


Tina Beth Sharkey Has Wedding
Tina Beth Sharkey, a director of client services at the Frankfurt Gips Balkind advertising agency in New York, was married yesterday evening to James Lawrence Nederlander, the vice president of the Nederlander Organization, the Broadway theater owner and producer.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Nederlander, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, Edward Sharkey of Cliffside Park, N.J., is the president of the S. Y. Corporation, an import-export concern in Carlstadt, N.J.
Her mother, Mona Sherman of New York, is the president of Pierre Cardin for New Aspects in New York.


Cells, Crystals, Bugs and Shells, Rendered in Paint
Terry Winters has been a quiet figure on the art scene for a decade.
Although he began working in the early 1970's and gradually developed a reputation among artists, he did not have his first one-man show in New York until 1982.
Since then, his paintings, drawings and prints have been regularly on view, but in a decade when flashiness counted, his low-key work was not the sort to grab the spotlight.
Now, in a new decade that seems more receptive to gentler strains of art, the spotlight has been turned on him in a retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art, through May 10.
The show is organized by Lisa Phillips, a curator at the museum (it was first seen at the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, its only other stop).


Networking; Sophisticated Virus-Fighters
Managers of computer networks both large and small are increasingly worried that computer viruses have become a fact of life and that to ignore them is folly.
The concern was heightened last week by the Michelangelo virus, so named because its creator programmed it to come alive last Friday, the Renaissance artist's 517th birthday, to destroy data on the hard disks of infected computers.
Damage from a virus like Michelangelo, which is spread by inserting an infected floppy disk in a computer's A drive when the computer is started, is generally limited to the infected computer.
But other viruses can spread throughout even a large network within hours if they aren't detected and disabled.


Jeanne Elaine Ripp Is to Marry Mark Kennedy Shriver in June
Mrs.
William G. Hildebrand of Greenwich, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Jeanne Eileen Ripp to Mark Kennedy Shriver, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Sargent Shriver of Potomac, Md.
Ms.
Ripp is also a daughter of the late Dr.
John A. Ripp Jr. of Old Westbury, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ripp, 26 years old, is a territory manager for American Express Travel Related Services in Boston.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross, as did her fiance.
Her father was chief of pediatrics at Syosset Hospital in Syosset, L.I.
Her late stepfather was the president and chief executive of the New York State Food Merchants Association in Hartsdale, N.Y.


U.S. Is to Abolish Passports Valid Only for Travel to Israel
Under a mandate from Congress to end the practice of issuing passports valid only for travel to Israel, the State Department has decided to abolish geographically limited travel documents.
Israel and South Africa were the only two countries for which such passports were normally used, the State Department's consular affairs bureau says.


Cleveland
To the Editor: I was born in Cleveland and have fond memories of traveling to and from the city by train.
More recently, when I have returned on family business, I would fly and look forward to the direct subway from airport to downtown.
As Cleveland is one of the few cities where this is possible (and more convenient than, say, Boston, where you have to take a bus at the airport to the train station), it is a major omission in Jennifer Stoffel's otherwise informative "What's Doing in Cleveland" (Feb. 9).


Talking: Disclosure; Protecting The Broker And Seller
BROKERS these days are asking sellers to fill out extensive questionnaires about the condition of their homes, and this information is passed along to buyers as soon as initial negotiations are completed.
Pressure for this kind of disclosure has been growing since the National Association of Realtors found that two-thirds of suits filed against real estate professionals in recent years alleged misrepresentation or failure to disclose defects in the property.
The idea is to better protect brokers and sellers from such suits.


Aliza Raskas To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Raskas of St.
Louis have announced the engagement of their daughter Aliza Raskas to Steven Major, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Major of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Raskas, 21 years old, is a senior at Yeshiva University.
Her father is an owner of Raskas Foods Inc., a cheese manufacturer in St.
Louis.


Crocuses Poke Through to Herald Spring
WHEN the crocuses bloom, spring is here.
Gardeners know this in their hearts, even though the calendar may say otherwise.
There is something about this beguiling springtime flower that sets the emotions astir and reassures those who have been waiting through the long winter that the new season has arrived.
This kind of response is especially noteworthy when the crocus brave late winter snow and poke through the white blanket anyway.
The crocus foliage is stiff and grasslike with white stripes.
The flowers, with their six shiny petals, are often described as having the shape of a chalice or a vase.
Three or more crocus flowers are rewarding to see, but a mass display of hundreds of them in bloom is an inspiration for the poets.


Ms. Crinnion Has Wedding
Colleen Maria Crinnion, the daughter of Maureen Crinnion of the Bronx and the late Thomas P. Crinnion, was married yesterday to Dr.
Samuel Mark Ventrella, a son of Alfred G. Ventrella of Wayne, N.J., and the late Angela Ventrella.
The Rev.
Cassion Miles officiated at Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ventrella, 25 years old, is a management intern for Prudential Insurance in Newark.
She is a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. from St.
Joseph's College in Philadelphia.
Her father was a consulting civil engineer in New York.
Her mother is a senior director of human resources for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Tracy Pyper To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pyper of Riverside, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracy Lynn Pyper to Peter Mark Swiderski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Swiderski of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pyper, 28 years old, teaches second grade at the Buckley School in Manhattan.
She graduated from Dickinson College and has a master's degree in elementary education from Manhattanville College.
Her father is a newspaper service representative supervising delivery drivers at The New York Times.
Her mother, Joan Pyper, is the administrative assistant to the headmistress of Greenwich Academy, a private school for girls in Greenwich, Conn.


Bill Clinton's Uncertain Journey
It's early December, and although very few voters have any idea who he is, Bill Clinton knows by the early buzz from the press and the party professionals that he's on the verge of becoming the hottest man in America.
The rain is beating down on the roof of his limousine speeding along the New Jersey Turnpike, he's losing his voice and the plastic container of food in his lap is filled with cold rubber chicken and cardboard vegetables.
But, talking politics in the back seat, Bill Clinton looks like he's exactly where he wants to be.
"Best campaign I ever ran," Clinton says in a hoarse drawl between cellular phone calls to campaign contributors.
"Just a lost cause that almost won." He's talking about his first political campaign 18 years ago, when, as a shaggy-haired 28-year-old who had never run for office, he came within a whisker of unseating a popular Republican Congressman in a heavily Republican district.


Using Correct Hammer To Nail Things Down
FEW tools for home repairs are as basic or as widely used as hammers.
Like most hand tools, many kinds of hammers are available, and choosing the most suitable can be confusing.
For general carpentry and tasks like driving nails to hang pictures, the best hammer to use is a 16-ounce, bell-faced carpenter's hammer with a curved claw.
If you own only one hammer, it should be that type.


Miss Denson to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Denson of Wilton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Ann Denson, to Justin Edward Smith 3d, the son of Raye Josephine Cook of Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Denson, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a managing director of Bank of Montreal in New York.
Mr.
Smith, 32, is the vice president of marketing for the United States edition of El Vocero, a Spanish-language newspaper based in San Juan, P.R.


Ms. Bousvaros To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
George Bousvaros of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Maria Bousvaros, to Dr.
Terry Ray Tollefson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wendell Tollefson of Longmont, Colo.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bousvaros, 28 years old, is an associate account executive at Bronner Slosberg Humphrey Inc., a Boston marketing consulting company.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Boston University.


The Easy Way Or the Hard Way
To the Sports Editor:
The $100 million offer to buy the Seattle Mariners baseball team by Messrs.
Minoru Arakawa, John Ellis, Chris Larson, John E. McCaw Jr., Frank Shrontz and Hiroshi Yamauchi, can be accepted either the easy way or the hard way.
The easy way is for Commissioner Fay Vincent to quit his public, crypto-racist posturing about the inclusion of Japanese money in the $100 million offer and present the plan to the owners for approval, without public or private interference.


Sunday Menu; Chicken and Mashed-Potatoes Comfort
The combination of shallots and garlic provides a piquant flavor to this chicken dish and sets up a good contrast to the sweet orange flavor.


Providence College Advances With Rout
Providence College struck the first blow among the 16 Eastern teams competing in two weekend Division I tournaments, that of ECAC Hockey and Hockey East.
The Friars, who had won only once in their last four games, swept past Massachusetts-Lowell, 7-0, Friday night as Erik Peterson and Shaun Kane each scored a pair of goals and goaltender Brad Mullahy had to make only 15 saves for his shutout.


Quotation of the Day
"I walked down the street and a flower pot fell off the roof and landed on me." -- S. PETER KARLOW, former C.I.A. agent falsely branded as a suspected mole.  [ 1:2. ]


AIDS Is Following Mexican Migrant Workers Back Home From the U.S.
As far back as people here can remember, the sons of this quiet market town have gone north to work in fields and factories on what they call "the other side." And for every story of loneliness and sacrifice, it seems, there is a television set, a pickup truck or a house with fresh paint.
In recent years, though, men from Zinapecuaro have come home from the United States with a terrible secret.
They have brought AIDS.


World Markets; A Labor Victory Looks Less Scary
If the Conservatives retain their control of the British Parliament in the election that is now expected in April, says Paul Walton, market analyst at James Capel, buy British Steel and the conglomerate BTR.
If Labor leads the next Government, Mark Brown at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew picks British Steel and BTR.


3 Ways to Cook Chicken in the Oven
ONE of the most reliable and simplest ways to prepare chicken is oven braising.
The well-seasoned succulent results make for a good family dinner yet also suit a dinner party.
While a basic principle applies to this type of dish, oven-braised chicken allows for infinite variation, making it adaptable to a variety of menus and cuisines.
The number of servings can also be extended, simply by doubling or even tripling the ingredients and using a large pan or a big casserole for the cooking.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Cranford
KNOWN at the turn of the century as the Venice of New Jersey, the Union County Township of Cranford grew up around the meandering Rahway River.
In 1720, John Crane of nearby Elizabeth Towne (now Elizabeth) built a grist mill on the north side of a ford in the river and a sawmill on the south side.
That mill at Crane's Ford provided grain for Washington's troops during the Revolution.


The Best Strategy for Managing Crises
To the Editor:
With reference to Steven Fink's "Dow Corning's Moral Evasions" (Forum, Feb. 16) as well as to other recent articles on corporate crisis management, let us not forget an even better strategy than the one the communications counselors are touting.
That strategy is to avoid wrongdoing in the first place.


After Criticism by U.S., Mulroney Jabs Back
In remarks bristling with unusual censure of the United States, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has defended Canada's new policy of relying more on United Nations peacekeeping activities than on NATO's strategy of deterrence to maintain a stable and secure world.
He calls the approach "realistic" and says it was brought on not only by the collapse of the Soviet Union but by the remarkable recent experience in which President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia has been seeking billions of dollars of aid from erstwhile enemies.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 16 about Pepsico Inc.'s fast food business misstated the year when John Cranor became head of the company's Kentucky Fried Chicken subsidiary.
It was 1989.
A brief adjoining article referred incorrectly to the founder of the McDonald's Corporation and to a hamburger chain bought last year by Pepsico.
The McDonald's founder was Ray Kroc; the chain is Hot 'n Now.


Review/Dance; Set Adrift In the Roiling Sea of Life
A woman dressed in what looked like vividly colored 19th-century fishwife's rags lay on top of a large draped box on a dimly lit stage.
Soon after the last audience member was seated, she began to wiggle her feet, smiled brilliantly at the audience and speculated aloud on the sounds, like distant animal or human cries, that echoed outside.
She spoke serenely of life as the experience of drifting in a rudderless, leaky old boat.
Then she slid down from the box and into the sea of bunched gray cloth that surrounded it, and was revealed as a richly fantastic figure dressed in oranges and magenta and a glittering turban.
That juxtaposition of plainness and fancy ran like a sturdy, gaudy thread through Jeannie Hutchins's "Do Not Use if More Salty Than Tears," presented last Sunday night at Performance Space 122.


For Petty Offenders, Toil Replaces Incarceration
Petty offenders who once went unpunished because their crimes were so minor are now being put to work by New York City.
Under a new program, they are cleaning subway platforms and courthouse holding pens, picking up debris in Central Park and helping out at homeless shelters.
The program, which began in January, gives defendants in Criminal Court in Manhattan a conditional discharge upon conviction and requires them to work for the city for up to 10 days without pay.
The defendants in cases like shoplifting, turnstile-jumping or other nonviolent crimes may even spend time stuffing envelopes at city agencies.
Others Lacked Support
Similar alternative sentencing programs tried in the past have generally failed, officials said, because they lacked sound organizational support and safeguards to insure their success.


THE GREAT PRETENDERS
Craig R. Whitney should know that for all non-Serbians in Yugoslavia, the Karadjordjeviks, the Serbian royal family, evoke the darkest memories of dictatorship under the late King Aleksandar ("The Great Pretenders," Feb. 9).
The brutality of this royal dictatorship led to the death and imprisonment of many Croatians, Macedonians, Bosnians and others.
Indeed, Serbian domination during two decades of royal rule brings back even darker memories than the more than four decades of Serb-dominated communism.
MARY RUCKY
Birmingham, Mich.


Misses McKeever Both Plan to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick C. McKeever of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagements of their daughters, Michelle Elizabeth McKeever and Cristina Carroll McKeever, to Richard Michael Starke and Donald Cotter Young, respectively.
A double wedding is planned for May.
Michelle McKeever, 27 years old, is a student at Eastern Virginia Medical College.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Richmond, he cum laude.
Her father is a senior partner in Rockville, Md., in the Baltimore law firm of Miles &amp; Stockbridge.


Topics of The Times; All About Of
It was one, maybe two years ago that the woman first noticed it: the way the "of" was showing up where it wasn't needed.
She'd overheard somebody describing something as "not that big of a deal."
"Isn't that strange," she mused to a friend, who said promptly: "Not at all. It's a regionalism. After all, New Yorkers are always talking about the Port
of
Authority."


A la Carte; A Greek Storefront Offers an Alternative
DESPITE hard times, people still eat out, but they have changed their habits.
Diners have made casual pasta cafes and Chinese and chicken-specialty spots the most recessionproof type of restaurants.
There is a fourth possibility, Greek storefront tavernas.
One of the newest, Zorba the Greek, in a shopping center at 620 Oyster Bay Road, in Plainview, is a perfect example.
Like its pasta, Chinese and chicken counterparts, it combines modest prices, nutritional food and a relaxed atmosphere.


Camera
How does someone who spent 34 years directing television camera crews choose a camcorder for himself?
That is a question Alvin Thaler had to answer after retiring from CBS News as a director and producer.
"We know how to communicate, and can tell camera people what we want," he said, referring to his fellow directors.
"But most of us have not had the hands-on experience with the camera equipment."


Computer Power
In the American marketplace someone skilled in the fine art of designing computers can easily fetch $100,000 a year.
In Russia that sum would pay the salaries of hundreds of good designers, a fact that Sun Microsystems, a Silicon Valley company, came to appreciate when it recently contracted to set up a team of 50 hardware and software experts in Moscow, who are apparently eager to work for their current salaries -- about $15 a month tops.
The team will be headed by Boris A. Babayan, whose designs for the military earned him a reputation as the Russian Seymour Cray.
Mr.
Cray's supercomputers rank with the world's fastest, but with the end of the cold war both he and Mr.
Babayan are having trouble selling their wares.
Sun officials said Mr.
Babayan's latest machine will be as fast as the fastest Crays -- a sobering thought, perhaps, for American trade officials who have agonized for years about the dangers of exporting American computer technology to the Soviets.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South Carolina; Bush and Clinton Score Big Victories
President Bush declared himself the winner of a convincing victory here in the Republican primary today and seemed likely to hold his main opponent, Patrick J. Buchanan, below the 30 percent level.
"We're not declaring victory yet, but it looks good," said Gov.
Carroll A. Campbell Jr. of South Carolina, beaming before television lights at the Bush-Quayle headquarters here.
"I don't see any numbers that would allow Buchanan to declare a victory here."


CAMPUS LIFE: William and Mary; Raising Money For One's School Before Graduation
Students at the College of William and Mary are not waiting to become alumni before they start raising money for their college.
The college's Student Advancement Association, a 40-member group, has been working to help raise money for the Campaign for the Fourth Century, which is seeking $150 million in contributions by the time the college marks its 300th anniversary next year.
The money would be used to finance scholarships, hire professors, make renovations and acquire museum art.


Big Wheels on Wall Street
At first blush, the very idea of racing cars barreling through New York City's financial district sounds absurd.
Indy cars zooming past the World Trade Center?
Skirting Battery Park at 165 miles an hour?
And if that doesn't sound loony enough, add that the sponsor is a cigarette company.
Somebody's got to be kidding.
They're not.
A city panel has given final approval to the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York, which could take place annually for 10 years.
And on second blush, it doesn't sound so bad.
With a bit of luck, the race, to start in June 1993, could bring New York some good publicity, some fun and become the asphalt equivalent of the tall ships.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Clintons Joined S.&amp; L. Operator In an Ozark Real-Estate Venture
Bill Clinton and his wife were business partners with the owner of a failing savings and loan association that was subject to state regulation early in his tenure as Governor of Arkansas, records show.
The partnership, a real estate joint venture that was developing land in the Ozarks, involved the Clintons and James B. McDougal, a former Clinton aide turned developer.
It started in 1978, and at times money from Mr.
McDougal's savings and loan was used to subsidize it.
The corporation continues to this day, but does not appear to be active.


Belgium Forms Government After 103 Days of Meetings
After 103 days of bitter negotiations, Belgium got a new center-left coalition Government today, led by Jean-Luc Dehaene, a newcomer to power.
His coalition is made up of the same four parties that formed the last Government, Flemish- and French-speaking Christian Democrats and Socialists.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Far Right; Duke's Followers Lean to Buchanan
Some subscribers to "The Truth at Last," a far-right publication partial to stories like "Negroes Never Had a Civilization -- Are Far Behind White Race in Mental Development," recently got something else mailed from the same address: campaign literature for Patrick J. Buchanan.
The Buchanan campaign says it had nothing to do with the mailing, which it says was unauthorized and apparently resulted from someone who picked up campaign literature and mailed it on his own.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
YORKTOWN 'PETER PAN'
"Peter Pan," the two-hour-and-45-minute Broadway musical, performed by a 32-member cast and a 15-piece orchestra, will be presented by the Yorktown Theater Company Saturdays and Sundays through March 22.


A Test for Neighborhood Schools
LIKE several Long Island school districts, Glen Cove is considering a plan that would eliminate traditional neighborhood kindergarten-to-sixth-grade schools in favor of primary and intermediate schools organized by grades.
Under the concept, a modification of the Princeton Plan of the 1960's, younger students are grouped in a building for up to the second or third grades and older students go to other schools.


Making a Difference; 'Mr. Enforcement' for the Defense . . .
In the 1970's, a seasoned prosecutor from the Securities and Exchange Commission took a young lawyer under his wing and trained him for a powerful role that he would play a decade later in cleaning up Wall Street.
The older lawyer, Stanley Sporkin, went on to become a Federal judge in Washington and wrote an opinion 19 months ago that challenged the Government to prosecute the lawyers and accountants who assisted corrupt savings and loan institutions.
The younger lawyer, Gary G. Lynch, moved on to a Wall Street law firm, and his latest clients are the lawyers whom Judge Sporkin had intimated the Government should investigate.


Wayne's Words
Wayne and Garth (Mike Myers and Dana Carvey), the shaggy-haied, baseball-capped, Aeromsith-t-shirted stars of "Wayne's World," first showed up on television on "Saturday Night Live." Now they're cleaning up at the box office and, believe it or not, in bookstores, where "Wayne's World: Extreme Close-up" (Hyperion) has become a best seller.
Wayne and Garth truly live in a universe of their own.
It's a place where loutish immaturity is an art form.
Gary Stewart's "Dream Weaver" is the ultimate love tune and intellect is a last resort tool for attracting a foxy female.
Entree into "Wayne's World" requires a certain linguistic expertise.
Here is a primer.
NOT! (adv.): Contradiction of a previous statement, as in, "Madonna is my girlfriend--NOT!" Etymology: on "Saturday Night Live" in the late 70s, Bill Murray and Gilda Radner used this expression in the Todd and Lisa Lupner skits.
Back then, though, no one laughed.
BABE (fem. n.): An extremely sexy and desirable woman with disproportionately large breasts and pouty lips.
Preferably clad in a bikini, leather mini skirt or buckskin, with navel visible.
BABEFEST (n.): A congregation of babes.
BABALICIOUS (adj.): A compound of BABE and DELICIOUS. A tasty babe.
SCHWING (exclam.): Remark conveying appreciation of a babe. (Accompanied by gesture of swinging rear end across seat of chair.)
MIRTHMOBILE (n.): Car, cruising vessel.
Must be equipped with stereo to provide maximum opportunity to sing along with Queen's "Bohemian Rhapsody."
KA-CHING (onomatopoeia): The sound of a cash register, used to indicate the presence of or potential for large sums of money.
Probably derived from Pink Floyd's classic rock staple "Money."
BABE LAIR (n.): An apartment to which males with power and money (ka-ching!) lure babes.
HURL (v.): To vomit. Also "honk" and "spew."
WE'RE NOT WORTHY!
WE'RE NOT WORTHY! (idiom): I.e., "We're not deserving of such an honor." Used in moments of crisis-level ebullience, such as when Wayne and Garth are in the presence of rock gods like Aerosmith or Alice Cooper.
PARTY ON (imperative v.): Continue the festivities, at least until the movie fades to black.


OUT OF THE JUNGLE
I have to admit that I had prejudged LeMoyne's article on my country, El Salvador, when I saw the picture on your cover.
"There they go again," I said to myself, "with nice pictures of smiling guerrillas." The article itself was, for the most part, a fair account, though sometimes one picture, as the saying goes, is worth a thousand words.
A more balanced portrayal would have mentioned the thousands who perished at the hands of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front hordes.
There was no mention, for example, of the 2,000 people who died as a result of the senseless guerrilla offensive in November 1989.


Facing the Latest Subway Slaying, New Transit Chief Mulls Solutions
Michael F. O'Connor had been basking in the glory of his new appointment as Transit Police Chief for all of about four hours Friday afternoon when calls from well-wishers were interrupted by an urgent message.
A 15-year-old youth had just been shot by another teen-ager on a crowded, rush-hour subway car in Brooklyn, he was told.
It was the second subway shooting in New York City in a week, and the second fatal shooting in a month.


Business Incentives: A High-Priced Letdown
The stunning decision by the General Motors Corporation to close its 91-year-old assembly plant here, coming after 15 years of huge subsidies aimed at keeping big business in the region, has provoked bitter criticism over the taxpayer support of corporations and which, if any, industries should qualify.
G.M. announced Feb. 24 that it would shutter the North Tarrytown plant in 1995, eliminating 3,400 jobs in a region where manufacturing, once dominant, has been in harrowing decline.


Making a Difference; A Green Light for Isis
When Stanley T. Crooke left Smith Kline &amp; French as president of research and development in 1989, he took the heat, rightly or wrongly, for the company's lack of a follow-up success to its blockbuster ulcer drug, Tagamet.
But he wasted no time, immediately founding his own company, Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Carlsbad, Calif., to pursue a new category of drugs that block disease at the genetic level.


Even-Steven Dept.
To the Editor:
I have been waiting for your article by a panel of psychiatrists commenting on Richard Gere's role in "Final Analysis," since you were apparently compelled to run such a piece on Barbra Steisand's performance in "The Prince of Tides"  [ "Psychiatrists Analyze Dr. Lowenstein," Jan. 19 ] .
His character does many of the things hers does -- most important, fornicating with the sibling of a patient.


Making a Difference; Making a Mark in Asbestos
When it comes to asbestos litigation, personal injury lawsuits have been the main event and property damage cases a secondary concern.
But a big award late last month against W. R. Grace &amp; Company demonstrated why asbestos property litigation is also a high-stakes matter.
In the case, C. Alan Runyan, one of the nation's busiest asbestos property damage lawyers, persuaded a jury to award Clayton Center Associates nearly $17.9 million.
Clayton Center owns the 18-story Chromalloy Plaza Building in Clayton, Mo., a St.
Louis suburb.
Clayton accused Grace of supplying asbestos fireproofing when it knew that the Government was about to ban the material.


The Mystique Is the Mode
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger's essay "25 Years of Unabashed Elitism"  [ Feb. 2 ]  brings his broad cultural skills to the examination of the present popularity of Long Ago and The Past as re-created by Disney Victoriana and the Ralph Lauren oeuvre.
Mr.
Goldberger poses interesting questions of authenticity and artifice in buildings and domestic setting and apparel.


Machado Is Out of Jail
Milwaukee Brewers pitcher JULIO MACHADO, in jail since Jan. 16 after his arrest in connection with the shooting death of a Venezuelan woman, was released Friday.
Judge RACHEL RIMER said in the western city of Barquisimeto that the case "continues, but in the meantime he is permitted to leave prison." Rimer said she would decide tomorrow whether Machado can leave Venezu la to play for the Brewers.


They Came for the Waters
THE SUMMER OF THE ROYAL VISIT
By Isabel Colegate. 219 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Hut to Hut In the Rockies
Hiking and bicycling in the Colorado Rockies in the European tradition of hut-to-hut travel will again be available to summer visitors this year.
The 10th Mountain Trail Association, a nonprofit cross-country skiing organization, has decided -- as it did last summer -- to open 13 of its network of 14 log cabins between Aspen and Leadville for year-round use.
They used to be opened only for winter use by back-country skiers.


By the Wayside
In Presidential primary campaigns, votes have a way of stimulating contributions.
Getting a lot less of the former than he had hoped, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska then fell short of the latter.
Last week, he quit the race.
"Unfortunately, we ran out of gas," he said.
He was particularly disappointed by his showing -- dead last -- in Colorado, Georgia and Maryland.
"After Tuesday, I felt a little like the Jamaican bobsled team," he said.
"We had a lot of spirit but unfortunately we didn't get a lot of medals."


S. &amp;L.'s Lawyers Pressured by Suit
Facing imminent collapse, a leading New York law firm said today that it had been forced into rushing to try to settle a $275 million Government lawsuit that accuses it of concealing the corruption of a client, a large savings association whose failure has come to symbolize the savings and loan debacle.
Lawyers at the firm, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, said today that the Government's move last Monday to freeze their assets for their role in representing Charles H. Keating Jr. and his savings association had bludgeoned them into seeking a fast settlement and was denying them the opportunity to fight their case on its merits..


1,097 Men Shut the Firehouse Door; 990 Women See No Cause for Alarm
For more than half a century, men have refused to welcome women to the fire department's annual Oyster Eat here.
Now the women are fighting back.
"I couldn't care less about oysters and bluegrass music, but excluding us from their party just because we were women simply wasn't fair," said Carol Carson, an elementary-school teacher from Rehoboth Beach, Del.
"So women decided if the men wouldn't let us into their Oyster Eat in Georgetown, we would start our own Shrimp Feast in Lewes."


FINDING MR. RIGHT: Presidential Politics; In Elections as in Romance, It's Often a Matter of Chemistry
Advising a young reporter how to cover politics without getting overawed, Russell Baker once said: "Just remember: These are all the same guys you went to high school with."
Looking over the class of '92, it is easy to apply this sort of back-to-the-future anthropology.
The candidates and their campaigns fall naturally into the same sort of cliques found in high school and college.


New Reasons To Cherish American Rococo
What excites today's collectors most about the American rococo style is exactly the opposite of what made it popular 200 years ago.
To 18th-century merchants and statesmen, the more a chair or teapot resembled a London original, the better.
Today, the most American expressions of this exuberant mode -- highboys with scrolled tops, desk-bookcases with busts, tea tables with pierced legs -- are among the most coveted.
Both British and American interpretations are represented in "American Rococo, 1750-1775: Elegance in Ornament," an exhibition of 173 objects at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through May 17.
The American craftsman's debt to the British can be seen throughout the show, especially in items decorated with scrolls, shells, leaves and flowers.
Invariably, however, Yankee carvers and engravers changed the scale, forms and materials, producing works that were anything but carbon copies.


IN SHORT/BUSINESS
ACCIDENTAL EMPIRES How the Boys of Silicon Valley Make Their Millions, Battle Foreign Competition, and Still Can't Get a Date.
By Robert X. Cringely.
William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $19.95.


Guam Tees Off On Golf Projects
The island of Guam is laying out seven 18-hole and four nine-hole golf courses in a bid to become a premier golf destination for American and Japanese tourists.
Another 10 courses are in various planning stages.
Guam gets more than 50,000 tourists a year from the United States and 10 times as many from Japan, an avid golfing nation.
The 216-square-mile Pacific island already has three 18-hole public courses.
The first of the new 18-hole courses are due to open this month in Yigo near Andersen Air Force Base in the northern part of the island and in Mangilao on the east coast.
Others are scheduled to be completed in the next two or three years, most of them at resorts or near sites for new hotels.


Dorfman's 'Maiden' Cries Out
Trying to explain what compelled him to write his new drama, "Death and the Maiden," the Chilean novelist and playwright Ariel Dorfman tells the story of a friend who was "beaten, arrested, tortured and spent almost a year in a concentration camp" before being shipped into exile because of his opposition to the dictatorship of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
Upon his return to Chile many years later, the friend found that, though his parents were delighted to see him, "they wouldn't talk about these things," Mr.
Dorfman recalled at his home here late last month.
When the former exile happened to mention that he needed to see a doctor about injuries sustained under torture in prison, his mother was baffled.
"You were never in prison," she told her son.


Who Shot J.F.K.?
To the Editor:
"Writers on the Grassy Knoll" missed the target.
In July 1964, a psychiatrist told the Warren Commission that shooting the President would have been the farthest thing from Oswald's mind.
His anger was directed at women, not at men.
In the cross hairs of his telescope, Oswald must have perceived his wife and his mother, with whom he had not spoken in more than a year, though she lived nearby.
He was a lifelong misogynist.


Whose Side Is Your Broker On?
STEALING THE MARKET
How the Giant Brokerage Firms, With Help From the SEC, Stole the Stock Market From Investors.
By Martin Mayer. 208 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $23.


Defanging France's Bloody Anthem
If a stirring rendition of its national anthem is a good antidote for a country with the blues, is this the moment for a malaise-gripped France to tamper with "La Marseillaise?" On the other hand, in these days of European brotherhood, should French patriots still bellow out their threat to "drench our fields" in the "tainted blood" of foreigners?
Debates of this kind are not taken lightly here.
Indeed, a confrontation is arising between France's need to evoke its past revolutionary glory and its desire to be seen as a cradle of human rights and political correctness.


Malibu
To the Editor: I read, with interest, Susan Spano's article on Malibu .
Our family built the first house on the isolated tract later known as "the movie colony," in 1928.
Our parents did not buy the land from an impoverished May Rindge.
In fact, they did not buy the land at all, but only leased it for 99 years.
That was because there might be oil beneath the marsh; oil was more valuable than far-out building lots.
It was a very small development, about 150 modest houses, close together, most reached by a dirt road, the others up on the highway across from Art Jones's truck stop and a grocery store.
The Rindge property -- many acres, elegant stucco house and the only pool north of Santa Monica -- was not occupied but patroled by guards with shotguns.


Q and A
For Children in California
Q.
We will be traveling to Sacramento and San Francisco in early June.
What attractions in those places would be fun for our two small children? -- Barbara Werle, Port Washington, L.I.


Regional Fare, Handy to the Civic Center
SMALL, elegant hotel dining rooms have become a trend over the last 10 years.
And a good thing, too.
They are especially comforting to hotel guests in an unfamiliar city.
But Pierpont's (as in J. Pierpont Morgan, the financier who was a Hartford native) in the J. P. Morgan Hotel in Hartford is more than just a culinary security blanket, it's a worthy place to dine (and convenient, too, half a block from the Hartford Civic Center), whether you're staying at the hotel or not.
Both restaurant and hotel are inside a handsome restored 1881 red brick building.
The long, posh dining space has been divided for greater intimacy.
The two rooms are distinguished by rounded, cream-color ceilings, lacquered dark-wood paneling, lace curtains on the long windows, beige banquettes hugging the walls and fresh flowers on each table.
The friendly, attentive servers try hard to be very correct, but there are long waits between courses.


Elizabeth Wilson, Analyst, Marries
Elizabeth Griswold Wilson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter L. Wilson of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Bradford Stowell Wall, a son of Patricia Q. Wall of Kittery Point, Me., and the late Dr.
Robert A. Wall.
The Rev.
Ronald Evans performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Darien.
Mrs.
Wall, 29 years old, is the senior business analyst in strategic planning at L. L. Bean in Freeport, Me.
She graduated from Simmons College in Boston.
Her father is the president of the Emmons &amp; Wilson insurance company in New Canaan, Conn.
Her mother, Marty Wilson, is the head of administrative services at the Darien Library.


English at the Olympics
To the Editor:
"If they can't speak English well, don't interview them without an interpreter," your Feb. 14 TV Sports column states, with typical American arrogance, about coverage of the Olympic athletes.
Yet how well many people
do
speak English, sometimes in remote parts of Romania or the Baltics!
Often very correct English, not peppered with "like," "you know" and "O.K., O.K." How many of our athletes can be interviewed in France in French?
JUDITH WERBEN  Greenwich, Conn., Feb. 17, 1992


Dance Music Marries The Machine
Electronic sounds are ricocheting all around the Limelight: TICK-a-tick-a POCK-a-tick-a TICK-a-tick-a POCK-a-tick-a BIP bip bih-bip-bih BIP bip bih-bip-bih -- "Go!"
Moby, a skinny Englishman with close-cropped hair, pokes at a keyboard; down on the club floor, black-clad dancers are leaping, shouting, slamming.
The rhythm takes Morse code to the verge of a backbeat.
The only sound that wasn't entirely created with a microchip is a verbal soundbite gone electronic: digitally sampled and triggered from the keyboard.


A Task Force Begins Its Struggle With G.M.
ON a winter morning in 1987, a proud Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, along with James McDonald, who was president of General Motors at the time, announced what was hailed then as a "historic private-public sector agreement" to bring a major automobile manufacturing project to North Tarrytown and to preserve "at least 4,000 jobs for at least 10 years."
What Governor Cuomo was so pleased about that Tuesday in February five years ago was that in addition to saving the plant's jobs "we are all but guaranteeing these jobs for the rest of this century, jobs for the workers of today and perhaps for their sons and daughters as well," he said.


Hobson's Old Faces Preach for New Red Sox Attitude
On the first day the hitters were all in camp and taking batting practice, the area behind the batting cage at Chain O'Lakes Park was crowded.
Rich Gale, the new pitching coach, was making comments to the pitchers.
Rick Burleson, the new hitting coach, was instructing the hitters.
Gary Allenson, the new bullpen coach, was making suggestions to the catchers.
And where was Butch Hobson?


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Jan. 92
Dec. 91
Jan. 91
Nation
$ 102,300
$ 100,300
$ 96,200
Northeast
140,900
137,300
134,600
Midwest
80,300
78,200
74,500
South
89,000
89,400
84,900
West
152,400
143,200
147,700
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.98
9.02
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.10
6.00
7.62
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.83
8.86
9.51
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.89
5.88
7.39
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.90
8.94
9.48
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.88
5.99
7.31
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.04
9.15
9.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.53
6.50
7.82
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.41
4.37
6.40
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.02
8.25
9.54
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Saberhagen Leaves Little to the Imagination in Debut
The debut consisted of less than 50 pitches, but the repertory wasn't restricted.
There were fastballs, curveballs and change-ups, and there were enough of them to amount to a striking debut for Bret Saberhagen.
Saberhagen, the superb right-hander the Mets acquired last December, took the mound in a Mets uniform today in his first official outing.
He allowed a single hit and no runs in breezing through three scoreless innings against the Dodgers at Thomas J. White Stadium.


Tommy Tune Stars in 'Bye Bye Birdie'
"NEVER," Tommy Tune hollered. "This show was never planned for New York."
"Absolutely not," Judy Jacksina, the show's press agent, affirmed.
And the advertisements read: "New Haven's Got Him . . . New York Ain't!"


Stamps
At the intersection of esthetics and marketing lies a growing trend in stamp design, the "unified" sheet of stamps.
Latinists call such sheets "confluent": the design of each stamp flows into the next, so that a sheet shows a single overall picture and each stamp is different from the others.
There are also "modular confluent" designs (who thinks up these names?), in which the overall sheet shows a repetitive design that is spread over several stamps, much like the repeating patterns in figured wallpaper.


The Tallis Scholars Offer Early Music Without Trappings
If there is one thing Peter Phillips loathes, it is the kind of early-music performance in which the ladies wear long velvet dresses and the gentlemen don plumed hats and shoes that curl up at the toes.
"That sort of thing immediately detracts from any real merit the music might have," said the soft-spoken, donnish Englishman in a recent conversation in New York.
"All one wants to know is, what does this piece of music have to say to someone who is prepared to think hard about it? The last thing you want is a load of wallies prancing about in doublets, grinning at you" (a wally being, in English slang, a buffoon).
Mr.
Phillips will lead the Tallis Scholars -- dressed in standard concert attire -- in a program of Spanish, Portuguese and Mexican polyphony on Wednesday evening at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in midtown Manhattan.
"I don't want to talk to the audience or put on a silly costume," he said, "so I eliminate any question of that by confining myself to the sacred repertory. A Mass by Palestrina is a very serious thing. It is not without wit, but it is without humor."


An Unspoiled Florida Isle
THERE is an island off western Florida where gopher tortoises slug through cabbage palms and ibises skitter along the shore line, where there are no cars, no paved roads and no hotels, and manatees sometimes poke their noses up through aqua waters full of tarpon, snook and other game fish.
Cayo Costa, nine miles long and a mile across, is one of Florida's west coast barrier islands.
It also seems to be one of the few places in southwestern Florida that is not for sale or under development.
One side of the island is open to the Gulf of Mexico, with long, uninterrupted stretches of beach, and the other faces Pine Island Sound, its edges fringed with mangroves.
The Florida Department of Natural Resources owns and administers the majority of Cayo Costa, and the only accommodations are a dozen rustic cabins and several tenting sites in a shaded glen, 10 feet from the Gulf.


Data Bank/March 8, 1992


Social Events
Party for St. Bart's Actors
March 9 -- The St.
Bart's Playhouse, founded in 1927 and now one of the oldest nonprofit theater groups in New York, is holding a benefit party at the Country Club, 209 East 85th Street, from 7 to 11 P.M.
Tickets, $15, at the door.
Information: (212) 751-1616, extension 215.


Technology; Talk About a Slogan for the Back-to-Basics 90's: Electrify!
All over the United States, utilities are diving into the technology of conservation, helping consumers install new light bulbs, electric motors and heating and cooling systems designed to use less electricity.
The current thinking is that the nation should do the same work with less power, to allow generating stations that burn coal to be closed.
These plants emit the ingredients of acid rain and also a high level of carbon dioxide, the single largest cause of the greenhouse effect.
But according to a contrarian school, this approach is backward.
If pollution or the greenhouse effect is really the problem, according to the counter-theory, there is a technical fix at hand.
It is to use as much electricity as possible.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa State; An Inventive End To a Daily Grind: Do In the Dishes
If two Iowa State University chemists have their way, the phrase "clean your plate" will someday take on a whole new meaning.
Jay-Lin Jane, a food scientist and an assistant professor here, and Seung-Taik Lim, postdoctoral research associate, have invented an edible plastic they say may eventually be used to make dinnerware.


Armenia-Azerbaijan Strife: Empires' Legacy
Armenians are Christian.
Azerbaijanis are Muslim.
But it would be simplistic to blame religious differences for the decades of hostility between those neighboring peoples -- particularly recent vicious clashes over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Caught at the crossroads of empires, Armenia and Azerbaijan have been conquered and played against each other in ways that helped foment an eventual explosion.


War Excused a Multitude of Sins
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST
By Alvin M. Josephy Jr. Maps. 448 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A MODEL WORLD: And Other Stories, by Michael Chabon. (Avon, $10.) This collection includes a group of short stories, reminiscent of the young Philip Roth's, in which a boy named Nathan Shapiro learns to shield himself from the unpredictable blows of a family on the brink of divorce.
With this book, Michael Chabon "establishes himself as one of his generation's most eloquent new voices," Michiko Kakutani said in The Times last year.
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) After making a fortune producing "The Sting," "Taxi Driver" and "Close Encounters of the Third Kind," Julia Phillips burned it up freebasing cocaine.
Now she is recouping some of the fortune with "what may be the most damning view of Hollywood since last week's Variety," Steven Bach said here last year.
"Her intelligence screams at you from every Hollywood Chainsaw Massacre page. . . . Ms. Phillips is so inside she drops names you never heard of and never will."


Devils Wouldn't Mind Getting a Few Breaks
Fair treatment, like hot water in the showers and fewer than nine consecutive penalties called against them, was all the Devils were asking for at Capital Centre tonight after their nightmare in Buffalo.
On Friday night, the Devils overcame 8 out of 10 manpower advantages for the Sabres, but they lost a three-goal lead and ended up suffering a 5-4 loss.


Four Men Charged With Sexual Assault
Four men in St.
Lawrence County, including a man and his grandson, have been arrested for sodomizing boys and raping girls over a three-year period, the state police said on Friday.
The police arrested Matthew Layboult, 16 years old, last month as part of an investigation into sexual assaults in the area.
The investigation led to three more arrests on Thursday, a state police spokeswoman said.


As Technology Makes Wiretaps More Difficult, F.B.I. Seeks Help
The Department of Justice says that advanced telephone equipment in wide use around the nation is making it difficult for law-enforcement agencies to wiretap the phone calls of suspected criminals.
The Government proposed legislation on Friday requiring the nation's telephone companies to give law-enforcement agencies technical help with their eavesdropping.
Privacy advocates criticized the proposal as unclear and open to abuse.


A New Work Force Adept at Recycling
ROSALEE ALLEN is 47 years old and for the first time she has a paying job.
Marilyn Guzman, who is 28, is also working in her first real job.
Both women are employed at Con Edison's Eastview operations center here, where they process rubber-coated cable wire for recycling.
Their jobs were made possible by a training agreement between Con Edison and the Westchester Association for Retarded Citizens.
"Recycling is a wonderful industry for our people because they are comfortable with the repetitive tasks that others find dull and boring," said Richard Swierat, executive director of the association, which trains people for the workplace.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD Mark for Joyner-Kersee Jackie Joyner-Kersee of the United States broke her own American indoor record in the long jump yesterday with a mark of 23 feet 1 1/4 inches in the Yokohama International meet in Japan.
The 30-year-old Joyner-Kersee, who set the previous record in 1988 at the Meadowlands, broke the record on her sixth and final attempt at the Yokohama Arena.
In the men's long jump, Huang Geng of Chinaleaped 26-7 to edge the world-record holder, Mike Powell of the United States, by two inches.
Michael Johnson, the world champion from the United States, took the men's 200 meters in 20.58 seconds.
Greg Foster of the United States won the 60 hurdles in 7.64 seconds, below his world record of 7.36.
Leroy Burrell of the United States, who won the silver in the men's 100 meters in the 1991 world championships in Tokyo, took the 60 in 6.58 seconds.
In other events, Mark Everett of the United States won the 400 in 46.11, his compatriot Terril Davis took the 800 in 1:49.15, Pyotr Bochkaryov of the Commonwealth of the Independent States cleared 18-4 1/2 to win the pole vault and Patrik Sjoberg of Sweden took the high jump at 7-8 1/2.
Evelyn Ashford of the United States won the women's 60 in 7.24 seconds. (AP)


Guns as Plentiful as Fear for New York Youths
When the little guy with the baseball cap and the knowing smile was 14 years old, he bought a .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol from a neighborhood dealer for $150.
He was tired of being picked on, he said, and it made him feel safer while he was selling heroin in a gritty section of Brooklyn.
One shootout and six months later the boy, Miguel, upgraded to a more powerful 9-millimeter pistol.
This year, as he turned 17, he began carrying an even more powerful .45.


Style Makers; Louise Hamlin, Gown Designer
Louise Hamlin fulfills fashion fantasies.
The brides and debutantes who wear her heavily decorated party dresses with bouffant skirts, off-the-shoulder necklines and an abundance of tulle and lace can feel like Scarlett O'Hara for a day, like Cinderella for an evening.
"I like to do bridal because it's the ultimate dress a girl buys," Ms.
Hamlin, who lives in England, said on a trip to New York.
"It's the one kind of dress where everything I'm good at can be done. There's a lot to decorate."


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan State; Animal Rights Raiders Destroy Years of Work
Animal rights advocates entered two research areas at Michigan State University on Feb. 28, set fire to one and destroyed 32 years' worth of animal science research, the university administration said.
The vandals also inadvertently destroyed fertility research that could have helped both humans and endangered species.
The raid was directed against Richard J. Aulerich, an animal science professor, the university said.
The raid destroyed equipment and property worth $75,000 to $125,000, said Maynard G. Hogberg, the chairman of the Animal Science Department at M.S.U.


As Sun Climbs, Rates Tumble At Ski Centers
With the sun getting higher and the snow getting softer, ski resorts across the country are beginning to cut their rates.
Here are some examples of reductions in the price of an adult lift ticket on a weekend day:
Beginning tomorrow, a ticket at Ski Windham, in the Catskills, falls from $34 to $26.
At Whiteface Mountain, Lake Placid, N.Y., rates will be reduced on March 16 from $32 to $20.


Green Teens
It's 11 on a cool Fall morning, and Sol Solomon, an 18-year-old native of Santa Monica, Calif., is pacing back and forth before some 900 students in an auditorium at Martin Luther King Jr.
High School in Manhattan.
Dressed in faded jeans and a T-shirt, his long black hair flowing from a baseball cap worn backward, Solomon is complaining about the environment's destruction.
"The ocean I'm surfin' in is like a toilet that hasn't been flushed," he laments.
"The sky has got colors in it Picasso couldn't even paint. What's going on here? Who's in control? Some corporate dude who wants to get rich? Some corporate dude who doesn't care about me?"
Amid cheers from his audience, Solomon reels off a dizzying list of ecological disasters: global warming, ozone holes, acid rain, toxic waste, vanishing wildlife.
He tells how young consumers forced Star-Kist to stop buying tuna from fishermen who ensnared dolphins, how they stopped McDonald's from using foam containers and how they stopped Burger King from importing beef harvested from tropical rain forests.


THE AGE OF CONDOMS
Ken Englade's About Men column "The Age of Condoms" (Feb. 16) asks that we care about a 53-year-old man who, for the first time in his life, has to take responsibility for his own sexual conduct.
What about the women who have had to endure not only embarrassment but also the physical and emotional consequences of being the responsible sexual partner?
Englade goes so far as to blame his ex-wife for exposing him to the threat of AIDS.
Small wonder that such a man finds himself alone in these sexually scary times.
ELIZABETH CHANG
Princeton, N.J.


Haitian Economy Is Getting Ever More Desperate
When Haitian and international economists are asked when this wretchedly poor nation might recover from the effects of five months of political turmoil and economic isolation, many pause, shake their heads and deliver a somber verdict: perhaps never.
Haiti was already the hemisphere's poorest country before the army overthrew its first democratically elected President on Sept. 30.
And experts say the nation may now have lost the chance in a rapidly changing world to lay the foundations of a modern economy able to support the more than six million people.


Why International Statistical Comparisons Don't Work
Living standards in the United States have fallen behind those in Germany, Japan, even Finland.
The pay and productivity of once-proud American workers trail those of a dozen or so other nations.
The short-sighted United States invests half as much as far-sighted Japan.
These dispiriting and widely cited statistics have one thing in common: They are wrong.


Photographer on Horseback Captures Spirit of Sleepy Hollow
"It's important not to show every detail," said Lynn Butler, "but to leave some room to imagination."
So it is that in Ms.
Butler's color photographs from horseback of the region around Sleepy Hollow in Tarrytown, you don't see the landscape so much as feel it: the ocher-tinged breath of early morning, the flapping rush of ascending geese in an autumn twilight, the spirit of Washington Irving restively stirring above a mound of headstones.


Biography Bonus
To the Editor:
Grant Johannesen's article on Darius Milhaud  [ "It's Milhaud's Turn for a Celebration," Feb. 16 ]  mentions the biography of the composer by Paul Collaer (in French, 1947 and 1982) but omits mention of its translation into English by Jane Hohfeld Galante, published recently in Berkeley by San Francisco Press.
The new version has been supplemented by a catalogue of Milhaud's works, compiled with the aid of Mrs.
Milhaud, as well as a section on his many sojourns in America during World War II and afterward, both at Mills College in California and at Aspen, Colo.
TERRY GABRIEL Berkeley, Calif.


A Chance to Say Yes or No to Fresh Disaster
It has been said of the Balkans that they have too much history, meaning that grievances from the past have been allowed to overwhelm the present, that atavistic passions have too frequently triumphed over sober calculations of self-interest.
It is an axiom that comes to mind at every turn amid the wreckage of Yugoslavia, where in the last nine months as many as 10,000 people have been mutilated and murdered, untold property has been destroyed and the economic prospects of 23.5 million people, the population of the six Yugoslav republics, has been ruined in an explosion of bitterness and anger that has defied every standard of humanity, reason and common sense.
Now, the south Slavs -- the Serbs and the Croats, the Macedonians and the Montenegrins, the Bosnians and the Slovenes -- stand once again at a crucial juncture, at a point where they must choose between renewed immolation or the recognition that the history that cast them together a millennium ago offers no sustainable alternative to working out a future in peace.


Designs by William Morris and His Circle of Utopian Artists
THOMAS MORE unveiled "Utopia" in 1516, 24 years after Columbus discovered the real thing in America, but the dates are close enough to qualify as a coincidence.
Since then and particularly since the Industrial Revolution, utopianism has flourished in various guises, while the term itself has grown steadily more pejorative.
Indeed, it seems today that the only good utopian is a dead one unless he or she favors machines doing all the work, a concept about which William Morris could not have been clearer.
"Without genuine art, the experience of man's pleasure in his handiwork," he wrote in 1892, society "must inevitably cease altogether and with it the hopes of the happiness of mankind." Too bad he can't see the patient today.


Style Makers; Alex Locadia, Furniture Designer
Alex Locadia is a designer whose work combines aspects of high technology and African art to create furniture that looks like modern sculpture.
As a result, Mr.
Locadia says, some people are intimidated by his chairs, lamps and tables, which are characterized by sharp angles and elements resembling tribal shields and totem poles.


Miss Marshall, Therapist, Wed
Tammy Sue Marshall, a physical therapist, and Neil Howard Meyerowich, a pizzeria manager, were married last evening in the chapel of the University of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Garrett Dorsey, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated and was assisted by Rabbi Elliot Burk.
The bride, 25 years old, is a physical therapist at Regional Health System in Sharon, Pa.
She graduated from the University of Pittsburgh and has a degree in physical therapy from the University of Maryland.
She is a daughter of James and Sandra Marshall of Clark, Pa.
Her father teaches history at Sharpsville High School.
Her mother is a speech therapist in the Sharpsville elementary schools.


POSTINGS: $1 Million Facelift; Preserving the Terra Cotta
The Potter Building, now a 41-unit co-op with ground-floor commercial tenants that fronts on Nassau Street (Nos. 139-145), Park Row (Nos. 35-38) and Beekman Street (Nos. 2-8), has stood as an 11-story testament to terra cotta since 1886.
To preserve that image, a facelift, costing more than $1 million, is in progress behind orange netting that is draped over part of the Beekman Street facade.(In the afternoon, the screen catches the shadow of the twin-spired Temple Court building across the street.)


Wall Street; The Rare Trades of Alpine Capital
There are some ideas that are simply catnip to the public.
The Catholic Income Trust was just such a gimmick.
This whimsical mutual fund was set up in 1989 by Alpine Capital Management in Denver, which already managed two other mutual funds.
The new fund invested in the obscure and rarely traded bonds issued by Catholic institutions like colleges and hospitals.
What could be more adorable?
But the predictable spate of stories didn't attract enough investors to keep body and soul together at Catholic Income.
Its assets never totaled much more than $4.3 million, and fees ate up about 5.75 percent of each dollar investors chipped in.
Last April, the Catholic Income Trust was quietly buried by Alpine and the estate was divided among its shareholders -- at $9 a share, a dollar less than its initial net asset value, according to Morningstar, the mutual fund service in Chicago.


M. A. Jaffe Wed To Ms. Smukler
Tanya Sandra Smukler, a daughter of Doreen and Dr.
Hyman Smukler of Newton, Mass., was married last evening to Mark Allen Jaffe, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Jaffe of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Herman Blumberg officiated at the Parker House in Boston.
Mrs.
Jaffe, 27 years old, was until recently a therapist at the Walker Home and School for disturbed boys in Needham, Mass.
She graduated from Boston University, where she earned a master's degree in social work.
Her father is a professor of periodontology and the director of the graduate program at the Boston University School of Graduate Dentistry.


New Rochelle Protesters Demand Cut In School Tax
MORE THAN 400 frustrated taxpayers jammed into the grand ballroom of the Greentree Country Club last Tuesday night to denounce a 14.4 percent increase in this city's school property tax and to demand that the next school budget reflect a "return to fiscal sanity."
The predominantly middle-aged and middle-class audience listened attentively for two hours as leaders of the New Rochelle Citizens for Reduced Taxes, the ad hoc group that sponsored the meeting, criticized the New Rochelle Board of Education for levying the highest school tax in city history.
The group also introduced its own school board candidates.


Joseph A. Buttinger, Nazi Fighter And Vietnam Scholar, Dies at 85
Joseph A. Buttinger, a Nazi fighter who became an advocate for refugees of persecution and a renowned authority on Vietnam and the American war there, died on Wednesday at the Margaret Pietz Center for Nursing in Queens.
He was 85 years old.
He died of natural causes after suffering from Alzheimer's disease, friends said.


Fresh Americana


Professors on the Trading Floor
CAPITAL IDEAS
The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall Street.
By Peter L. Bernstein. 340 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Tech Notes; Spotting the Postal Bar Code
Sorting the mail has become increasingly automated in recent years.
Now the United States Postal Service is upgrading its ability to process large-size mail -- including catalogues, magazines and direct-marketing envelopes -- by installing an advanced generation of bar-code-reading scanners.
These new machines can spot bar codes whizzing by at 75 inches a second, interpret the codes and then direct existing postal sorting machines to drop the mail into the proper bin.


Miss LaFonte to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Sal LaFonte of Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Maria LaFonte, and John Grasso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Grasso of Port Washington, L.I.
Miss LaFonte, 27 years old, is a vice president of the National Westminster Bank in West Hempstead, L.I.
Mr.
Grasso, 33, is a second vice president of Chase Manhattan in East Meadow, L.I.


Wall Street; Chrysler Unit Tries to Loosen Ties to Parent
The question of succession is not the only point of stress at the Chrysler Corporation.
The auto company's troubles, including its underfunded pension fund, are also affecting its otherwise shiny financing unit, the Chrysler Financial Corporation.
Chrysler Financial, one of the largest non-bank finance companies, gets high marks in the debt market for smart management and a lessened reliance on auto loans in its portfolio.
But it still shares its parent's worrisome pension liabilities.
As a result, its credit rating has fallen too low to permit it to borrow in the commercial paper market.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday showing the racial breakdown of voters in the 1988 primaries for six Southern states carried indistinct shading in most copies, leaving the segments unlabeled.
These were the percentages:
*Florida: black, 17; white and raised in the South, 26; white and raised elsewhere, 56.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 23 about landscape designs for Riverside South, the complex under development by Donald Trump on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, misidentified one student designer.
He is Doojin Hwang.


Sea Cadet Again Defeats Strike the Gold in Florida
Sea Cadet, the tailless wonder who commutes from California, swept to his second straight victory in the Florida classics today when he won the $300,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap by seven lengths.
And he again outran the mystery horse, Strike the Gold, who lost for the 11th time in a row since winning the Kentucky Derby last May.
Just five weeks ago, Sea Cadet, a 4-year-old colt who charmed the public chiefly because of his stumpy wisp of a tail, came out of California to win the $500,000 Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park by three lengths.
Strike the Gold ran sixth that day, seven lengths back, and he was still seven lengths back today even though they ran an extra furlong in their return match.


Chesnokov Victory Over Stich Is a Tonic
Even his opponent expected him to perform invincibly.
But when Michael Stich's brilliant beginning became diluted by errors, Andrei Chesnokov, who today battled a nagging headache as well the Wimbledon champion, became persistent and upset the German powerhouse, 1-6, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3.
Once Stich self-destructed with 35 unforced second-set errors, Chesnokov, the unseeded Moscovite, had no choice but to take control of the proceedings and advance to the final of the $1 million Newsweek Champions Cup.


Car Bomb Kills an Israeli Embassy Aide in Turkey
A powerful car bomb killed a senior Israeli Embassy security officer here today.
Two militant Islamic groups took responsibility for the slaying, one of them calling it "an answer to the Israelis."
It is unclear whether the assassination of the diplomat -- identified by Turkish officials as Ehud Sadan, the embassy's top security officer -- was intended as vengeance for Israel's killing of Sheik Abbas Musawi, the head of the Party of God organization in southern Lebanon, on Feb. 16.


Gilbert Dionne Emerges From Brother's Shadow
Gilbert Dionne grew up in a Quebec town as the hockey-playing brother of a National Hockey League superstar.
That wasn't easy.
The sport creates a hothouse atmosphere in this province's long winters, especially when everyone knows the root system of the family tree.
"When I was a kid, the other parents would say to the coaches 'Why do you play him? Just because he has the name Dionne on his back?' " Gilbert (pronounced Geel-bear) Dionne recalled the other day.
He is a rookie with the Montreal Canadiens, who played the Islanders tonight in the Forum.


Floyd Taking 3-Shot Lead Into Doral's Final Round
Raymond Floyd put himself in excellent position to become the first player ever to win a regular PGA Tour event and a Senior Tour event in the same year by building a three-shot lead today to take into the final round of the Doral Ryder Open.
Floyd, who will begin playing Senior Tour events after he turns 50 on Sept. 4, shot a third straight 67 for a 54-hole total of 15-under-par 201 over the Doral Country Club's Blue Monster course.
That was three strokes better than Fred Couples and 44-year-old Larry Nelson, who fired a 65 today.


Stealing Toward Russian Capitalism
Olga Romanova, a middle-aged woman in a babushka, painstakingly stamps out small copper parts for garden tools on a giant, inefficient metal press on the main floor of the state-owned Electropribor factory here.
But instead of working for the factory, Ms.
Romanova is working for one of the factory's senior executives, who has become an entrepreneur on the side.
In effect, he rents machinery and floor space from himself and operates a profitable private business within a state factory.
The arrangement is typical of the creeping privatization in the old Soviet Union, a spontaneous process that is steadily shifting public property to private use, mostly as a result of the ingenuity, energy and adroitness of people like Ms.
Romanova's boss, Viktor Todoryk.
Nowhere else in the former Communist Bloc nations is privatization proceeding more rapidly today, or with less respect for master plans devised by economists and government officials.


Paris Gardens Get a New Look
The gardens of the Palais Royal, situated at the bottom of the Avenue de l'Opera in the heart of Paris, are being redesigned for the first time in 70 years.
The French Government has hired an American landscape artist, Mark Rudkin, to head the renovation of the five-acre park, created by Cardinal Richelieu in 1632.
The work, to be completed in May, will provide the gardens with annual bursts of color: monochrome flower beds in shades of blue this year, yellow next year.
The circular fountain will be replaced by one horizontal jet of water and its basin will be surrounded by 10 wooden tubs planted with holly.


Ethnic War in the Caucasus Finds New Depths of Carnage
As Hadjayev Hakhverdy washes the corpses of gunshot children and mutiliated adults here at the valley mosque, all the despair and defeat of Azerbaijan seems at hand in his ministrations after four years of undeclared war with Armenia over the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
"I have cleaned 200 since Feb. 26," said the mosque worker, aghast as he wrapped for burial another decapitated male corpse fresh from the war between Armenians and Azerbaijanis, which appears to be setting new standards for carnage and vendetta.
"Some are so broken, but we must bury them."


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the play "Death and the Maiden" gives an incorrect date and play in some copies for Glenn Close's last appearance on Broadway.
She performed in "Benefactors" in 1986.


MEN'S STYLE: Milan Preview:; Bright Ideas
It's easy to spot foreigners on the streets of Milan.
They're the ones in black shoes.
It's not that Milanese don't own black shoes.
"But," said one impeccably-put-together silver-haired gentleman, with the same precision that created the folds in his merino wool scarf, "we save them for severe occasions -- weddings and funerals."
It's hard to argue fine points of style with the Milanese.
On Saturday afternoons, polished and pomaded couples of all ages promenade along shopping avenues like the vias Montenapoleone and della Spiga, in such a quietly proud display of sartorial exactitude that tourists are tempted to throw their all-purpose worn-on-the-plane overcoat in the nearest trash bin.
"We find what suits us," the gentleman added, in the same sure tone he might use to discuss women or the World Cup.
"Architecturally, Milan is monochromatic. The color we must provide."


Sports of The Times; Yankees Didn't Check Time Bomb
IT wasn't as if the Yankees shouldn't have known.
Long before George Steinbrenner, then in power as the principal owner, agreed to sign Pascual Perez to a three-year, $5.7 million contract, enough warnings had been posted.
As if they were highway signs for "speed zone" or "construction, slow."
In 1984, Perez served three months in a Dominican Republic prison after a conviction for cocaine possession.


It's the Little Jet Schoolhouse, And Nagle Is the Only Student
Browning Nagle is the only student in Jets Quarterbacking 101, a class currently being conducted by Coach Bruce Coslet and the new quarterbacks coach, Walt Harris, at the Jets practice center at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.
Being the only student in class has good points and bad points.
Nagle gets the undivided attention of the instructors.
On the other hand, he can't show up late and sneak into the back of the classroom unnoticed.
But tardiness and inattention are not a problem for Nagle, because he realizes the importance of this tutorial.


Peace Talks: Israeli Election Barges In
The latest round of Arab-Israeli peace talks has demonstrated that the negotiations have ceased being a forum for serious give-and-take and have instead turned into a stage for influencing the Israeli election in June.
This is not surprising given the fact that Israel is the central player in the negotiations.
Since the Israelis control all the territorial cards in any land-for-peace barter, the current talks for the other players are really about how to get Israel to put one or more of those cards on the table.


A Composer With Many Public Faces
According to Virgil Thomson, who wrote a classic analysis of the American musical scene in 1939, every composition's style is influenced by the source of the composer's income.
A composer who earns a living outside music writes pieces marked by a naive quality that can give "a useful kick to the profession," the way Mussorgsky, Satie and Ives did.
Composers who depend on commissions display an "international" style good for "prestige value." A teaching composer combines the bossiness and pomposity of a schoolmaster with timidity and overscrupulousness.
I am not sure what Thomson, in this materialist mood, would have said about William Schuman's music and its relationship to his income.
For Schuman, who died on Feb. 15 at the age of 81, earned his living as the most important musical administrator of the 20th century.
His impact on our musical life stemmed more from the way he treated music than from the way he wrote it.
At one time, he was probably the most powerful figure in the world of art music.


Botha Rebuffs de Klerk Over Vote in South Africa
President F. W. de Klerk suffered a setback today in his campaign to win a mandate from whites to negotiate a nonracist future when his predecessor, P. W. Botha, announced he would vote against Mr. de Klerk's referendum.
"I cannot participate in what I perceive as a direction of suicide for my own people," Mr.
Botha said.
He implied that Mr. de Klerk's program reflected "a spirit of gradual abdication."


Streetscapes: The Vermeer; Trouble Behind the 'Elegant' Facade
THE reputation of the white-brick, modern apartment house is at a low ebb, and even developers now use "white brick" as epithet rather than advertisement.
Yet 30 years ago, when the age of white brick was at its peak, it was considered a premium material carrying a premium cost.
Now one of the city's largest white brick apartment houses, the 1964 Vermeer, a 352-unit, co-op at 77 Seventh Avenue, between 14th and 15th Streets, is in the midst of a $3 million facade renovation that shows how poorly buildings of that period were put together.
Most of the facade must be replaced, and the new brick will be taupe, not white.


Dollar Soars 8% Against Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
131.85
129.50
136.74
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6675
1.6390
1.5694
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1917
1.1820
1.1616
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7187
1.7570
1.8640
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$349.25
$353.50
$369.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


U.S. Just Can't Afford Pentagon Fantasies
To the Editor:
I am astonished by "Pentagon Imagines New Enemies to Fight in Post-Cold-War Era," your Feb. 17 front-page report that Pentagon planners, whose past planning has been so discredited by world events, are urging new reasons for excessive military spending.
Who is left who believes these Pentagon planners?
They have wasted so much of the wealth of our country on preparations to "defend our nation's interest" against hypothesized enemies.


Trying to Entice the Whole Family
THREE events this afternoon and another three next weekend could be described as family experiences, programs involving music, history, magic and even clowns.
The Rockland Center for the Arts, across the Hudson in West Nyack, is presenting a 2 P.M. program today called Tantalizing Traditional Tales with four storytellers looking to Jewish, African, French-Canadian and American music and folklore for narratives.
For more information, call 358-0877.


Constructive Community Involvement
To the Editor:
Regarding "Some High Hurdles Loom for Pepsico's Fast-Food Hotshots" (Feb. 16), Pepsico and other companies have sought creative, constructive and meaningful ways to heighten visibility.
Decisions made at the corporate level to increase community involvement and social awareness have not only translated into increased revenues but have also raised the consciousness of customers and employees alike.


A Savvy Blending of the Old and New
IT is natural for diners at a restaurant called the Best of Both Worlds to wonder what those two worlds are.
On recent visits to this newcomer in Williston Park, customers could be heard repeatedly asking that question.
No two replies were alike.
It is clear that the worlds do not represent two ethnic cuisines, for the restaurant is a veritable United Nations of food.
The menu lists Japanese negimaki, Mexican fajitas, Oriental won tons, Italian pastas and polenta and Louisiana headliners like jambalaya, black-eyed peas, collard greens, corn bread and blackened fish, chicken and steaks.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
Sincere congratulations go out to puzzle editor Eugene T. Maleska.
Fifteen years of responding to "gotcha" letters (concerning puzzle errors) and never a cross word.
FRANK J. D'AGOSTINO
Hillside, N.J.


Business Diary/March 1-6
COMPANIES Secrecy Thwarts the Billion-Dollar Milken Settlement


What These Actors Don't Say Is Part of the Magic
Once, about six years ago, Liz Larsen and Scott Waara had a real-life date.
"I told someone I thought he was cute and talented," she remembers.
Did the earth move?
"It was the most happy, memorable night of my life," Mr.
Waara intoned in his melodious tenor.


Brooklyn Merchant Killed in Robbery
For nearly 30 years, Stephen Murray ran the photo studio founded by his father in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Crime was a constant worry.
He had been robbed about 15 years ago and felt it was just a matter of time before it happened again, his daughter said.
On Friday night, Mr.
Murray, 49 years old, was shot to death, in a robbery that his daughter Cassandra and the police said appeared to have been carried out by youths who knew him and his storefront studio at 848 Franklin Avenue.


Public &amp; Private; A Far Better Thing
To: David Dinkins
Re:1993
Mr. Mayor,
I'm sure you're familiar with the final sentence of "A Tale of Two Cities." It's the one that goes: "It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done . . ."


End of an Era
Betty Furness, 76, door opener par excellence, will make her last appearance on NBC's "Today Show" March 18 after 16 years.
While she gained fame advertising Westinghouse refrigerators on television ads in the 1950's, the doors she opened for consumers cinched her reputation.
First as President Lyndon Johnson's special assistant for consumer affairs, later as a network's first consumer affairs reporter, Ms.
Furness became a popular guide.
Typical of her helpful reports was one of her last: how to protect yourself from hospitals.
March 18 will also end her career on NBC's New York affiliate, WNBC, which wants more investigative reporting, something she isn't up to after cancer surgery in 1990.
The former head of New York State's Consumer Protection Board and the city's commissioner of consumer affairs, she'll miss most another title: the oldest reporter working on network television.
"I've held it for several years now and that's been kind of fun, especially since I'm a woman."


Whalers' Woes: From Blue Line to Ticket Line to Bottom Line
ASHLEY GORDON was optimistic when she wrote to 146 corporate leaders in Fairfield County, inviting them to attend a reception, dinner and a Hartford Whalers hockey game last month at the Hartford Civic Center.
Her optimism turned to chagrin, however, when only 40 responded to the invitations and just six showed up at the reception, which was to have included Governor Lowell P. Weicker Jr., whose son Gray once was a goalie in the Whalers' farm system and even played in a few exhibition games for the Hartford club.
But even the Governor did not make it; his mother was ill, the team said.
Many of the invited executives "said they were going to be out of town on business, but in some cases I could tell they just weren't interested," said Ms.
Gordon, a member of the team's marketing staff and daughter of its principal owner, Richard Gordon.
"It was all part of a concerted effort we're making to reach out to get people in the lower part of the state interested in the Whalers." The Whalers were part of the old World Hockey Association when the team moved to Hartford from Boston in 1974.
But ever since the club joined the National Hockey League in 1979, becoming the only major league team in Connecticut, it has never had a statewide appeal.
Most hockey fans in Fairfield County are still oriented toward the New York Rangers.
Now, primarily because of declining attendance, the Whalers are trying to expand their fan base beyond the Hartford area, where it is largely confined, hoping to reach as far south as Greenwich, home of the tennis star Ivan Lendl, one of the team's biggest fans.


Perspectives: Assisted Housing; Managing the Newly Built Apartments
BEAUTY didn't abandon the Grand Concourse in the Bronx during the 70's, when property owners did.
Linda Field spotted it on the corner of Tremont Avenue, in a city-owned property known as the Flatiron Building, which a doctors group had owned and operated for years as a medical center.
Ms.
Field won city designation to do a Federally subsidized gut conversion to create 43 apartments in the building.
That was not the last of the gut rehabilitations in the West Bronx done by Ms.
Field, who set out on a housing career after a stint as a graduate student in art history at Columbia University in 1967.
But in recent years development opportunities have contracted.


CAMPUS LIFE: Boston College; Double Majors Mixing Business With Liberal Arts
Mindful of the poor job market, an increasing number of undergraduate business majors at Boston College have been adding second majors in the College of Arts and Sciences.
James Bowditch, associate dean of the college's business school, the Wallace E. Carroll School of Management, said the 75 business students now carrying an arts-and-sciences major represent one of the largest groups to do so at Boston College.


Student Volunteers: A Required Course?
Re: "Students Do Community Work in School Hours," Feb. 16:
How nice it is to give of your own time in service to your community.
How much nicer is it to give of someone else's time?
Our State Senate would require community service of all New Jersey high school students.
I teach in Ridgefield, where the Board of Education demands that every senior complete 50 hours of community service.
No community service, no diploma; at least that's the plan.


Review/Music; Shirley Verrett in Recital
Shirley Verrett's recital at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night negotiated between size and intimacy.
Ms.
Verrett's long and distinguished career -- it did much to lay the groundwork for American eminence, if not dominance, among the world's opera singers -- is based on a powerful soprano voice comfortable in the grandest of grand opera.
Here she varied heavy declamation (Handel's "O Numi eterni!" from "Lucrezia"; Beethoven's "Ah, perfido!") with music on a smaller scale (Schumann's "Frauenliebe und Leben"; five Spanish songs by Joaquin Nin).
Her success was intermittent.


Not!
This usage occurs more often in spoken than in written communications," writes Franklin L. Noel, magistrate judge of Federal District Court in St. Paul. "Rather than using the ordinary syntax, the speaker will express a negative by making an affirmative statement, followed by a brief pause punctuated by the word
not
."
As a good judge should, he includes a citation: On a recent "Today" show, Jane Pauley, the former co-anchor, made an appearance to plug a new program that will not be called "Real Life With Jane Pauley," the title of her most recent show.


Crocuses Poke Through to Herald Spring
WHEN the crocuses bloom, spring is here.
Gardeners know this in their hearts, even though the calendar may say otherwise.
There is something about this beguiling springtime flower that sets the emotions astir and reassures those who have been waiting through the long winter that the new season has arrived.
This kind of response is especially noteworthy when the crocus brave late winter snow and poke through the white blanket anyway.
The crocus foliage is stiff and grasslike with white stripes.
The flowers, with their six shiny petals, are often described as having the shape of a chalice or a vase.
Three or more crocus flowers are rewarding to see, but a mass display of hundreds of them in bloom is an inspiration for the poets.


Red Light for Glanville
Nascar has rejected the entry of JERRY GLANVILLE into the Atlanta 300 on Saturday at Atlanta Motor Speedway.
Glanville, the coach of the Atlanta Falcons, had hoped to make his debut in the $277,859 Busch Grand National race on the 1.522-mile oval.


Anderson Whines In Good Company
To the Sports Editor:
I have always been a fan of Dave Anderson.
But after reading "Sour Whine Even Stains Bronze Bid" (The Times, Feb. 22), I wonder who the real whiner is.
The 1992 United States Olympic hockey team made a terrific showing, overachieving beyond our greatest hopes.
I question Anderson's last crack that "this Olympic team wasn't about to beat the Unified Team if they played from now until 1994." How about giving credit where credit is due.
J.
POWERS SHEPARD New Canaan, Conn.


INSIDE
Israeli Official Slain in Turkey
A powerful car bomb killed a senior Israeli Embassy security officer in Turkey.
Two militant Islamic groups took responsibility for the slaying, one of them calling it "an answer to the Israelis." Page 12.
Law Firm Tries to Settle
Near collapse, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler says efforts to freeze its assets have forced it to seek a deal in a case involving Lincoln Savings and Loan.
Page 22.


Using Correct Hammer To Nail Things Down
FEW tools for home repairs are as basic or as widely used as hammers.
Like most hand tools, many kinds of hammers are available, and choosing the most suitable can be confusing.
For general carpentry and tasks like driving nails to hang pictures, the best hammer to use is a 16-ounce, bell-faced carpenter's hammer with a curved claw.
If you own only one hammer, it should be that type.


Who Shot J.F.K.?
To the Editor:
In his essay "Writers on the Grassy Knoll: A Reader's Guide" (Feb. 2), Stephen E. Ambrose states that President John F. Kennedy's commitment to the withdrawal of troops from South Vietnam "is a proposition that is open to debate."


Off the Rack Or Off the Tracks?
To the Editor:
Concerning the article "Ask Not 'Is It Art?' Ask 'Did an Artist Make It?' "  [ Feb. 23 ] , I believe the question should be, ask not "Is it art?" but rather "Did an art collector buy it?"


Thoughts From the Front
The Republicans President Bush, speaking to the Home Builders Association of South Carolina:


At Last, G.O.P.'s Bills See Light of Day
REPUBLICAN state senators who have spent their entire careers in the minority are facing a heady prospect.
They are going to see some of their favorite bills voted on.
For the last two decades, Democrats have wielded the gavel of the Senate President, a position that carries the ultimate power to decide which bills are posted for voting.
Republicans who came up with inspired pieces of legislation would sometimes have to watch from the sidelines as their bills were stolen -- copied word for word -- and put up for a vote by Democratic sponsors.


White Sox Begin Process to Salvage Bo Jackson's Career
The Chicago White Sox have begun a process that would enable them to retain Bo Jackson but avoid a March 15 decision on his contract option.
Jackson, whose labored, limp running in spring training appearances has shown he is not ready to play serious baseball, was placed on waivers Thursday for the purpose of removing him from the club's 40-man major league roster and signing him to a minor league contract.


Jill Friedman Is Wed
Jill S. Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
William Friedman of White Plains, was married last evening at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton to Michael D. Bizenov, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Bizenov of Bayside, Queens, by Rabbi Joshua Hertzberg.
Mrs.
Bizenov is the sales manager of Independent Printing in New York.
Mr.
Bizenov is the managing partner of the Real Estate Funding Center in Great Neck, L.I.


Stories, His and Hers, at All Ages
SHE mentions hating her mother's milk, announces that "these are my formative days" and warns, "It's very dangerous to feed me false information."
Not bad for a 4-month-old, but then her chattering started months before that, in a see-through prism, and it won't stop until she winds up, ages later, in the same set.


The Struggle to Provide Affordable Homes
The struggle to introduce low-income housing into a working-class neighborhood in this coastal city just west of Los Angeles illustrates the difficulties of providing such housing throughout the state.
The Community Corporation of Santa Monica, a nonprofit home builder, bought four separate parcels in a working-class neighborhood and planned a total of 30 apartments for renters of very low, low and moderate incomes.
A group of nearby residents sued to block the project.
When the home builder won in lower court, the homeowners appealed.


Susan E. McCarthy Weds Jeffrey E. Mindham
Susan Ellen McCarthy, a securities trader at E. A. Moos &amp; Company, and Jeffrey Edward Mindham, a vice president of the Wells, Rich, Greene-BDDP advertising agency, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert Anderson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Mark hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Mindham, 34 years old, is a graduate of Ithaca College.
She is a daughter of Joan Feinberg of Ocean Township, N.J., and the late William G. McCarthy.
Her stepfather is William M. Feinberg.


Lehigh and Bucknell Win in Patriot
With Fordham, the defending champion and the top-seeded team, waiting in the wings for a game tonight, Lehigh and Bucknell advanced today today in the Patriot League tournament here at Stabler Athletic and Convocation Center on the Lehigh campus.
Lehigh beat Colgate, 86-71, and Bucknell defeated Army, 74-55, to move into the semifinals.
Tonight, Fordham (15-12 over all) was scheduled to play Navy (6-21) and Holy Cross (17-10) was to play Lafayette 8-19). Award Winners
Second-seeded Bucknell (20-8) coasted to its fifth 20-victory season under Coach Charlie Woollum by routing hapless Army (4-24).
Mike Bright had a game-high 18 points and a team-high 9 rebounds, and the Bison got 14 points apiece from Patrick King and Chris Simpson and 12 points each from Bill Courtney and Raymond Brown.


Have the Right Thing
TASTE
The Secret Meaning of Things.
By Stephen Bayley.
Illustrated. 237 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.


BEST SELLERS: March 8, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
2
2
2
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
3
6
3
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other and themselves through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
4
7
11
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
5
4
22
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
6
5
4
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party, attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children, reveals family strains and love.
7
3
7
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
8
13
4
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs, a man's disappearance and Chicago scandals.
9
1
KISS, by Ed McBain. (Morrow, $17.) Two 87th Precinct detectives to the rescue of a woman imperiled by a series of suspicious accidents.
10
11
7
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the aid of an actress.
11
8
5
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs, Calif.
12
12
7
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines during World War II.
13
99
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
14
15
4
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
14
29
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
5
16
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
3
3
14
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
4
15
2
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his Italian heritage.
5 *
2
21
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
6
1
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia and the influence of the mob across the country.
7
8
10
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
8
2
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) An attorney says L.B.J. was involved in the death of J.F.K.
9
4
8
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) The case for C.I.A. involvement in J.F.K.'s death.
10
9
17
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
11 *
6
25
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
12
1
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) An economist argues that in the past 20 years Americans' leisure time has greatly diminished, with foreboding consequences.
13
12
11
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) An Auschwitz survivor's story, in comic-book form.
14 *
1
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) A political philosopher considers where two powerful historical forces are now leading us.
15
20
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France.
16 *
11
4
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The challenges America faces.
17 *
7
14
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A season with the Chicago Bulls.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
3
14
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
3
4
9
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
2
14
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
5
5
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, by Gordon S. Wood. (Knopf, $27.50.) In this elegant, learned landmark in the interpretation of American history, Mr.
Wood argues that if radicalism is measured by the social changes that actually took place, our revolution was as radical as any other.
MR.
MANI, by A. B. Yehoshua. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A kaleidoscopic novel of Jewish history that slips back from 1982 to the 18th century, through generations of one family, its exiles and returns.
THE GATE OF ANGELS, by Penelope Fitzgerald. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $19.) A slim, concentrated novel about randomness in physics and luck in human affairs, exemplified in the collision of a physics student's bicycle with a young woman in 1912.
THE WAR OF DON EMMANUEL'S NETHER PARTS, by Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow, $25.) It looks like Latin American magical realism, but it's a romance by a Briton; when the war (a mistake, mostly) is over, everybody moves to an arcadian mountain valley.
DEAR DEPARTED, by Marguerite Yourcenar. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) First published in French in 1974, 13 years before the author's death, this investigation of her mother's family captures a superb sense of bourgeois life in the comfy Belgian aristocracy.
QUILTING: Poems 1987-1990, by Lucille Clifton. (BOA Editions, cloth, $18; paper, $9.) Poems personal, visionary, celebratory, passionate, mercurial, vulnerable and funny; the seventh collection by this urban African-American poet.
HILL DAUGHTER: New &amp; Selected Poems, by Louise McNeill. (University of Pittsburgh, cloth, $24.95; paper, $12.95.) Fiercely determined poems spanning the last 60 years and concerned with preserving a personal past in West Virginia.


We Must Restore Higher Tax on Top Incomes; Harmful Boat Fee
To the Editor:
The "no-new-taxes President" seems to have gone a step beyond rationality with his new recreational vessel fee.
It is one thing to have to pay a tax or fee as a small-boat owner, but to do so and have the following statement attached to the sticker we receive to signify payment, verges on insult:


May Wedding For Kyle Holt
Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton B. Holt 2d of Mansfield Center, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Kyle Holt, to Dwight Douglas Hopkins Jr., a son of Elizabeth Balch Hopkins of Westport, Conn., and the late Mr.
Hopkins.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Holt, 28 years old, is known as Kyle.
She graduated from Smith College and is a singer and actress in Manhattan.
Her father is chairman of Moldex Inc., a plastics engineering company in Putnam, Conn.
Her mother, Katherine Holt, is a composer and a choral conductor at Westfield Congregational Church in Danielson, Conn.


Marines Making Music, Cannon Firing Confetti
It was a glittering social week in New York City, capped by Thursday night's celebration of Brooke Astor's 90th birthday.
The Citizens Committee for New York City honored Mrs.
Astor three weeks before her actual birthday, March 30.
R.
H.
Macy transformed the Seventh Regiment Armory into two dazzling sections: a mirrored ballroom filled with flowers and 31 chandeliers, and a dining room where metal trees 30 feet tall twinkled.


At Work; An Approach With Staying Power
Michael Greenstein has a passion for charts -- or "metrics," as he calls them -- that goes well beyond most people's.
The lanky Mr.
Greenstein, engineering and quality manager at the A.T.&amp; T. submarine systems plant in Clark, N.J., curled himself into a comma to trace the upward trend of a chart fastened near the floor.
"Just look at the metrics," he said, as he applauded the employees who have driven up the yields on housing seals for the underwater fiber-optic cable repeater made at the 318-employee plant.
As far as Mr.
Greenstein is concerned, the banks and banks of metrics lining the walls at Clark like spidery, high-tech graffiti make the case for the sort of team approach the plant adopted two years ago.
An assessment of the metrics reveals, Mr.
Greenstein says, that the Clark plant, which A.T.&amp; T. had planned to close, has reduced the cost of its only product by more than 30 percent.


Style Makers; Jimmy Choo, Shoe Designer
A cluster of rooms in a red-brick Victorian hospital in East London is hardly where one would expect to find a designer and maker of women's shoes.
But in those surroundings, Jimmy Choo designs and makes shoes that have been seen on the likes of the Princess of Wales.
His tiny, makeshift showroom is hugely upstaged by shelves of sleek evening shoes and flashy thigh-high boots.


Abroad at Home; The Road Not Taken
There is a central mystery in President Bush's response to the campaign attacks of Patrick Buchanan.
Why is he competing on Mr.
Buchanan's terrain instead of running as the President of the United States?
Mr.
Buchanan is a crudely nativist candidate, a man who over the years has spoken in contemptuous terms of blacks, Jews, women, gay people, immigrants.
He has called Adolf Hitler a man of "great courage" and "extraordinary gifts."


Careful Planning Turns Day to Night
How do you handle the recession plus the uncertainty about hem lengths?
Planning, that's how, says Pauline Trigere.
If a woman plans her wardrobe so she can get a lot of wear out of it, she will be less edgy about buying new clothes, the designer said.
She has worked out two fashion plans from the clothes in her current spring collection.
They consist of pieces that can be combined in different ways to be worn to work, lunch, dinner or even a black-tie event.


Notes With Pleasure
Losing the World Outside
We sometimes misread history by neglecting to take into consideration a central, if prosaic, feature of the past: that much of life was spent outdoors.
This is from "Natural Knowledge in Preclassical Antiquity" by Mott T. Greene (Johns Hopkins University).


Building Saddam Hussein's Bomb
"About this big." high in the United Nations building in New York, a U.N. official is holding his arms out in a circle, like a man gripping a beach ball.
"About a yard across, weighing about a ton."
This is the Iraqi bomb -- slightly smaller than the one dropped on Hiroshima, but nearly twice as powerful -- packing an explosive force of at least 20,000 tons of TNT.
The official is dramatizing a drawing he has made in his notebook, based on documents seized in Iraq.
He is sure that the bomb, if built to the specifications in the drawing, will work.


Tutors Give New York Students Pride
Eager to catch up with their peers, three students who must juggle raising children with their schoolwork chide their tutor for his tardiness.
But they understand the reason: the tutor has traveled from his Brooklyn law firm, a 40-minute journey by subway to the night program at West Side High School in Manhattan.
The tutor, David Stern, a 31-year-old housing lawyer, devotes two hours each Tuesday night, and is often willing to stay late to help his students get needed credits to complete high school.
He has several success stories, like Anthony Marmol, who floated from school to school until he went to West Side and entered City College's architecture progam this year.


Fats Waller's Tribute To the People of Harlem
"AIN'T MISBEHAVIN'," the musical cabaret at Theater Three in Port Jefferson, is a lodestar of the music of Thomas (Fats) Waller.
Foot-stomping finger-snapping numbers intertwine with blues, ballads and love songs detailing life and culture in Harlem in the 20's, 30's and 40's.
Actually that is all you need to know about this show.
If delicious songs like "Honeysuckle Rose," "Two Sleepy People" and "I Can't Give You Anything but Love" leave you cold, then "Ain't Misbehavin' " ain't for you.


French Baroque


David Stone Martin, 78, Illustrator of Jazz Albums
David Stone Martin, a prolific illustrator who drew more than 400 album covers and created covers for Time magazine and many other works, died on Friday at the Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in New London.
He died of pneumonia, family members said.


Excerpts From Pentagon's Plan: 'Prevent the Re-Emergence of a New Rival'
Following are excerpts from the Pentagon's Feb. 18 draft of the Defense Planning Guidance for the Fiscal Years 1994-1999:


3 Ways to Cook Chicken in the Oven
ONE of the most reliable and simplest ways to prepare chicken is oven braising.
The well-seasoned succulent results make for a good family dinner yet also suit a dinner party.
While a basic principle applies to this type of dish, oven-braised chicken allows for infinite variation, making it adaptable to a variety of menus and cuisines.
The number of servings can also be extended, simply by doubling or even tripling the ingredients and using a large pan or a big casserole for the cooking.


Why Quote Only Men?
To the Sports Editor:
William C. Rhoden describes how the male-dominated ethic of sports can lead to the treatment of women as objects and to the tolerance of serious offenses such as rape ("No Lesson May Come in Tyson Verdict," The Times, Feb. 12).
While I welcome an article on this subject, I wonder why Rhoden chose to quote only men.
Are we to infer that only men can be experts on male domination?


June Wedding For Perri Peltz
Robert B. Peltz and Lauren Veronis, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Perri Anne Peltz, to Eric M. Ruttenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Derald H. Ruttenberg of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Peltz, 31 years old, is a reporter for WNBC-TV.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Peltz Food Corporation, a frozen-food distributor in New York.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the Irvington Institute for Medical Research in New York, which supports studies in immunology.
Her stepfather, John J. Veronis, is the chairman of Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, a New York investment banking concern, and a trustee of the Carnegie Hall Corporation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Goes Back to His Favorite Role
What do large-mouth bass, a sweaty T-shirt, naval air power and Saddam Hussein have in common?
President Bush used all four as props today as he finished off a two-week campaign swing through the South with a show of Presidential power and sportsmanship.


Tribute for Thompson
DAVID THOMPSON, whose National Basketball Association career was cut short by drug abuse and injury, will have his Denver Nuggets jersey retired next season, the team announced last week.
Nuggets officials reportedly spent considerable time in making the decision because of Thompson's past.


Landowners Endorse an Effort To Preserve a Scenic Riverside
THE Little River in Hampton is well known among anglers as one of the state's premier trout streams, a wild and scenic stretch of water through one of Connecticut's most rural areas.
And an effort by Earth Care, a local environmental group, could keep it that way.
The organization recently persuaded the owners of six tracts along the Little River to grant conservation easements to Joshua's Tract Conservation and Historic Trust Inc., preserving more than a half-mile of the river for the future.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
On a recent Queen Elizabeth 2 cruise out of New York, I found myself sitting in a deck chair, watching the ocean and sky and working a Sunday Times crossword puzzle.
I later discovered that there were others who had packed the puzzle to work on the ship.


Haitian Chronicles
Nothing about Manno Charlemagne's appearance betrays the reverberations his songs have set off across Haiti.
A slight 43-year-old given to plain dress, Manno, as he is known, resembles more than anything else a simple peasant.
But he is Haiti's premier folk singer, a rebellious balladeer whose lyrics ring with commitment to the common man.
In his elegiac "Haiti Pa Fore" ("Haiti Is Not a Forest"), he sings: "Everyone is putting me down/ My name is a doormat/ The skin on my back is torn/ My wounds are exposed/ The reason I didn't make it like the fat cats/ I didn't have teachers to show me colors/ To make me see clearly."


The Charge? Depraved. The Verdict? Out of the Show.
Long before the National Endowment for the Arts was so much as a dim gleam in the governmental eye, and decades before Robert Mapplethorpe touched a camera, a solitary work of art threw America into a frenzy.
The offending item was a painting titled "The Fleet's In!" by a 29-year-old New York artist named Paul Cadmus.
The row it inspired has a strangely contemporary ring.
The work, executed in 1934, depicted a group of roistering sailors and floozies in Riverside Park in Manhattan.
It was exuberant and cartoonish, unashamedly carnal.
It also included a homosexual pickup in progress.


Scattering the Assets of the Team at Bridgeport
Bruce Webster is dead serious when he says basketball at the University of Bridgeport has been his life.
Webster is concluding his 27th season as head coach of the Knights.
There won't be a 28th.


Athens Journal; 75 Years of Seed Ads and Free Advice
For the farmers who come into Howard McCants's milling operation here, The Market Bulletin is a fixture in their lives -- the place to get a line on anything from a cow dog to seven-shank plows to bales of high-protein coastal Bermuda hay.
For Linda Wish, an Atlanta lawyer, The Market Bulletin is the place to locate seeds for touch-me-nots and four-o'clocks and all manner of things she can use to adorn her suburban garden.
And it is the place to correspond with other avid gardeners.


More Charges
Senator Brock Adams of Washington, who weathered one charge of sexual misconduct in 1987, was effectively washed out of office last week after eight other women made similar charges in an article in his hometown newspaper, The Seattle Times.
The newspaper did not name the women, but said that all had agreed to testify if Mr.
Adams sued the paper.
Mr.
Adams, a liberal Democrat who had announced for re-election last month, said his decision not to run was "not an admission of anything." The 65-year-old lawyer was never considered Presidential timber, but for a while held Cabinet rank.
He was a six-term Congressman when President Jimmy Carter put him on the payroll as Secretary of Transportation in 1977, a post from which he was dismissed in a policy dispute in 1979.
Ending his public career last week, Mr.
Adams denied ever harming anyone, but said it was "not worth it to continue this campaign because of what it is doing to my family, myself and my supporters."


Inez Mabon, Publisher, 80
Inez Camprubi Mabon, a former publisher of the La Prensa Spanish-language newspaper in New York City, died on Friday at her home in Southbury, Conn.
She was 80 years old and also lived in Greenwich, Conn.
She died of cancer, a relative said.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Cranbury 135,000
6 Pinehurst Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old contemporary; c/a, parklike property, full basement; taxes $3,964.
Edison 147,500
18 McGinnis Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; sun porch, gas fireplace, automatic garage opener; taxes $2,709.
Flemington 129,000
65 Mine Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 90-year-old colonial; porch, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,900.
Metuchen 110,000
205 Columbia Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 18-year-old ranch; walk to stores and trains, new furnace and water heater; taxes $2,474.
Mount Laurel 207,000
26 White Chapel  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; stone fireplace, sprinkler system, quarry floors; taxes $3,722.
Raritan Township 180,000
28 Bristol Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial, finished basement, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,800.
OTHER AREAS Fort Salonga, L.I. 295,000
11 Paddock Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 2-car garage; taxes $8,300.
White Plains, N.Y. 322,500
5 Sage Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, family room, new kitchen, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $6,083.
East Haddam, Conn. 132,000
159 Parker Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; vinyl siding, unfinished basement, 4.5 acres; taxes $1,680.


Making a Difference; The Visionary From the Wheat Fields
Determined to connect with a different world, a teen-age Mel Harris scavenged a junkyard radio from a Buick Roadmaster and, using old springs and foam rubber to cushion the ride, mounted it on his tractor.
Then, as he worked his family's Kansas wheat fields by night in the late 1950's, he would wait eagerly for the voice of Wolfman Jack to drift over from Mexico, introducing the rebellious sounds of rebel rockers like Chuck Berry: "Her own little son named Johnny B. Goode/Was gonna make some motion pictures out in Hollywood."
The 49-year-old Mr.
Harris has been out in Hollywood for some time now, making his mark as an executive in television, if not in motion pictures.
Now, looking for innovative management, Sony Pictures Entertainment has tapped him to lead the town's largest studio television operation into new territory.


Learning to Use Computers Will Never Replace an Education
To the Editor:
Your Economic Scene column of Feb. 14 ends by stating, of disadvantaged children, "maybe it makes sense that these kids have equal access, and plenty of it, to computers in school."


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Beginning this week, the Garden Q. &amp; A. column will appear on Thursdays in The Home Section.


Tara Kilbane, Artist, Marries
Tara Hughes Kilbane, a daughter of Ginger Kilbane of Darien, Conn., and Paul L. Kilbane of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Peter Arthur Dixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Dixon of Baton Rouge, La.
The Rev.
Frank Fajella, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Dixon, 25 years old, is a freelance artist and a student at the Art Students League of New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is a senior vice president of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the adevertising agency, in New York.
Her mother owns Hotel, a silverware importing company in Darien.


The Social Pressure To Be Thin
"Challenging the Must-Be-Thin Message" (New Jersey Q &amp; A, Feb. 23) did not mention an important -- and most unfortunate -- aspect of social pressure on anorexics and bulimics to be thin.
This message is, of course, counteracted by feminist theory, but because of their fragile self-esteem, bulimics in particular often experience feminism instead as an additional source of self-dissatisfaction.
"The women's movement greatly increased my expectations of myself," one bulimic complains in my book on the subject.
"The superwoman thing really took its toll on me."


Broadening Young Horizons With Opera
THE leading man was handsome, the set was otherworldly and the young chorus pronounced Somali words like balanbaalis (butterfly) and waharawaalis (a kind of flower) with aplomb.
The first performance of "Ahmet, the Woodseller," a children's musical based on a story from Somalia, was two days away, and Arthur Jay, the founder and music director of the Children's Opera Company of Ossining, was knitting together the threads of the production with last-minute fervor.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
An unexpected benefit of retirement is that I won't have to use vacation or sick time to stay home with the treasury of crosswords in the Magazine.
I am even grudgingly pleased to have lost enough memory to be able to solve some of the puzzles a second time with that first-time delight at finding what ingenious, creative, sometimes diabolical key to the definition lies in every puzzle.


Jodi Lisa Garner Is to Wed in July
Andrea Beth Garner of Forest Hills, Queens, has announced the engagement of her daughter, Jodi Lisa Garner, to Neal Alan Elkin, a son of Robert J. and Myrna K. Elkin of Wayne, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Garner, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and is pursuing an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
She is also the daughter of the late Norman Garner, who was a structural engineer in New York.
Her mother is a travel coordinator in Forest Hills.


Q and A
Retroactive Rent Increase Question: My apartment and many others in the building where I live are under rent control.
Because of numerous code violations in the building there has been no rent increase since January 1987.


Karolyi Is a Driving Force for U.S. Prospects
Bela Karolyi didn't want to go to America.
And he told this to a man who didn't want to hear it.
The man was Nicu Ceaucescu, the feared head of the Romanian Sports Federation and the son of the ruthless dictator of that country, Nicolae Ceaucescu.
This was in January 1981.
The Romanian gymnastics team was scheduled to make a tour of the United States in March, and had a television contract with ABC that stipulated that both Nadia Comenici, the Olympic gold-medal winner, and her coach, the husky Karolyi, would appear.


Playing Dumb Isn't a Job For Nitwits
Being stupid on the screen may look easy, but in fact it calls for skill.
Unless stylized stupidity is presented properly, it runs the risk of looking dangerously like the real thing.
Except for those eager to follow in the footsteps of the authentically imbecilic Ernest (of "Ernest Scared Stupid" fame), precautions are definitely in order.
After all, achieving just the right degree of dimness is a delicate business.
In the words of the pioneeringly stupid pseudo-rock band Spinal Tap, "It's such a fine line between stupid and clever."
It is indeed a fine line, and the 1984 film "This Is Spinal Tap" stayed on the right side of it.
In the process, screen stupidity entered a new realm -- of heavy-metal music, head-banging fans and all the brain damage that implies.
"Spinal Tap" has paved the way for such arch-stupid heavy-metal devotees as Bill and Ted, the happy, time-traveling high school duo and, most recently, Wayne Campbell (Mike Myers) and Garth Algar (Dana Carvey) of "Saturday Night Live," on which these characters originated.
Anyone who mistakes these two for bona fide numbskulls need only glance at last week's chart of movie grosses, where the hit film "Wayne's World," in the No. 1 spot, emerged as a true idiot's delight.


New Suits to Match The Mood of Spring
Chances are that anyone who would wear a classic spring suit already has at least one in her closet.
Who really needs another blazer and knee-length straight skirt?
So it's time to think about jazzing up the wardrobe with something a little bit different.
"People are looking for nontraditional suits," said Barbara Weiser, a vice president of Charivari, the chain of cutting-edge boutiques.
"For the last few years, they've been wearing straight skirts and classic tailored jackets. Now people expect clothes to be more flexible in general, and for suits to have something new to say.


ABOUT CARS: Jumping on Language, Prices and Such; Opening the Box
Dear Sir,
I read with great interest and amusement your article about the Eagle Summit and minivans.
And my question is, why do all these vehicles have only one sliding door for the passenger and cargo compartments?
Either the person at the door has to get up when somebody else wants to get out, or all have to climb over him or her.
My other question is, if there is only one sliding door, why is it on the right side and not on the left behind the driver?
In most metropolitan areas, most streets are one-way, and one side of the van is always disadvantaged.


Political Talk
For Dissatisfied Minds
Inspired by recent polls suggesting that an unnamed Democrat would beat President Bush while all the real-life candidates lag behind him, Thomas P. DiNapoli is proposing a novel twist in New York State election law.
He wants to amend the law to allow people to officially vote for "none of the above."


We Must Restore Higher Tax on Top Incomes; Tuition Deduction
To the Editor:
With all the discussion about tax reduction and educational choice, why not consider a tax break that makes long-term sense: tax deductibility of college tuition.
After all, tax laws help homeowners carry the burden of mortgages.
Shouldn't education expenses be viewed as a similar long-term investment?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: arch 8, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
3
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
3
6
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
4
3
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
44
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
7
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
7
3
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) A woman and a man find true love while fighting to save her family's business.
8
7
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
9
2
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the strange death of a widow from England's Lake District.
10 *
1
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of a serial killer in the Twin Cities.
11
2
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Continuing the story of life in the fantasy land of Shannara.
12
1
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
13
7
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
14
16
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
15
2
FACES OF FIRE, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.99.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is caught in the middle of a war.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
2 *
42
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
6
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
4
435
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
34
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
6
11
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
7 *
1
DARKNESS VISIBLE, by William Styron. (Vintage, $8.) The novelist's memoir of a period of severe depression.
8
6
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
9
34
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
10
120
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
30
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
78
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
59
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
2
WAYNE'S WORLD, by Mike Myers and Robin Ruzan. (Hyperion, $7.95.) Lists, games, etc., inspired by a "Saturday Night Live" skit.
5
27
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


P.S.A.L. Streak to Be Tested
The New York City Public Schools Athletic League was aiming for its fifth straight boys' team title today as the New York State Indoor Interscholastic Track and Field Championships got under way at Cornell University.
"If we are to win," said Ed Joyce, chairman of boys' track and field for the P.S.A.L., "most of our points have to be scored by our runners. We are not strong in the field events."


The Banking Crisis Moves To Europe
Just when Wall Street had concluded the worst was over for the banks, the rumblings of crisis have begun to arrive from Europe.
If the good news for American banks is that the recession has exposed this continent's bad credits, the bad news may be that the process is just getting under way in Europe, where economies are weakening.
Last week, the European financial press was filled with stories of various bank problems.
Christiana Bank, Norway's second largest, announced a huge loss and will need another capital infusion.
Swedish banks saw their losses mounting and in Spain the central bank had to step in to salvage Banco Ibercorp.
The Scandinavian problems appear to be bad loans exacerbated by falling real estate prices.
The Spanish losses seem to have resulted more from freewheeling trading gone wrong, with the possibility of an overlay of political scandal.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
My father was an inveterate Sunday Times crossword puzzler right up to the day he died ("50 Years of Crosswords," Feb. 16).
Imagine my feelings working the same puzzles he did 30, 40 and 50 years ago.
I kept wondering: Did Dad know this word?
How long did it take him to solve the first "stepquote" puzzle?
Did he laugh at the "Joe Miller Motif"?


Bump and Run Costs Conner
Dennis Conner, who is known for his precision in starting a race on time, was late by 32 seconds today in his match with Bill Koch's second-string boat, Defiant.
But there was a reason.
Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes collided with a large powerboat during pre-start maneuvers.
There appeared to be only minor damage to the spectator craft, said Barbara Schwartz, Conner's spokeswoman.
But the other boat knocked a small hole in the bow of Stars &amp; Stripes.


Florence Williams to Marry in June
Florence Skelton Williams, a reporter, and James Chesnut Williams, a natural resources planner, both in Paonia, Colo., are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Williams, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and works for High Country News, a nonprofit environmental publication.
She is the daughter of Elizabeth Friar Williams, a psychotherapist in San Francisco, and John Skelton Williams Jr., a senior scientist for the World Conservation Union in Gland, Switzerland.


How to Build Low-Cost Housing the Private Way
From the street, 72 Lewis Avenue remains a stolid old schoolhouse, its five-step stairway ascending to an arched doorway flanked by tall classroom windows.
Long gone from its hallways are the clatter and clamor of uniformed schoolchildren, cloistered from the outside by the comforting certitude of their daily parochial curriculum.


All About/The 'Little Four' Auto Exporters; Detroit's Not-So-Obvious Rivals
Last month, while Detroit's Big Three were trading jabs with Japan's largest auto makers, the Daihatsu Motor Company quietly announced that it would stop selling its Charade subcompact and Rocky sport-utility vehicle in the American market.
That announcement, coming from one of Japan's smaller automobile exporters, caused only the faintest of ripples in the American auto industry.
After all, Daihatsu held only the tiniest share of the market -- 0.1 percent.
Still, Daihatsu's retreat marked the first time a Japanese car company halted sales in the United States since Toyota temporarily pulled back more than 30 years ago.


Story of Anne Frank Is Basis for a Musical
IF the notion of "Anne Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl" as a musical makes you wince, be fair.
Think of other once unlikely musical sources that worked.
Like "Pygmalion." Think even of "Evita." And so on.
That out of the way, let it be said that wincing is in order.
"Yours, Anne," seen Off Broadway in 1985, written 10 years before that and currently being produced in Westport by the Music Theater of Connecticut, promotes the argument that there are no bad ideas for musicals, only bad musicals.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y. 700,000
47 Sturgis Road
6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 63-year-old brick colonial; entry hall, fireplace, dining room, library, playroom; taxes $13,955.
Eastchester, N.Y. 545,000
5 Hilltop Road
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; formal dining room, family room, new kitchen, new marble Jacuzzi; taxes $12,302.
White Plains, N.Y. 322,500
5 Sage Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, family room, new kitchen, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $6,083.
East Haddam, Conn. 132,000
159 Parker Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; vinyl siding, unfinished basement, 4.5 acres; taxes $1,680.
New Milford, Conn. 135,000
13 Howland Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 21-year-old ranch; new siding and roofing, country setting, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,200.
Ridgefield, Conn. 159,000
554 Branchville Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; skylights, great room with cathedral ceiling, 1.7 acres; taxes $2,037.
OTHER AREAS Cranbury, N.J. 135,000
6 Pinehurst Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old contemporary; c/a, parklike property, full basement; taxes $3,964.
Fort Salonga, L.I. 295,000
11 Paddock Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 2-car garage; taxes $8,300.
Hauppauge, L.I. 199,000
103 Eagle Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; family room, patio; taxes $5,100.


Who Shot J.F.K.?
To the Editor:
I was truly startled by the closing paragraphs of the essay on the Kennedy assassination books by Stephen E. Ambrose.
When he advocates "a new commission, appointed by the President," to look into the issues and "reassure people . . . that whatever happened, there is no cover-up now," he commits one of the great non sequiturs of history.


Recognition Factor
To the Editor:
In his essay on the "New Park: New Ideas" show, Herbert Muschamp somehow manages to avoid the use of the term "landscape architect" and any reference to the field of study or expertise  [ "A Park as Not Just Another Pretty Space," Feb. 23 ] .
In fact, the project was undertaken by landscape architecture students in accredited degree programs at three of the five participating schools.
This profession would seem to offer Mr.
Muschamp the perfect alliance of artists and environmentalists that he seeks and might be recognized as such.
NINA R. KRAMER New York


Why the Nuclear Debate May Be Mostly Hot Air
Paul E. Tsongas's support for nuclear power has thrust the issue into the center of the Presidential primary campaign for the first time in many years.
But many people who follow the fortunes of the nuclear industry, which has been in sharp decline for a decade despite backing from the White House, say it may not make much difference who the President is.
"It sure is a manufactured issue," said Irwin Stelzer, an energy expert at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington research organization.
"You tell me who's going to build one? The utilities, the intelligent ones, are not pounding the table for the right to build nuclear plants."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Primary Debaters Become Brawlers
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas began his campaign day today in the most serene fashion, with a prayer and a gospel hymn.
But nothing is serene about this Democratic Presidential race anymore.


How the Cholera Scare Is Waking Latin America
Cholera, as it turns out, may have saved more people than it killed in the Americas in 1991.
"Last year in Latin America, 4,000 people died of cholera," said Carlos Moreno Chacon, director of Peru's anti-cholera campaign.
"During the same time, 100,000 to 150,000 Latin American children did not die of acute diarrhea. Public awareness over cholera and medical preparation made the difference."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucases; A Bitter, Frenzied Race to Super Tuesday
With his sharpest attacks yet, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas is battling to contain Gov.
Bill Clinton as the race for the Democratic nomination roars toward the Southern-dominated primary extravaganza known as "Super Tuesday."
On the final weekend before 11 states vote in primaries and caucuses, producing more than a fifth of the pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention, Mr.
Tsongas and Mr.
Clinton engaged in a bitter exchange over who was distorting whose record.


Uncertain Days for Havel and Czechoslovakia
The spectacle of major legislative proposals by President Vaclav Havel going down to defeat in Parliament in recent weeks has stirred debate here about whether Mr.
Havel can be re-elected to a new two-year term in June, and if so how effective he can be.
Mr.
Havel's weakened position raises doubts not only about Czechoslovakia's economic recovery after four decades of Communist mismanagement, but also about its continuance as a unified state, given the President's role as the principal integrating factor in the family feud between Czechs and Slovaks.


Buchanan Vows to Stay in Race, Despite Vote
In a statement that is likely to antagonize Republicans worried that his campaign will divide the party and wound the President, Patrick J. Buchanan said today that he does not intend to drop out of the race even if it is clear that he cannot win the nomination.
In an interview with Associated Press Radio, Mr.
Buchanan said that if he did not win any of the 11 primaries on Tuesday, or if he did not do well in the Illinois or Michigan primaries on March 17, it would be "extremely difficult, virtually impossible" to wrest the Republican nomination from President Bush.


POSTINGS: 2d Phase in Milford; Reefing Sails in a Recession
When the developers of Caswell Cove, a waterfront community in Milford, Conn. put up the first phase of their project four years ago, the recession was still off shore.
The 48 two-bedroom condominiums on the marina there sold out at prices of $240,000 to $325,000, along with 48 slips at $1,000 a foot.
But when Milford Partners tried to build the next phase, few buyers came forward and construction stopped for 18 months.
"We had a choice of throwing up our hands and going bankrupt or restructuring the project." said Kevin Bartlett, the only remaining member of Milford Partners, the developers.


Tax Foreclosures
To the Editor:
Your Perspectives column on Feb. 2 about "Tax-Foreclosed Housing" raises a number of issues.
To its rhetorical question, "Does a new wave (of abandonment) threaten?", my answer is "yes." Actually, there already has been a rise in rental-housing abandonment because of higher water, oil and tax charges, and rent-law restrictions, and I don't seen any reason this trend will stop.


Using Correct Hammer To Nail Things Down
FEW tools for home repairs are as basic or as widely used as hammers.
Like most hand tools, many kinds of hammers are available, and choosing the most suitable can be confusing.
For general carpentry and tasks like driving nails to hang pictures, the best hammer to use is a 16-ounce, bell-faced carpenter's hammer with a curved claw.
If you own only one hammer, it should be that type.


PGA Tour Counters Image From Lawsuit
As one of the biggest success stories in sports, the PGA Tour is not accustomed to playing defense, but with its commissioner under seige, its players alarmed and its future less rosy than its recent past, that's just what it spent the last week doing.
Normally a tightly controlled organization that dispenses information grudgingly, the Tour felt it necessary to put on an aggressive damage-control campaign before play began at the Doral Ryder Open.


New Space Shuttle Being Prepared for Launching


Robert Cohen Weds Ms. Pennington
Leslie Alexandra Pennington, an interior designer, and Robert Andrew Cohen, a trader with Banque Paribas, both in New York, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Pennington, 27 years old, is a designer with the Eggers Group, an architectural and planning concern.
She and her fiance are graduates of Trinity College in Hartford, and she has a degree in interior design from the Parsons School of Design.


Sports of The Times; Mookie Wilson Says He Will Be Fine
THERE were some very sad words about Mookie Wilson in the paper the other day.
Those words were "from his home in South Carolina." It is March, they are playing games in spring training, and Mookie Wilson is not there.
How can that be?
This is the man who had the single most important at-bat in the history of the New York Mets, on a certain October night that has forever been codified into "the Mookie Wilson game."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Alan Kellock, a retired executive of the McGraw-Hill Book Company, omitted a survivor.
She is Susan Kellock of Chicago, his daughter.


Lisa M. Cook, Lawyer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Errol M. Cook of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Michelle Cook to Cary Jay Bayer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen J. Bayer of Livingston, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cook, 26 years old, is a lawyer with MFY Legal Services in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a J.D. from Hofstra University.
Her father is a managing director of E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company, a New York venture-capital concern.


Karen Ann Heidelberg Is Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Prentiss Heidelberg of Detroit have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Ann Heidelberg to Dr.
John Maclin Barnwell, a son of Mrs.
Benjamin Burdee Barnwell Jr. of Petersburg, Va., and the late Dr.
Barnwell.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Heidelberg, 25 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is a third-year medical student at Howard University.
Her father is a dermatologist in Detroit.
Her mother, Vera Heidelberg, is Dr.
Heidelberg's business manager.


Mutual Funds; When the First Choice Is Closed Off
In the wake of last year's small-company stock rally, some mutual funds have been flooded with cash and their sponsors are slamming the door on new investors.
Fund closings are not new.
A handful of the industry's most-respected funds, including Sequoia and Windsor, have been turning away new business for years.
The trend may well accelerate, but there are two ways to circumvent the limits: buy shares from other investors rather than from the fund itself or invest in "clones" of the closed funds.


Bicycle Safety And Common Sense
Sisalee Hecht's tale of how a bicycle helmet saved her daughter from serious head injury is less a call to have laws protecting ourselves from ourselves than ones that would protect ourselves from our guardians.
Ms.
Hecht's daughter sustained severe facial injuries.
Where was the child's face mask?
Just because there is no law requiring face guards does not mean that proper precautions should not be taken.
You cannot legislate common sense. JOHN BURY Kenilworth


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Patchogue 117,000
4 Liberty Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $1,900.
Fort Salonga 295,000
11 Paddock Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, 2-car garage; taxes $8,300.
Hauppauge 199,000
103 Eagle Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, eat-in kitchen, patio; taxes $5,100.
Lake Ronkonkoma 162,000
20 Donna Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old ranch; fireplace, den, basement, deck; taxes $2,700.
Medford 127,000
220 Syracuse Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Smithtown 230,000
17 Oaktree Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kichen, den, atrium, finished basement; taxes $7,300.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y. 322,500
5 Sage Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room, family room, new kitchen, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $6,083.
East Haddam, Conn. 132,000
159 Parker Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; vinyl siding, unfinished basement, private wooded setting, 4.5 acres; taxes $1,680.
Cranbury, N.J. 135,000
6 Pinehurst Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old contemporary; c/a, parklike property, full basement; taxes $3,964.


The Piper Who Leads Stuyvesant's Gifted to Science Prizes
Richard Plass has never done scientific research more sophisticated than raising guppies with his sons.
But the Stuyvesant High School biology teacher has nurtured scores of young researchers, including 181 semifinalists in the prestigious Westinghouse science competition.
"The kids in Stuyvesant are beyond me," he said.
"I'm a biology teacher, not a biologist. I'm a plain old guy. I love being with kids."
Mr.
Plass's secret is that he is both an impassioned teacher and something of a salesman who pitches salvation through science projects.
The more customers he can win over, the merrier he is.
While other teachers around the country oversee a dozen or two dozen Westinghouse candidates, Mr.
Plass will shepherd as many as 90.
In a selective school with a student body as talented as Stuyvesant's, that can translate into a trove of prizes.


Hot and Cool Images of Malcolm X
HE came into the world as Malcolm Little and left it as Malcolm X. The story is short -- 1925 to 1965 -- and grim, and it is being told through word and picture in "Malcolm X: The Man, the Meaning," a show that comes to Aljira here from the Jamaica Arts Center in Queens.
Malcolm was about 4 when his father, a Baptist preacher who worked for Marcus Garvey's Universal Improvement Association, was killed by a white hate group.
The family had been burned out of their house in Lansing, Mich., and before that had been run out of Omaha, Neb., by the Ku Klux Klan.


Board of Education and City Hall at Odds Over Money, Again
What began last weekend as Mayor David N. Dinkins's push to bolster security in city schools following the killings of two teen-agers in a Brooklyn high school has degenerated into a bureaucratic squabble that threatens to worsen the often acrimonious relations between the Schools Chancellor and City Hall.
Last Sunday, four days after the killings at Thomas Jefferson High School, the Mayor proposed spending $28 million for more security guards and an expanded weapons-detection program in the schools.
Since then a tug-of-war over how to pay for the measures has wrapped the two bureaucracies in the same fog of mistrust and maneuvering that characterized last year's negotiations over the education budget, mayoral and school officials said.


Mozart, Continued


April Wedding for Kyle R. Friedman
Arlene Friedman of Tenafly, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Kyle Renee Friedman to David Harris Greenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Greenberg of Wayland, Mass.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Friedman, 28 years old, is an account executive at the Cablevision Corporaton, a cable television company in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University, as did her fiance.
Her father, the late Howard Friedman, was a manufacturer's representative for outdoor furniture.


IN SHORT/BUSINESS
COLUMBIA PICTURES Portrait of a Studio.
Edited by Bernard F. Dick.
University Press of Kentucky, $30.


Some Royal Insiders Feel Like Outsiders
In the space of a week last month, George Brett gained a new wife and a new team.
"It felt like I was the one who had been traded," Brett said, referring to his arrival here at the Kansas City Royals training-camp clubhouse, not his marriage.
"I walked in and didn't know 10 people. I was early and a lot of position players weren't here yet so I felt when they came in, I'd feel more comfortable. But they came and I still didn't know many of them. Someone said I walked by Gregg Jefferies and didn't know him."


Ann B. Bedell, Nurse, to Wed
May wedding plans for Ann Bryant Bedell and Richard Robert Fritz have been announced by the parents of the future bride, Peter Bedell and Joan Bedell, both of Philadelphia.
Mr.
Fritz is the son of William Fritz and Gretchen Fritz, both of Blue Bell, Pa.
Miss Bedell, 30 years old, graduated from Hahnemann University and is a registered nurse at Roxborough Memorial Hospital in Philadelphia.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia investment firm of Walnut Asset Management.
She is a granddaughter of the late Charles F. Noyes, a New York real-estate developer and manager.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
The New York Yankees, the Brooklyn Dodgers (their move still pains me) and your Sunday crossword puzzle were wonderful family activities that made Sundays special when I was growing up.
As I grew older, I would often buy two copies of the Sunday Times for the pleasure of having my own puzzle.


A Class Brings Poetic Secrets to Life
UNTIL 10-year-old Isaac began attending a creative writing workshop at the Coachman Hotel here, where 106 other homeless families live, untold secrets remained locked in his heart.
I never told anybody
any special secrets of mine.
I never told anybody that
my first sister died.
I never told anybody
that I live in a hotel.


ABOUT CARS: Jumping on Language, Prices and Such; Duesenberg to Subaru
Dear Sir,
A comment in one of your recent columns struck a chord.
I remember emerging car-less from World War II to the rumor that jeeps were available from Army surplus for $15.
And so they were, but you had to buy in the hundreds, and they were as-is and where-is, generally in the Aleutian Islands.
I'm an old geezer and I've had 'em all, from Fords through Pierce-Arrows and Bugattis and a Duesenberg.
Right now, I still have a 1986 Subaru Turbo XT that I can't bring myself to part with because nothing yet built approaches its handling qualities.


ABOUT CARS: Jumping on Language, Prices and Such
THE mailbox overflows, so it's time again for a smattering of comment and query.
But how to begin?
Well. . . .


Wendy White Has Wedding
Wendy Louise White, a mental-health worker at Yale-New Haven Hospital, and Peter Michael Brockelman, a graduate student at Yale University, were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
R.
Bradley Beaupre, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Daphne W. P. Hawkes, an Episcopal priest.
Mrs.
Brockelman, 25 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Connecticut College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. White Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
Her father is a surgeon in Princeton.


Now or in 1993, Cable TV Meets the Regulators
The cable television industry is looking for cover.
Specifically, it is looking for a legislative compromise that might make more tolerable what most cable executives say is an inevitable strengthening of Federal regulation.
Failing that, the cable industry hopes that a new ally can get it off the hook for at least another year, by persuading Congress to forgo any action this session.


City Ballet's Season: Untypically Special
The New York City Ballet's winter season appeared to place the company in a holding pattern, although there was more here than met the collective eye.
With no special event on the schedule, the troupe was obviously taking a breather.
Last spring saw the huge success of Peter Martins's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty." This spring, the dancers will move into high gear for an unusual weeklong series in May, the Diamond Project, that will present new ballets by 11 choreographers.


POSTINGS: Carroll Gardens Renewal; 28 Low-Income Rentals
Six vacant city-owned buildings in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn are being renovated into 28 low-income rental apartments by the Carroll Gardens Association
The project is being financed under a $2.2 million loan agreement with the City of New York and contributions from the Enterprise Foundation and the New York Equity Fund.


The Haitian Beat Thrives in Times Of Suffering
Within a day after its release last month to radio stations in Port-au-Prince, "Kalfou Dangere" ("Dangerous Crossroads"), the new single from Boukman Eksperyans, had burned a fast track across the airwaves and into streets shattered by coup, terrorism and economic embargo.
"Kalfou Dangere," the title track of Boukman's second album, to be released here in May, is a percussive assault on Haiti's "evildoers" that is steeped in the symbolism of voodoo and Haitian history.
The song soon headed northward via teledyol, the grapevine that is the Haitian community's equivalent of a news service.
Taped from radio broadcasts, then rebroadcast over shortwave and pirate radio stations in New York, "Kalfou Dangere," in only three days, became a hit from Port-au-Prince to Flatbush, Brooklyn.
It also became an anthem for supporters of the democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Terrorized by military dictatorship, strapped by embargo, Haiti would seem to be the last place one would expect to find bands making pop records.
But neither political nor economic suffering seems able to repress the surge of musical creativity that began to surface in Haiti six years ago, with the departure of Jean-Claude (Baby Doc) Duvalier.
According to Boukman Eksperyan's lead singer and composer, Theodore Beaubrun, nearly a dozen groups have released songs for this year's Haitian carnival season, which ended last Tuesday.


Male Mien
'Annie Hall' was eons ago.
Today, a stylish woman suits herself up with all the spiff and polish of a well-turned-out man, except the clothes have been designed to her measure.


Alice R. Toole, Law Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Dillon Toole of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alice Reilly Toole to Navy Lieut.
Sherman Baldwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry deForest Baldwin of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Toole, 26 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is a third-year law student at Fordham University.
Her father is a lawyer with Echlin Inc., a manufacturer of auto parts in Branford, Conn.
Her mother, Norine Toole, is a partner in the Painted Ladder, a gift import and sales concern in Scarsdale, N.Y.


C.I.A. Dug for Moles but Buried the Loyal
Three years ago the Central Intelligence Agency gave S. Peter Karlow a small bronze medal, a citation in a blue leatherette binder and a check for close to $500,000.
It was the agency's way of saying there had been a terrible mistake.
More than two decades earlier, the C.I.A. had falsely branded Mr.
Karlow as a suspected mole, a spy within the agency's ranks.
"I walked down the street and a flower pot fell off the roof and landed on me," Mr.
Karlow, who is now 71 years old and lives in Northern California, said in an interview.


A Cozy Bermuda Trio
FOR visitors it's like entering a fairy-tale world, a marzipan island of pastel houses, powder-pink beaches, golf courses as green as shamrocks and flowers and shrubs in exuberant profusion.
The pace is unhurried, the air fragrant, the sun generous.
True, the weather can be spotty and the coral reefs treacherous but, on the whole, Bermuda is a pleasing respite from the real world.
Less than two hours from New York, this 16-mile strip in the Atlantic Ocean, discovered by Juan de Bermudez, a Spaniard, but British since 1612, is still a time warp of gentility and manners.
This is not an "anything goes" vacation spot; certain standards are maintained and expected.
Perish the thought of bare feet and bikinis roaming at will.


'Average Joe' Left in the Dust
To the Sports Editor:
Many years ago when I was a young man and an avid sports fan baseball's best players were paid something like 10 to 15 times as much as the average Joe.
That differential seemed more or less reasonable.
Today the top players are getting 100 to 150 times as much as the average working stiff.
And that doesn't seem reasonable.
Outrageous and disgusting are more fitting descriptions.
DAVID A. BINZEN Tunbridge, Vt.


POSTINGS: Riverside Drive's Wall; Restoring by the Numbers
Storm-water runoff is something that doesn't love a wall.
And it has been playing havoc with the 110-year-old stone retaining wall that supports Riverside Drive from 98th to 120th Street, separating it from Riverside Park, some 30 feet below.
As a result, the Parks and Recreation Department is planning a $1.6 million repair and restoration project, beginning this summer.
The wall is made of schist, in pieces up to seven feet long.
It will be taken apart, numbered and reassembled.


Crocuses Poke Through to Herald Spring
WHEN the crocuses bloom, spring is here.
Gardeners know this in their hearts, even though the calendar may say otherwise.
There is something about this beguiling springtime flower that sets the emotions astir and reassures those who have been waiting through the long winter that the new season has arrived.
This kind of response is especially noteworthy when the crocus brave late winter snow and poke through the white blanket anyway.
The crocus foliage is stiff and grasslike with white stripes.
The flowers, with their six shiny petals, are often described as having the shape of a chalice or a vase.
Three or more crocus flowers are rewarding to see, but a mass display of hundreds of them in bloom is an inspiration for the poets.


On the Street; Why Can't a Woman Dress Like a Man?
When Madonna wants to go incognito, she puts on a mannish suit and a worn secondhand man's coat (upper left).
Other women have their own style when they borrow from men.
The mannish suit has long been a staple in their wardrobes, but now women are wearing coats actually made for men, as well as men's shirts, vests, ties and hats.
In the 19th century, George Sand created a sensation when she dressed like a man.
At the turn of the century, the Gibson Girl appropriated the starched white-collar shirt.
A hallmark of the 1920's was the boyish look.
And in the 30's and 40's, Marlene Dietrich and Greta Garbo wore men's clothes, bringing an androgynous sexiness to the look.


3 Ways to Cook Chicken in the Oven
ONE of the most reliable and simplest ways to prepare chicken is oven braising.
The well-seasoned succulent results make for a good family dinner yet also suit a dinner party.
While a basic principle applies to this type of dish, oven-braised chicken allows for infinite variation, making it adaptable to a variety of menus and cuisines.
The number of servings can also be extended, simply by doubling or even tripling the ingredients and using a large pan or a big casserole for the cooking.


Review/Dance; A Doug Elkins Potpourri
"Translucent Illustrations of Idiot People" was what Doug Elkins called the program that his Doug Elkins Dance Company presented on Wednesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Each of his offerings bore an imposing title.
But there was nothing solemn about the works themselves, which resembled patchwork quilts filled with bright bits of movements and taped snippets of music and speech.
Mr.
Elkins has stitched all these sights and sounds together artfully.
"The Stuff of Recoiling," a new work to compositions by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and David Byrne, begins with sculptural poses for the dancers.
Then simple clarity gives way to countless shakes, twists and wiggles.
No matter how complex the action becomes, chaos never results, and joyousness prevails.


VIETNAM'S EXODUS APPEARS TO HALT
The number of Vietnamese boat people coming to seek refuge here dropped to zero last month in what officials called an encouraging sign that the exodus that scattered nearly 675,000 Vietnamese throughout this region in a dozen years may finally be ending.
February was the first month in seven years that no Vietnamese arrived in Hong Kong, which had been virtually the last place in Asia where the authorities would not quickly return them to Vietnam.
Officials said they believe that people in Vietnam are at last beginning to understand that there is no longer much chance they can improve their lives by fleeing their country.


U.S. STRATEGY PLAN CALLS FOR INSURING NO RIVALS DEVELOP
In a broad new policy statement that is in its final drafting stage, the Defense Department asserts that America's political and military mission in the post-cold-war era will be to insure that no rival superpower is allowed to emerge in Western Europe, Asia or the territory of the former Soviet Union.
A 46-page document that has been circulating at the highest levels of the Pentagon for weeks, and which Defense Secretary Dick Cheney expects to release later this month, states that part of the American mission will be "convincing potential competitors that they need not aspire to a greater role or pursue a more aggressive posture to protect their legitimate interests."


No Cats and Dogs, but How About Fish?


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 22  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 305,000
346 West 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, 2 exposures, roof terrace; common charge $161, taxes $3,200 (Broker: Kingman Associates)  Columbia University Area 270,000
420 Riverside Drive (114th St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, renovated, kitchen, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $780, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  Sutton Place 158,500
60 Sutton Place South (53d St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 785-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 exposures, common garden; maintenance $871, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Penthouse Properties)  TriBeCa 232,000
95 Reade Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. co-op in loft building; dining area, eat-in kitchen, 11-ft. ceilings, maintenance $1,200, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  West Side 105,000
165 West End Avenue  650-sq.-ft. studio-co-op in postwar building; 24-hr. doorman, dressing area, c/a, river view; maintenance $600, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: David Gold Properties) BRONX  Kingsbridge 135,000
2703 Decatur Avenue  3-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in two units; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 25-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $950 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 680,000
4920 Arlington Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, English stone cottage; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, servant's quarters above 2-car garage, 1/3-acre irregular lot; taxes $8,000 (Broker: Shelley Scherman, Realtor)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 196,000
509 East 4th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes 'R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 440,000
213 Berkeley Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in other; 8- by 11-ft., 3-story extension, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,149 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  Manhattan Beach 330,000
137 Amhurst Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, stucco-sided house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens 400,000
57 Continental Avenue  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 30-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Whitestone 222,000
169-55 25th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick and aluminum-sided house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, carport, 37- by 123-ft. lot; taxes $1,050 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 181,500
433 Barlow Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached high-ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3-room hospitality suite in basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Richmondtown 240,000
267 Thomas Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, high-ranch; family room, c/a, hospitality suite on first floor; 1-car garage, in-ground pool, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Miss Richardson Marries D. J. Ryan
Cynthia Anne Richardson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Richardson of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Douglas Joseph Ryan, a son of Mrs.
Erwin Chark of Rye and Joseph Donal Ryan of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
David Uhl performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Ryan, 27 years old, is an advertising account executive with Gannett Suburban Newspapers in White Plains.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is a stockbroker with Wertheim, Schroder in New York.


A Season to Salute Rossini's 200th
IF Mozart was the big noise at last year's music festivals, Rossini will be the rather softer sound at this year's.
Everyone likes Rossini, whose birthday was 200 years ago -- Feb. 29, 1792, to be precise -- and although he was no Mozart, in terms of either musical quantity or quality, a large number of this year's festivals will be presenting Rossiniana of one sort or another.
Naturally, the annual Rossini festival in Pesaro, Italy, can claim pre-eminence.
So successful has it become that Pesaro veterans (the festival is only 13 years old) are already lamenting its loss of innocence and intimacy.
Rossini aside, the single festival with the biggest claim on this year's seeker after festive delights is Salzburg, and the single country is Austria.
That country has the Vienna Festival, as full of rich good things as ever, and the Styriarte Festival in the director Nikolaus Harnoncourt's native Graz.
At Salzburg, this summer marks the first Salzburg Festival programmed by Gerard Mortier, who over the last decade made the Theatre Royale de la Monnaie in Brussels into a forum for vanguard composition, dance and productions of opera and theater, and promises (threatens?) to do the same thing at this picturesque bastion of comfortable conservatism -- or so it has been for years under the suzerainty of the late Herbert von Karajan.


ABOUT CARS: Jumping on Language, Prices and Such; No Soliciting
Dear Sir,
Since 1937, my wife and I have consistently and loyally bought cars from the Big Three (and American Motors), all made in the good old U.S.A.


The Persistence Of Inequality
TWO NATIONS
Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal.
By Andrew Hacker. 257 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


The Americans Are Coming, on Behalf of the Kips Bay Club
The new Russian Mission to the United Nations is reaching out to win friends and influence among New Yorkers.
As a demonstration of the new order, the Russians will turn over their banquet hall to The Kips Bay Boys' and Girls' Club for its annual spring ball, with the theme of a spring night in St.
Petersburg.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
DINER IN THE HAMPTONS
IN historical Southampton, how old is historic?
For 26-year-old Alexis Stewart, anything from the 1950's is historic.
Ms.
Stewart, a daughter of Martha Stewart, the decorating and entertainment author, is trying to open a 50's-style diner.
She has named it the Delish, pronounced dee-LISH, as in delicious.


Grande Dame Fasts for Haitians and a Suffering City Responds
In this island of urban desperation, where people know firsthand about poverty and suffering, a deeply personal crusade is under way to help the refugees of another desperate place in the hemisphere, Haiti.
At the center of the movement is Katherine Dunham, an 82-year-old grande dame of modern dance, who has homes both here and in Haiti, is in her second month of fasting to protest the deportation of Haitian boat people to what she and others here fear is certain death in their homeland.


Anne S. Phelan, A Writer, Weds
Anne Susan Phelan, a playwright, and David Francis Eliet, a playwright and director, both in New York, were married yesterday at Grace Church in New York.
The Rev.
Brian A. Lathrop, an Episcopal priest, officiated and also administered Quaker vows.
The bride, 31 years old, writes for the Aboutface Theater in New York and is the development and marketing manager for the United States Institute for Theater Technology in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College and the Trinity Repertory Company Conservatory in Providence, R.I.
She is a daughter of Katharine and Harold A. Phelan of Cleveland.
Her father is a partner in the Cleveland law firm of McGinness, Painter &amp; McGinness.
Her mother is president of KPA Inc., a Cleveland public relations and advertising company.


Bridge
A quarter-century ago, two Texan bridge enthusiasts, one with money and the other with expertise, came up with an idea that was to change the face of the game both nationally and internationally.
They decided to create the world's first professional team, aiming to bring the world title back to the United States.
They chose the name "Dallas Aces," but this was soon contracted to "Aces," recalling the top-ranked American team of the 1930's.
The financier, providing business acumen, was Ira Corn Jr., chief executive of Michigan General Corporation, a conglomerate.
The player was Bob Wolff, already started on a great bridge career.
They invited five of the brightest young stars in the game to join them in Dallas to train as a team: Bob Hamman and Mike Lawrence from California, Bill Eisenberg from New York and Bob Goldman from Philadelphia.
Jim Jacoby was already in Dallas, long his family home.
His father, Oswald Jacoby, had been one of the original Aces a generation earlier.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
Your crossword puzzles have kept my marriage thriving for more than 25 years.
Here's how my husband and I do the puzzle: I start, using a red pen, filling in only the squares where I feel I'm correct.
Then he takes over, using a blue pen.
If we complete the puzzle, we celebrate with a split of Champagne.
LILY FLOM
Forest Hills, Queens


Flunking I.B.M.'s Top Management  To the Editor:   Jane Morriss (Letters, Feb. 16) is outraged at the International Business Machines Corporation's plan to cut 10 percent of its work force by assigning failing grades to 10 percent of the workers. But when reviewing I.B.M.'s performance last year, it really does seem reasonable for I.B.M. to reduce its force by 10 percent. Ms. Morriss seems to ignore the need for top performance by our workers if we are to maintain our pre-eminence in manufacturing. I.B.M. must become lean and mean to compete.


Seton Hall Creates A 3-Way Title
A banner on the wall is all that was really at stake.
The dramatic reversal of the St.
John's season, and the remarkable run the Redmen made through the month of February, had placed them in the position of being no worse than first in the Big East.
But March is powered by emotion in this business.
The looks on the faces of the Redmen, after a St.
John's rally failed to keep Seton Hall from pulling off a 78-71 victory at Madison Square Garden yesterday, said that sharing first place was unacceptable.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
As a longtime fan (more than 40 years and a proud member of the "Gotcha Club") of your crossword puzzles (all varieties), I thought your 50th anniversary edition was a slice of heaven.
I hope I'm around for the 100th anniversary edition.
ART CARLSON
Cranford, N.J.


Visions of Hell, Urban and Garden Varieties
I'm not sure if that's a super-highway cutting across the stage of the Circle in the Square Theater these days, dividing it neatly in half.
It could well be an airport runway.
In either case, having "Search and Destroy" unfold on a sleek stretch of macadam couldn't be more appropriate.
After all, Howard Korder's darkly compelling comedy is about getting somewhere in life and business, putting scruples behind you, taking off.
The set designer (and road builder) Chris Barreca has also provided just enough fragments of movable scenery -- a hotel registration desk, a restaurant booth, the front seat of an automobile -- to pin the play down to some real places.
But you're always aware of that rolling highway underneath, leading inexorably onward, if not necessarily upward.


RIDGEFIELD STUCK IN ZONING DISPUTE
Historical markers along Main Street here commemorate the Battle of Ridgefield, a 1777 standoff between rebellious colonists and their British foes that was the Revolutionary War's only land battle in Connecticut.
But a more recent battle of Ridgefield, a decadelong conflict between a pair of developers and the town's planning and zoning mandarins, may end up having even greater notoriety.


Dance in Review
Steve Gross
Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue (at Ninth Street) Thursday through Sunday
Everyone referred to in the text for Steve Gross's "Worthy" was called either Steve or "not-Steve." This made the solo, which Mr.
Gross performed on Friday night, seem something of a self-examination.
Yet those Steves (and "not-Steves") also became universal symbols of desire and insecurity.


Atcor Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Find/SVP Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Theater; The Journalist Who Sees A Novelist in the Mirror
In Roger Rosenblatt's "And," a journalist's fear that a magazine article might be rejected by unknowing editors is treated with the angst that might be reserved for the tragedy of an artist in extremis.
The unnamed writer in this case is not a Kafka or a Dostoyevsky, but someone very much like Mr.
Rosenblatt, a former essayist for Time magazine, a writer of think pieces and a relentless analyst of his work process and of any paradox that crosses his path.
The last time that Mr.
Rosenblatt was in residence at the American Place Theater, he spoke his own lines in a witty stand-up monologue entitled "Free Speech in America." Now he has returned in the guise of a playwright, or monodramatist, with Ron Silver as his surrogate.
Mr.
Silver is a most dramatic and feverishly comic messenger.
His virtuosity almost compensates for the work's flaws, but "And" is less a play than an ampersand.
As an artistic entity, it is considerably less than "Free Speech in America."


GWIL Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Atco Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Opera; Quirky Traits in Met's 'Figaro'
A great performance of "Le Nozze di Figaro" requires as much stagecraft as sound craft.
There is almost no way to separate the two qualities.
Who is overhearing what and when?
Who is fooling whom and why?
In the final act, what does Figaro know and when does he know it?
Answers to these questions will have a lot to do with the impact of the second-act finale or what effect the melodic caresses of "Pace, pace" have as Susanna and Figaro finally reconcile, stripped of all role playing.
So I was torn on Friday night, watching this season's first presentation of the work at the Metropolitan Opera.
This was a superior musical performance.
James Levine's conducting was lithe, exuberant, precise, rarely veering into the strenuous.
And onstage was a cast that was both an exceptional ensemble and an unusual assemblage of stars.
The results were even more effective than on the new Deutsche Grammophon recording with Mr.
Levine and many members of the same cast.


Cobi Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Spirit of Newburgh Past Haunts Political Present
IF Michael Harrington was a hero of American social welfare advocates in the 1960's, Joseph McDowell Mitchell was their nemesis.
When Mr.
Mitchell was driven into political oblivion from his job as City Manager of Newburgh, N.Y., leaders of the welfare-rights movement heaved a collective sigh of relief.
Fully 30 years later, though, he haunts the national welfare debate that he briefly dominated.
Semiretired in northeast Florida, he may be smugly wondering whether revisionists will some day conclude that if he was a racist, a reactionary and a rabble-rouser he was also ahead of his time.


The Talk of Hollywood; Tracking A Tailspin, Script To Screen
Not since such big-budget movie disasters as "The Bonfire of the Vanities" and "Hudson Hawk" has a film so shaken its studio, its creators and the town as "Radio Flyer."
The drama, dealing with the fantasies of two boys seeking to escape an abusive stepfather, opened two weeks ago to numerous negative, even angry, reviews, and it has collapsed at the box office.
At this point, Columbia Pictures, which produced it, has written off virtually the project's entire cost of $40 million to $45 million, and the movie's creators and producers, who include some of the biggest names in Hollywood, refuse to discuss a film that has turned into the major embarrassment of their careers.
"There's nowhere to hide on this movie, and you just want it to go away," said one prominent movie executive who, like the others quoted in this article, would speak only on condition of anonymity.
In Hollywood, success has many fathers, but a failure like "Radio Flyer" is an orphan and no one wants to speak about it on the record.


Pharmacy Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


PSI Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At Least 87 Killed in Thai Ferry Accident
At least 87 people were killed yesterday when a ferry jammed with Buddhist pilgrims was sliced in two before dawn in a collision in the Gulf of Thailand with a small oil tanker, the Thai marine police said.
A woman in Siracha, Thailand, wept over the coffin of a relative who died in the accident.
Police spokesmen said the ferry captain had been trying to cut across the path of the tanker when the collision happened. (Associated Press)


Cognitronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dorset Exploration reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Falconbridge Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Reason for Staten Island to Secede?
Staten Island, which, as everybody knows, got its name when an early visitor to New York Harbor leaned over the rail and asked "Is t'at an island?" is wrestling with a new nuance of nomenclature.
It seems that a promoter has proposed holding a Formula One race on Staten Island in 1993, the same year that the first Indy-car race will be held in lower Manhattan.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
ARB Group Inc., 2.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Ameriserv Food Co.., 5.1 million shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
Applebee's International Inc., 2.8 million shares.  Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
Applied Laser, 1.2 million units (two class A shares, two class A warrants, and one class B warrant) D. H. Blair &amp; Co.
Aquarion Co., one million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Autozone Inc., 4,725,000 shares. Lehman Brothers.
Back Bay Restaurant Group, 1.6 million shares. Tucker, Anthony Inc.
Barnett Banks, 3.3 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Biosys Inc., 2.3 million shares. Kemper Securities.
Carolina First Corp., 1.5 million shares. Paine Webber.
Cellcor Inc., two million shares. Furman Selz Mager Dietz &amp; Birney.
Celox Corp., 1.5 million shares. Mathews, Holmquist &amp; Associates.
Chattem Inc., one million shares. Wheat First Securites.
Criticare Systems Inc., two million shares. Dain Bosworth.
Damark International Inc., 2.7 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Dauphin Deposit Corp., 350,000 shares. Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Day Runner Inc., 1.4 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Duff &amp; Phelps Corp., 3.5 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Ezcorp, 1.5 million class A non-voting shares. Kidder Peabody &amp; Co.
Forschner Group, 1.2 million shares. Allen &amp; Co.
Glacier Water Services, two million shares. Sutro.
Greentree Acceptance Inc., three million shares.  Merrill Lynch.
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., five million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Kauffman &amp; Broad Home Corp., 7.5 million shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Kellwood Co., 1.5 million shares. First Boston.
Liposome Co., three million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Lone Star Steakhouse and Saloon Inc., 1.15 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Merisel Inc., 4.85 million shares. Robinson-Humphrey.
Network General Corp., 2.2 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Newplan Realty Trust, three million shares of beneficial interest. Merrill Lynch.
Sciclone Pharmaceuticals Inc., 2.6 million shares and 2.6 million warrants.
Josephthal &amp; Co.
Sierra On-Line Inc., 1.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Singer N.V., seven million shares, with 5.25 million to be offered in U.S. by Merrill Lynch and the remainder offered through Merrill Lynch International.
Standard Pacific Corp., three million shares. Prudential Securities.
United Retail Group, 4.4 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
U.S. Homecare Corp., 1.5 million shares. Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
Valassis Communications Inc., 22.1 million shares. Salomon Brothers.
Williams Cos., 3.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.  (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


Daleco Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Electronic Tele-Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data Transmission Network reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wiland Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Datum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; HARKIN ENDS QUEST AS CAMPAIGN RISES TO NEW INTENSITY
The Democratic field will narrow to three on Monday with the withdrawal of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, signaling a new intensity of the Presidential race as it moves through the battlegrounds of the South and on to the industrial Midwest.
Mr.
Harkin, who campaigned as a "real Democrat" and a tough voice for traditional liberalism, told supporters today that he intended to withdraw, said senior Democrats who spoke on condition that they not be identified.
The decision will trigger a scramble for Mr.
Harkin's backing among the ranks of organized labor.
And it is emblematic of the grim winnowing now under way in the Democratic field, coming only three days after the withdrawal of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.


Sports of The Times; Ryan, Paige and Rules For Keeping Young
THE only time Nolan Ryan met Satchel Paige was in the mid-1970's in Los Angeles, and the old pitcher -- now the late old pitcher -- gave the younger man a piece of advice.
"One of the best pitches is the bow-tie pitch," Paige said.
Ryan looked at Paige, then about 70 years old.
Ryan was close to 30 and already an experienced big league pitcher, but he was puzzled.
"What's a bow-tie pitch, Satch?" he asked.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY MAYOR DINKINS ADMITTED TO HOSPITAL
Looking under the weather, Mayor Dinkins checked into the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center early with an apparent touch of the flu, and his personal physician later said he was resting comfortably and would be kept overnight as a precaution.
The 64-year-old Mayor had been feeling ill for several days, his aides said.
His doctor said that Mr.
Dinkins had had a flu shot several months ago but may not have been protected against this particular strain.
B3.
A WEEKEND OF PRAYERS FOR THE REBBE
Lubavitch Hasidim sang Hebrew prayers of supplication without pause over the weekend as their leader, known as the Rebbe, stayed in his private quarters in Brooklyn recuperating from a stroke he suffered one week ago.
Lubavitch leaders confirmed that the stroke was more serious than earlier reported.
B2.
A DAY FOR A PERFECT SOUND BITE
Three candidates for the United States Senate competed to find the perfect backdrop for news conferences.
Senator D'Amato stood in front of a midtown Manhattan unemployment office that was closed for the day.
One of his Democratic challengers, Elizabeth Holtzman, held her news conference outside a Federal office building in lower Manhattan that was also closed for the weekend.
Another opponent, the Rev.
Al Sharpton, met with Cardinal O'Connor at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
B3.
WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE WALKWAY OPENS
The walkway on the Williamsburg Bridge reopened for the first time since it was closed for repairs last summer, and a 1954 Schwinn Black Phantom was the first across its new wooden planks.
The opening is also a small triumph for three groups -- frequently at odds -- in Williamsburg.
The groups -- Hispanic residents, a Hasidic community and a newer population of young artists -- often find themselves in disputes over housing, police protection and race.
Williamsburg Bridge Journal, B3.
Anti-welfare crusade from 1962 has become a reality today.
Metro Matters, B2.
REGION THE EMPIRE BUILT ON ILLUSION
In a burst of real-estate speculation in the heady 1980's, Jonathan Googel, Benjamin Sisti and Frank Shuch dazzled Connecticut with their wealth, their flamboyance and their deals.
The dealing stopped in September 1990, when banks forced their Colonial Realty Company into bankruptcy.
The company's demise proved to be not the end of an economic era, but the end of an illusion.
Creditors and lawyers representing investors say Colonial was not merely one of the decade's largest investment debacles, but one of its largest frauds.
A1.
RICH SCHOOLS, POOR SCHOOLS
Many communities in Connecticut lack the tax that their richer neighbors have to support public schools.
State education leaders wrung their hands over the disparities for years, but little changed.
Now, prompted by fiscal necessity rather than educational philosophy, Governor Weicker Jr. has proposed a budget that would begin leveling that system, provoking an intense debate over education financing.
B5.
LOOKING FOR A MAYOR -- OR NOT
The search by the eight members of the City Council of Jersey City for someone to serve as mayor until a special election in November appears to have run out of time, but appearances can be deceiving where politics is concerned.
After the mayor's office became vacant Feb. 7 following Mayor McCann's conviction on Federal fraud charges, the Council had 30 days to name an interim mayor.
Today is the deadline, and while the Council has a meeting tonight, the agenda makes no mention of filling the mayor's seat.
B5.
A CROP OF OUTRAGE IN NEW JERSEY
Farmers in New Jersey are objecting to the state's efforts to manage growth.
New Jersey's pioneering state land-use plan, which is intended to direct growth to already-developed areas, has won over nearly all of the state's fractious business groups except the farm community.
As now written, the plan frowns on any development in farm-designated areas that is not directly related to agriculture.
Farmers insist the future of farming in the Garden State is at stake.
B5.
The Traffic Map B8  Chronicle B8


CHRONICLE
The classical scholar BERNARD M. W. KNOX was named yesterday as the 1992 Jefferson Lecturer in the Humanities.
Mr.
Knox, 77, a native of England who is an American citizen, is the 21st person to receive the honor for distinguished intellectual achievement, given annually by the National Endowment for the Humanities.
He will give the lecture on May 6 in Washington.


Apogee Robotics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saudi Rulers Are Confronting Challenge by Islamic Radicals
In specialized Islamic cassette shops across this country, a two-hour tape that rails against the Saudi Government has become the latest hit of the subversive Islamic materials making the rounds in Saudi Arabia.
"Royal family princes are not owed allegiance except if they follow the rules of Islam," the unidentified speaker declares, opening the tape's assault on the Saudi rulers.
The tape goes on to attack the senior religious leaders allied with the monarchy; the United States, which is described as an atheist enemy of Islam, and most of all the growing number of middle- and upper-class Saudis who have turned away from religion and toward a secular, Western-oriented way of life. 'The Supergun' Is the Title
The recorded message, called "The Supergun," is perhaps the sharpest illustration of a yearlong confrontation with an increasingly outspoken group of Muslim clergymen who have challenged the ruling establishment of Saudi Arabia.


Accounts
*
Forte Hotels, the American subsidiary of Forte P.L.C., London, to Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector, New York, for its American advertising account, previously handled by Eurocom, London.
Billings were $1 million to start. *
The Dial Corp., Phoenix, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, for Brillo soap pads.
The assignment consolidates all Dial household products at the agency, which also handles Dial's Breck hair care line.
Billings on the account, previously at Bozell Southwest, Dallas, were not disclosed; Brillo had no measured advertising activity last year, according to the Leading National Advertisers tracking service.


Diagnostic Sciences reports earnings for Year to Nov 31


Law Firm Will Pay A $41 Million Fine In Savings Lawsuit
A leading New York law firm today agreed to pay $41 million to settle Government accusations that it had improperly withheld damaging information about its client, a large savings association whose failure has epitomized the savings and loan industry's disaster.
Shortly before settling the $275 million lawsuit that the Government filed six days ago, lawyers at the firm, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, insisted again that they did nothing improper in representing Charles H. Keating Jr. and his Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif.


Chang Turns Match Into a Short Subject
Michael Chang and Andrei Chesnokov don't know what it means to overdose on deuce: Left to their own devices, they play tennis like a pair of battering rams, with horns locked and not a white flag in sight.
Five-set marathons intrigue them, attrition is a tactic they value over aggression, and the first thing that comes to mind when each envisions himself locked in combat with the other is fatigue cramps.
Both expected their Newsweek Champions Cup final today to turn into a grueling, multiset marathon, but what materialized instead for Chang was a 6-3, 6-4, 7-5 victory, his second tournament title this year, which put him back in the top 10 for the first time in nearly a year.


Investors Say Connecticut Empire Is Fraud
In a burst of real-estate speculation in the heady 1980's, Jonathan Googel, Benjamin Sisti and Frank Shuch dazzled Connecticut with their wealth, their flamboyance and their deals.
As many as 6,000 people invested $350 million in partnerships of their Colonial Realty Company that bought shopping centers, apartment complexes and office buildings.
The dealing stopped in September 1990, when banks forced Colonial into bankruptcy.
The company's demise proved to be not the end of an economic era, but the end of an illusion.
Rather than a legitimate business, creditors and lawyers representing investors say, Colonial had been an enormous open checkbook for the three partners.
They say it was not merely one of the decade's largest investment debacles, but one of its largest frauds.


Roger M. Herriott, 83, Expert in Viral Disease
Roger M. Herriott, an educator and scientist who advanced the understanding of viral diseases, died March 2 at his home in Baltimore.
He was 83 years old.
Dr. Herriott died of cancer, his family said.


Mexico Grew 3.6% in 1991
The Mexican economy expanded at a rate of 3.6 percent in real terms in 1991, the Finance Ministry has reported.
The figure fell short of the Government's forecast of 4 percent growth.
The Finance Ministry said the preliminary results were affected in part by a revision in the 1990 figure to 4.4 percent growth from 3.9 percent.


With Seeds of Statehood Slow to Flower, Ukraine Blames Russia's Shadow
Proclaiming a state is the easy part.
The tricky part, Ukraine is learning, is building one.
One hundred days into independence, the nation is deeply divided over what to do next.
Economic reforms are stalled.
Friction with Russia is growing.
The ersatz national currency has dropped in value from 10 rubles to 1 coupon to parity with the ruble as early illusions about the powers of an independent currency have waned.


Golden Corral Realty Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Gun Culture: Fun as Well as Life and Death
It is sunny and in the low 60's on a winter's Friday afternoon.
Bruce W. Nelson, a leathersmith who specializes in gun belts and holsters, and his wife, Sandra S. Froman, a lawyer, have invited friends to their home in the cactus-studded foothills of the Catalina Mountains for some pistol shooting.
Starting with .22 revolvers, moving on to .45-caliber and 9-millimeter semiautomatics, they shoot soda and beer cans, hitting them low so they pop into the branches of a paloverde tree.


The Other Hamptons: Jobs and Food Lag
At the First Presbyterian Church, a squat white frame structure built by prosperous whalers in the 1840's, hungry people began lining up along a dark staircase even before a volunteer unlocked the door to a small room where the emergency food was stored.
The shelves were almost bare.
Thomas Haskins was one of the first on line.
Thirty-five years ago in South Carolina, he boarded a bus of migrant farm workers to pick potatoes on Long Island, and stayed.
Now he earns $7.50 an hour at a riding stable, in season, and goes hungry in the winter as he struggles to survive on an unemployment check of $166 every two weeks.


Energy Conversion Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Group Makes Bid for Land In Brooklyn
With about 2,000 supporters packed into a Brooklyn church, the coalition of religious groups and community advocates that brought affordable housing to deteriorating sections of Brownsville and East New York began a campaign yesterday to obtain more city land in Brooklyn to build 2,000 more homes.
The rally, at the St.
Paul Community Baptist Church in East New York, just blocks away from the troubled Thomas Jefferson High School, started a crusade that pits the coalition, East Brooklyn Congregations, against the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins much as the politically active, largely minority group had once battled former Mayor Edward I. Koch.
Land Designated in 1989
In 1989 the Board of Estimate designated the Starrett Housing Corporation to develop Spring Creek, the empty landfill site that the coalition is seeking.
Starrett is developer of the Starrett City housing complex to the east of the Spring Creek site.
The 1989 agreement was reaffirmed by the Dinkins administration when it came into office, city officials said.


Leslie's Poolmart reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastco Industries Safety reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Esterline Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Bull &amp; Bear Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thatcher's Miracle: Victim of Its Own Excess
When the Conservatives led by Margaret Thatcher won a landslide victory five years ago, Britain was booming, and Britons believed that their economy, which had long suffered from anemic growth, high inflation and militant unions, had been transformed.
Now, with Britain slogging through what is by some measures its longest recession since World War II, the so-called Thatcher miracle is looking a lot less miraculous.


Ms. Shapiro Has Wedding
Elizabeth Nan Shapiro, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Shapiro of Great Neck Estates, L.I., and Eustatia Island, British Virgin Islands, was married yesterday to Robert Michael Factor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Factor of Huntington Beach, Calif.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson officated at the couple's New York home.
Ms.
Shapiro, 40 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College and has a master's degree in public health from Yale University.
She is a product safety epidemiologist at Sterling Winthrop Inc., a New York pharmaceuticals manufacturer.
Her father is a retired surgeon.


Coal Industry Contests Law on Restoring Lands
A 15-year-old law intended to restore land scarred by strip mining is facing a stiff legal challenge this month from the nation's $22-billion-a-year coal industry.
To the dismay of environmental groups and a Congressional committee, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. is siding with coal companies in a case that could undermine the ability of states and the Federal Government to enforce the law.


Kentucky Central Life Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finding Hemingway's 'Lost' Articles
He covered economic summit conferences, jailbreaks, the sacrifices of a single mother for her three small children, the death of oak trees in High Park, the decline of Jack Dempsey.
In three years at The Toronto Star his byline was Ernest M. Hemingway, although not all the hundreds of articles that he wrote for Canada's biggest-circulation newspaper carried his signature, or even were published.


Gateway Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Essay; Whine, Women, Tsong
Let us now phase out famous myths.
Myth 1.
President Bush's popularity will rebound as economic growth resumes this summer.


Autrex reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Calm Makes Comeback In Colleges
New Hampshire defeated Northeastern, 4-2, yesterday to restore some order to tournament hockey after two of the nation's top teams, Boston University and Harvard, were eliminated on Saturday night.
The victory for New Hampshire, which finished second in regular-season play and thus was seeded second, qualified the team for Hockey East's final-four tournament at Boston Garden on Thursday and Saturday.


Groupe Val Royal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Democratic and Republican Women Take 2 Paths Toward Abortion Rights
Seeking an election-year showdown on abortion rights, Democrats and Republicans in Congress have begun separate initiatives intended to preserve a woman's right to an abortion.
Republican women in the House and Senate are among the sponsors of a new group formed to raise money for female Republican candidates who support abortion rights.


Large Man in the Land of Lithe Bodies
In last week's United States Olympic swimming trials in Indianapolis, the men and women seemed to have been stamped from machines.
Their shoulders were broad, their waists negligible and their hips all but missing.
Except for WILLIAM CAMPBELL .
He calls himself the CHARLES BARKLEY of swimming, a big, round mound.
University of Nebraska teammates call him Fridge.
One gave him his own ZIP code.
He says opponents have nudged one another and said, "Look at this fat tub of guts."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the intensifying debate between Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas in the Democratic Presidential primaries misattributed a quotation in some copies.
It was Mr.
Clinton's deputy campaign manager, George Stephanopoulos, who said of Mr.
Tsongas: "The great anti-politician is pulling out the oldest political tricks in the book. Whine about being attacked while you're leveling them against your opponent."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Wooing Florida Elderly: For You, Maybe I'll Vote
Up one stretch of Collins Avenue and down the other, the political drums are beating night and day here in the heart of condo country, flashing the latest take on the Democratic Presidential candidates from high-rise to high-rise to high-rise.
With just two days until the primary election, here one minute is former Senator Paul E. Tsongas at a condominium rally, here the next is Gov.
Bill Clinton at a synagogue, both of them come again and again to pledge their commitment to Social Security and Israel in this, the bastion of the Jewish retiree.


Begin Dies at 78; Achieved Peace With Egyptians
Former Prime Minister Menachem Begin, a leader of the revolt that created the state of Israel and later the country's only leader to sign a peace treaty with an Arab neighbor, died early today in a Tel Aviv hospital.
Mr.
Begin, who was 78 years old and in rapidly deteriorating health, had been taken to Ichilov Hospital a week ago after suffering a heart attack.


Yankees' First Bragging Rites of Spring
Today, it was simply baseball.
The Yankees, the Mets, Florida sunshine, a sellout at Fort Lauderdale Stadium.
Willie Randolph remembered the lazy afternoons he used to spend here.
Gene Michael talked about the importance of New York's two teams playing each other in the spring.
And for one day at least, no one mentioned Pascual Perez or Darryl Strawberry or controversies of any sort.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today, depressed by political uncertainty after the ruling Liberal Democratic Party lost a parlimentary election in a local stronghold.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished at 20,797.68, down 195.31 points, or less than 1 percent.
At midday, the index fell 172.97 points.
The losses extended into the afternoon, with the Nikkei falling as much as 293.72 points in sluggish trading before retreating.
The Liberal Democrats' close loss is expected to increase criticism of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 128.57 points.


Geer, DuBois Hires a Chief In Time for Jaguar's Review
GEER, DuBOIS INC. has hired a president and chief executive, and not a moment too soon.
The agency's second-largest client, Jaguar Cars Inc., has announced a review of its account.
Joining Geer, DuBois is Stephen G. Bowen Jr., who had been president of J. Walter Thompson U.S.A. until April of last year, when the agency said he had resigned "because his career objectives are not in accord with the current opportunities here." Translation: his departure followed a political tussle.


Datakey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westmin Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Stewart Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Editorial Notebook; The Beauty of the Flat Tax
Jerry Brown's upset victory in the Colorado primary has forced his opponents to pay attention to his campaign proposals, even those that sound oddball.
Take the tax plan he extols in every debate: Scrap all Federal taxes and replace them with a 13 percent "flat tax" on each taxpayer's personal and corporate income.
Mr.
Brown is able to set such a low rate because he would eliminate nearly every deduction and exemption.
Families would be allowed to deduct only mortgage interest, rent and charitable contributions.
Mr.
Brown says his plan would cure nearly every national ailment.
Because Congress would be taken out of the business of dishing out tax breaks, the political choke hold wielded by most powerful special interests would be broken.
And because the marginal tax rates would be low, investment should spurt -- bringing rapid rises in productivity and wages.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury this week plans to hold only its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, which is scheduled for today.
Late in the day on Friday, three-month bills traded at 4.02 percent and six-month bills at 4.12 percent.


Curragh Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Private Brands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Isolated Washington Neighborhood Keeps Wary Eye on Its New Subway
For Anacostia, a neighborhood separated from the rest of the nation's capital by the river that bears its name, the recent opening of its first subway stop could mean the end of decades of isolation.
But many residents worry that the long-awaited arrival of the Metro's Green Line could engender a rush of gentrification in a neighborhood that has seen its turn-of-the-century grace diminish over the years, supplanted by drugs and crime.


NO ORDERS ISSUED TO STOP ARMS SHIP
A North Korean freighter believed to be carrying Scud missiles to Iran and Syria is still well outside the area where American warships are prepared to intercept the vessel, and any confrontation over the shipment is not likely to occur for days, Administration officials said today.
The officials, who insisted on anonymity, said the United States is prepared to board the ship as an intimidating gesture and a show of strength that Washington hopes will register its strong objections to any delivery of Scud missiles.


Digital Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Manhattan Stops Iona To Advance to Title Game
Despite the absence of starting center Jamal Marshall and five stitches in the forehead of his replacement, David Bernsley, Manhattan still managed to hang on and defeat Iona tonight, 79-78, in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference semifinal contest before 9,367 spectators at Knickerbocker Arena.
The Jaspers, who had five players in double figures and were led by Keith Bullock's 15 points, will play La Salle Monday night in the championship game of the tournament.
La Salle earned the right to compete for the title by defeating Siena, 84-71, in the conference's other semifinal game today.


David Stone Martin, 78, an Artist Who Specialized in Jazz Albums
David Stone Martin, a prolific illustrator who drew more than 400 album covers and created covers for Time magazine and many other works, died on Friday at the Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in New London.
He died of pneumonia, family members said.


Dial REIT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quedlinburg Treasures Are on View in Dallas
The Quedlinburg treasures went on display at the Dallas Museum of Art this weekend as part of an out-of-court settlement between the Government of Germany and the heirs of the American Army lieutenant who stole the treasures in the closing days of World War II.
From all appearances it might have been just another international loan show.
One visitor, A. T. Muller of St.
Louis, said: "I'm surprised they don't come out and say they were stolen. Maybe it's morbid curiosity, but that's a large part of why we came to see them." He was among nearly 1,500 to attend the first weekend of the show.


Dance in Review
Cornfield Dance
Merce Cunningham Studio
Ellen Cornfield's choreography was always lucidly phrased in the program that Cornfield Dance presented on Thursday night.
Unfortunately, it was insufficiently varied.


Dinkins Hospitalized With Touch of Flu
Looking under the weather, Mayor David N. Dinkins checked into the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center early yesterday with an apparent touch of the flu, and his personal physician later said he was resting comfortably and would be kept overnight as a precaution.
The 64-year-old Mayor, who had been feeling ill for several days and had perspired heavily while performing at an annual political spoof and attending parties at a midtown hotel Saturday night, went to bed at Gracie Mansion about 2 A.M. and awoke two hours later with a fever and severe chills, mayoral aides said.


Florida Public Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance in Review
Movement Research
Judson Church
Extroverted tomfoolery and melancholy dreaming were the order of the night when Movement Research presented Scott Heron and DD Dorvillier on Monday.
"Lecture: The Dance of Positions, Two People" was at its best a showcase for Mr.
Heron's angelic lunacy.
Looking often like a stick-figure as he moved through those positions, long thin limbs prodding crookedly, Mr.
Heron first appeared as a solemn high priest of sorts, moving gingerly onto the stage in a towering headdress of plastic-bagged balloons.
By the end he was distinctly human, crossing and recrossing the floor in an odd, knotty little duet with Kathy Danger.


Coffins Plundered At Black Cemetery
Apparently unmindful that they were plundering the coffins of slaves and desperately poor freemen, grave robbers invaded New York City's colonial-era black cemetery in lower Manhattan sometime Friday night or Saturday morning, the Federal official in charge of the site said.
Their yield: a number of teeth. But several skulls were damaged.


Review/Music; From the Endellion Quartet, A Relaxed, Mellow Manner
To a critic whose experience of quartet-playing has been dominated of late by crack, high-tension ensembles like the Juilliard, Tokyo and Emerson String Quartets, the Endellion's softer-edged manner on Wednesday evening at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater seemed at first a fascinating change.
These London-based players -- Andrew Watkinson and Ralph De Souza, violinists; Garfield Jackson, violist, and David Waterman, cellist -- produced a mellower, more salonish overall sonority, inviting rather than compelling, and generally well suited to their program of Haydn, Mozart and middle-period Beethoven.
Where a certain rigor was needed, as in the fugal finale of Beethoven's C-major "Razumovsky" Quartet (Op. 59, No. 3), the Endellion rose strongly to the challenge, with Mr.
Jackson setting the standard.
And on the whole, ensemble remained taut, most gratifyingly in the instrumental relays of the Beethoven's Minuet, executed seamlessly.


Fernandez Is Bent Out Of Shape
Before it even began today, Sid Fernandez's first spring training start for the Mets was surrounded by the suspicion that it might rate as a considerable anticlimax.
Fernandez had, after all, already made his greatest appearance of any spring on an anonymous practice mound more than three weeks ago.
Fernandez had shown up minus 40 pounds, reporting for 1992 demonstrably more fit than fat, and seemingly more at ease than at odds with himself.


Foreign Affairs; They're Kidding
The Pentagon has come up with a new idea for American security policy in the post-cold-war era.
It is to make the U.S. into the world's only policeman -- in fact but not in name, not everywhere but almost everywhere.
No kidding.
"While the U.S. cannot become the world's 'policeman' by assuming responsibility for righting every wrong," Pentagon planners state, "we will retain the pre-eminent responsibility for addressing selectively those wrongs which threaten not only our interests, but those of our allies or friends, or which could seriously unsettle international relations." This latest secret brainstorm of military planners and their civilian chiefs can be found in yesterday's New York Times.


Bridal Magazines Find Cupid Is Recession-Proof
After years in which cohabitation seemed more compelling than commitment, wedding bells are again ringing throughout the land.
And so are cash registers in bridal markets and at bridal magazines.
For most magazine publishers, 1991 was the year they would rather forget, as advertising fell sharply.
Bridal publications, however, held their own or better, and they report that so far 1992 looks even stronger.


Fordham Reaches Final With Homespun Victory
The team wearing the home whites won another game at Lehigh's Stabler Arena tonight.
This time, however, Fordham was wearing the home colors by virtue of being seeded No. 1 in the second annual Patriot League tournament, and the Rams derailed the Engineers, 96-84.
Fordham (17-12) will be wearing home whites again Tuesday night in the championship game against second-seeded Bucknell (21-8).
The Bison eliminated Holy Cross, 86-77, in the first semifinal game tonight.
The winner of the tournament receives an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
The Rams' last appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament was in 1971.


Long-Sought Indoor Title for Manhattan
Manhattan College, which had not won an IC4-A indoor track championship since 1973, finally did it today.
The Jaspers won an intense five-way team race when David Frazier added a second place in the triple jump to his long jump victory Saturday, and after favored George Mason dropped the baton in the final running event, the 1,600-meter relay.


Did Cancer Battle Shape Tsongas's Character?
To the Editor:
"The Candidate's Cancer" (editorial, Feb. 23) attempts to defuse Paul Tsongas's medical history as a political issue, but it doesn't go far enough.
In the view of this undecided Democrat, Mr.
Tsongas's battle with cancer does more than simply not disqualify him from the Presidential race; it actually distinguishes him as a candidate worth a closer look.
Paul Tsongas was forced in his 40's to confront his own mortality, to find courage and the will to fight in the face of understandable terror.
Surely, if he is a thoughtful man, he has emerged from those experiences with some of the insights and sense of priorities that make a wise leader.


Budget Cuts May Dim 'Lighthouse Districts'
Education officials call them the "lighthouse districts": communities like West Hartford, Greenwich and Westport that have the money and commitment to make their public schools beacons of innovation and high standards.
But left in the shadows, often next door, are other schools, mostly in the cities, that lack the tax base to even contemplate the grand ambitions of their richer neighbors.


For Brooklyn Neighborhood, at Long Last, the Way Is Clear
THE first bike over the Williamsburg Bridge's reopened walkway was a beauty: a 1954 Schwinn Black Phantom, big and bulky with whitewall tires.
Its owner, Andy Cohen, 26 years old, had waited for that ride since last June, when the decrepit walkway was determined a danger, then abruptly closed.
"It's a pleasure," Mr.
Cohen said yesterday, after gliding across the refurbished walkway, 1.3 miles long and 150 feet above the East River.
"The best part is going across and seeing all the cars backed up."


Executive Telecard reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Berkshire Hathaway reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Kasler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Base Ten Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Lifetime reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ecogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marianne Stein Has Wedding
Marianne Stein, a daughter of Gerald M. Stein of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Diane Stein, was married yesterday to Michael David Magnotta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Magnotta of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk performed the ceremony at the Westchester Country Club in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Magnotta, 23 years old, graduated from Boston University.
Her father is president of Iron Gate Products, a specialty food distributor in New York.
She is a granddaughter of Jerry Berns, who was an owner and is a founding partner of the "21" Club in New York.


Market Place; Companies Find Rewards In Hiring G.E. Executives
So many companies have been rejuvenated by the arrival of a new chief executive drawn from the management of the General Electric Company that many investors feel as if they have hit a jackpot when their companies announce such recruiting coups.
Companies that hire G.E. executives usually get managers who have experience running businesses that would be among the nation's largest companies if they were independent.
Most have also been through G.E.'s widely admired management training courses and have absorbed G.E.'s global perspective.


A Writer Extols His Boyhood Hero
For someone who has written a baseball book aimed at fifth- to eighth-grade fans, HOWIE REISER seems curiously cavalier about raising unrealistic expectations in impressionable young minds.
Yet in his book, "Jackie Robinson: Baseball Pioneer" (Franklin Watts), Reiser insists on telling how it was between youngsters and their idols in the old days, the 1950's, when Reiser was growing up on the Lower East Side, enthralled by the Dodgers and Robinson.


Wolverine World Wide Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 28


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Reuters Rates Upset British Clients
The Reuters news agency has angered some of its most important British clients by sharply increasing the rates it charges some publications at a time when they are struggling to get through a severe recession.
Faced with rates that have more than doubled, The Daily Telegraph, the largest of the broadsheet British dailies, has dropped the Reuters World Report, which carries mostly foreign news.
Instead, it will rely on Agence France-Presse and The Associated Press.


A Winter Without Its Brrr
In the 97 years the Federal Government has been keeping records, never has a winter been so warm, the National Climatic Data Center says.
Preliminary figures for the 48 contiguous states show the average temperature for December, January and February at 36.87 degrees Fahrenheit, said Richard Heim, a meteorologist at the center in Asheville, N.C.
That surpassed the record set in 1953-54, when the nation averaged 36 degrees.
At third was the winter of 1933-34 at 35.97.


Stagnation Seen Globally
An upswing in the global economy is not in sight in the next 6 to 12 months, the Ifo economic research institute said today in issuing results of a poll of 500 economists in 60 countries.
It said Japan would see an especially noticeable cooling of growth.
The experts expect a further rise in Japan's trade surplus as exports increase and imports fall during the economic slowdown.


Quotation of the Day
"I feel every household should have a gun. If somebody breaks in, you're more likely to deter them. But I do kind of feel that if you have a gun in the house you should have a soft-point bullet so it won't go through your house into your neighbor's." -- JAMES JENNINGS, a gun enthusiast in Tucson.  [ A10:4. ]


Frederick McNally, 75, Rand McNally Official
Frederick G. McNally, a former vice president of the Rand McNally map publishing company, died Friday at his home in Cuernavaca, Mexico.
He was 75 years old and died when he accidentally slipped and struck his head, his family said.


Dark Humor From the Bad Old Stalin Days
To the Editor:
"Is Communism dead?" Mikhail S. Gorbachev asks in "No Time for Stereotypes" (Op-Ed, Feb. 24).
"I think," he states, "the Stalinist model is dead and, I would add, thank God." This brings to mind a joke told me by one of my Russian teachers some years ago, which recalls with characteristic dark humor the days of the Stalin dictatorship.
In keeping with the official atheism of the Communist state, the phrase "thank God" (in Russian, "slava Bogu," literally "glory to God") was not to be used.
Stalin decreed that, in its place, Soviet citizens should say, "slava Stalinu," or "thank Stalin."


Genovese Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


JAPAN'S STATISTICS POINT TO A SLUMP, ENDING LONG BOOM
A series of unexpectedly bleak indicators in recent weeks is signaling the end of Japan's longest postwar economic boom, causing business leaders and politicians to plead for action to avoid a severe recession.
A survey by the Bank of Japan released on Friday showed that business confidence was at its lowest in nearly four and a half years.
Based on the Government's early estimates, economists are projecting that industrial production will decline 4 percent in the first three months of this year, the steepest drop since the recession of 1975.
Capital investment by manufacturers in the fiscal year beginning April 1 is projected to tumble nearly 11 percent, the worst decline since 1977.


Science Contest Teaches Hard Lessons
To the Editor:
In "Science Contest Pressures Kids Too Much" (letter, Feb. 19), Haibin Jiu complains of the stress induced by the Westinghouse science competition.
I've been a professional computer programmer for 25 years.
On scores of occasions I have worked for weeks or more on software that was discarded without even getting into production, much like the losers in the Westinghouse competition, who come up empty after a lot of effort.


People
*
Rinker Buck, editorial director of Adweek's Marketing Week, New York, was named to the additional new position of publisher.
Craig Reiss, editor in chief of all Adweek publications, will assume more direct involvement in the weekly's day-to-day editorial operations.


Gelman Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sudan Is Undeterred in Drive to Expel Squatters
The Islamic Government has vowed to continue moving thousands of squatters and displaced Sudanese in Khartoum to desolate camps, despite protests from Western Governments, relief organizations and people whose houses are scheduled to be destroyed.
Some 400,000 people have been moved out of their homes in the last year, most of them in the last three months, according to estimates from the United States Agency for International Development and the United Nations Children's Fund.
The Government plans to move another 400,000 from shantytowns near the city's edge to five desolate sites farther outside Khartoum, the country's capital.


GV Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Parking Space Is Reserved for . . .
At the Tournament Players Club at Eagle Trace in Coral Springs, Fla., where the PGA Tour's Honda Classic has been played for the last eight years, the men's and women's club champions receive choice, reserved parking spaces for a year.
It's a fitting reward for those who solve one of the nation's most wind-whipped golf courses -- a course that, in fact, has exasperated and drivenplayers like GREG NORMAN to tantrums.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Florida; Democratic Race in Crucial State: Organization Versus Popularity
The first thing Bernard Craighead did Friday when he arrived here from Georgia, where he ran Gov.
Bill Clinton's successful primary campaign, was to get leaflets printed and distributed in black and Hispanic neighborhoods and retirement centers.
Then he arranged for volunteers to spread the word about Mr.
Clinton by knocking on doors and visiting churches in the Tampa-St.
Petersburg area over the weekend.
He spent most of today lining up drivers to take Clinton supporters to the polls on Tuesday.


Space Bargains From Russia
How shortsighted can the United States get?
The Soviet space program, once the best in the world and long a feared competitor, has put most of its products and many personnel up for sale.
The offer comes when the West is seeking ways to prop up the disintegrating Russian economy and keep Russian scientists from selling their services to renegade nations.
So what's the response of timorous Federal officials?
They are hanging back, worried that any purchases of Russian space hardware or expertise might keep alive the Russian defense industry.
Their ingrained reluctance persists even though the cold war is over and the chief threat in the former Soviet empire is disintegration, not military revival.


Medarex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Electronic Technology Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Canadian Manoir reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liposome Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; A Columnist Shares Glimpses of His World
I've Seen the Best of It  Memoirs  By Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt  Illustrated. 495 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $29.95.
In a preface to these memoirs written shortly before he died on Aug. 28, 1989, at the age of 78, Joseph W. Alsop explains that when his doctor told him he had lung cancer, the news did not greatly surprise him, since he had smoked 95 cigarettes a day until not so many years earlier.
He adds: "To my more real surprise, the news did not enormously distress me, either. I have had an improbably lucky and satisfying life." As the title of this reminiscence puts it, "I've seen the best of it."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Broadcasters Take a Bite Out of Cable in the Ratings
For the first time since the cable industry began its rapid growth more than a decade ago, the broadcast networks have been able to regain a piece of the audience they lost.
While it is too soon to declare that broadcasting has finally bottomed out, many network executives are hopeful that the latest ratings are a sign that the networks may not irresistibly lose viewers year after year to cable channels.


Senate Candidates Smile for the Cameras
For three candidates for the United States Senate who scheduled news conferences yesterday, it was a picture-perfect day for photo opportunitiies and sound bites.
Two of the three went to locked government office buildings where they sought to dramatize Federal policies they want changed.
A third had coffee with John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, and later chatted with reporters outside an instantly recognizable Manhattan landmark, St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


Ms. Belson Marries D. M. Rattner
Gabrielle Belson, the director of marketing for Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, a law firm, and Donald M. Rattner, an architect at Ferguson Murray &amp; Shamamian, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York.
Rabbi Martin S. Cohen, a cousin of the bride, officiated.
Mrs.
Rattner, 32 years old, graduated from Barnard College and is a graduate student in English literature at New York University.
She is a daughter of Joel and Abby Avin Belson of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Her father is chairman of the humanities department at the State University of New York Maritime College in the Bronx.
Her mother is the director of medical publications at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.


A Boom Town's Slumping Fortunes
If any place is a gauge of just how much the recession has knocked the confidence of Britons, it is Milton Keynes.
A gleaming city of low-rise, mirror-glass office buildings, warehouses and light-manufacturing factories about 50 miles north of London, it was one of the Thatcher era's boom towns.
As a train pulls into town, visitors are still greeted by a slogan scrawled on a wall declaring, "Tomorrow belongs to us." But with foreign investment slowing, housing prices down by 25 to 35 percent and unemployment at what is here considered to be an astronomical 7.5 percent, uncertainty pervades the city.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Genesee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Greek Names
To the Editor:
In the middle of "Buchanan Shock" (Feb. 19), an otherwise thoughtful editorial on the New Hampshire primary results, you indulge in some unfortunate stereotyping.
You ask, "What was Paul Tsongas to most Americans a year ago?" You answer, "Someone with an unpronounceable name."


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Phillips Perera, 58, A Financial Expert For Food Companies
Phillips Perera, a business executive and an expert in finance for agriculture and food companies in developing countries, died March 2 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


American Service Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  CLERICS ASSAIL SAUDI RULERS
Using mass-produced cassette tapes to accuse the Government of corruption and "atheist" behavior, a group of Muslim clergymen is challenging Saudi Arabia's ruling establishment.
A1  ISRAEL COOLING TO U.S.
LOANS
Israeli leaders have suggested in recent statements that they are ready to abandon a request for loan guarantees in the face of U.S. demands that they stop building settlements in occupied territories.
A3


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Profile; No Longer Target of Jokes, Brown Becomes a Force
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, the butt of so many Republican jokes, is no longer a joke.
The introspective, ascetic Mr.
Brown has developed a loyal, even passionate, following with his message of disaffection and calls for a national health care system and a program for nonpolluting energy sources.
Yet he has a campaign staff of only seven paid workers, only two of them with political experience, no paid political consultants or speech writers, little advertising and almost no money because he has imposed a limit of $100 per contributor, a 10th the legal limit for individuals.


Black Politicians Discover AIDS Issue
Nearly ignored even as it became a virtual plague in inner-city neighborhoods, AIDS has finally caught the attention of black political leaders, largely because of Magic Johnson's candid acknowledgement that he is infected with the virus that causes the disease.
Since Mr.
Johnson's announcement in November, members of the Black Congressional Caucus have protested plans by the Federal Centers for Disease Control to cut $14 million in financing for 24 groups working on AIDS projects in minority neighborhoods.
The caucus has also said it would make AIDS one of its legislative priorities.
And about 200 ministers joined the Rev.
Jesse Jackson at a recent news conference in Chicago to call attention to the disease's impact on black as well as Hispanic residents of inner cities.


Equitable Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Krone Gets Four More But Not the Feature
Julie Krone rode four winners at Gulfstream Park today, one short of the track record, set 39 years ago by Charlie Burr.
But she did not win aboard Miss Legality, who ran fourth while the 13-to-1 long shot, Spectacular Sue, was scoring an upset in the $200,000 Bonnie Miss Stakes.
It was an upset of impressive proportions for the gray daughter of Spectacular Bid.
She has raced eight times in her career and this was her fourth victory, but her first in a stakes race.
And as recently as three weeks ago, she ran third behind two of the favorites in this race: November Snow, the even-money choice, who finished fifth in the field of six, and Miss Legality, third in the betting and fourth at the wire.
And this was a major race for candidates competing for the season's honors as 3-year-old fillies.


Susan Wildfeuer Weds Sim Shapiro
Susan Muriel Wildfeuer, an occupational therapist, and Sim Reuven Shapiro, a law student, were married yesterday in Denver.
Rabbi Stanley Wagner officiated at Beth Hamidrash Hagadol Congregation.
Mrs.
Shapiro, 23 years old, as is the bridegroom, graduated from Boston University and recently completed an internship at the Braintree (Mass.) Rehabilitation Center.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Wildfeuer of Denver.
Her father is president of the Denver Boneless Beef Company, a meat distributor.


Advanced Promotion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Genta Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Things may be tight in the city, but you would never know it to judge by the response to the 25th anniversary celebration for Phoenix House.
Tickets for the party Wednesday evening sold out before the invitations were even in the mail.
Now, there is a waiting list, said TINA BROWN, editor of Vanity Fair magazine and a co-chairwoman of the event.
"We are astonished and delighted," she said.
"We thought it would be a harder sell."
Among the 600 people who plunked down $1,000 each to go to the United States Customs House for the dinner given by Vanity Fair are JONATHAN and LAURA TISCH, ROBERT and BLAINE TRUMP, OLIVER and ELIZABETH STONE, ROY and DOROTHY LICHTENSTEIN, BEN BRADLEE and SALLY QUINN, MORTON and LINDA JANKLOW, ROGER and NORMA AILES, and NORMAN MAILER and NORRIS CHURCH.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan's longest postwar economic boom appears over, with severe declines in production, capital investment, consumer spending and corporate profits.  [ Page A1. ]


Griffin Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amerihealth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Emerging Mexico Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
McGaw Inc., Irvine, Calif., a medical products maker, filed for $90 million of senior notes, due 1999, to be offered through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette and Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Common Stock  *
ISG Technologies Inc., Toronto, a diagnostic equipment maker, plans to offer 2.8 million shares in the United States, through Smith Barney, Harris Upham and in Canada through Gordon Capital.
*
Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc., Corona, Calif., filed for an initial public offering of three million shares to be sold through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Ratings  *
Georgia Pacific Corp., Atlanta, has been given a preliminary BB+ rating by Standard &amp; Poor's on its $500 million shelf registration.
*
Santander Overseas Bank Inc. has won an A+ rating for $225 million of its 8.7 percent noncumulative preferred shares from Standard &amp; Poor's.
They are guaranteed by its Spanish parent, Banco de Santander S.A. de Credito.
The rating service cited "a buoyant Spanish economy which continues to benefit all Spanish banks."


Israelis Say They May Drop Bid for U.S. Loan Support
Israeli Government leaders have strongly suggested in a series of recent statements that they are ready to abandon their request for United States loan guarantees in the face of American demands that they stop building Jewish settlements in occupied territories.
A growing number of senior officials have actively urged the Government to withdraw its aid request, which involves $10 billion in loan guarantees to help resettle hundreds of thousands of new immigrants from the former Soviet Union.


Senator Bentsen's Soft Sell Of a Hardball Tax Package
The favorite fallback Presidential candidate of many Democrats is managing the most partisan tax bill in years, and the Republicans aren't complaining about it.
Senator Lloyd Bentsen is trying to put the President between an election year rock and a hard place.
If Mr.
Bush signs a bill like Mr.
Bentsen's, he will be approving a tax increase for the well-to-do.
If he vetoes it, the President will be rejecting a $300-a-child tax credit for middle-class parents, wider access to health insurance and easier conditions on Individual Retirement Accounts and college loans.
The White House is threatening a veto, but it does so without the bitter scorn it heaped on a similar tax bill the House passed after angry debate.


Data-Design Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Volt Information Sciences Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Applied DNA System reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Capital Housing &amp; Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
Bird Has Celtics Flying  Kevin Gamble scored 18 points and Boston held Orlando to four points in the first eight minutes of the fourth quarter last night to complete a 5-0 sweep of the season series against the Magic with a 111-93 victory on Orlando's home court.
The Celtics also snapped a five-game losing streak on the road and won their fourth consecutive game since Larry Bird returned from the injured list on March 1.
Bird had 15 points and nine rebounds in 32 minutes. (AP) Bulls 103, 76ers 99: Michael Jordan scored 11 of his 34 points in the fourth quarter as Chicago used a 16-1 spurt to erase a 12-point deficit and defeat the 76ers in Philadelphia. (AP)  Pistons 98, Lakers 93: Joe Dumars scored 21 of his 25 points in the second half as Detroit beat the Lakers in Los Angeles for its fourth straight victory.
Watson, who had been without a victory since his Nabisco Championships of Golf title in 1987, entered the final round with a seven-shot lead but almost lost it with a three-over-par 74.  (AP) Dickinson Wins Inamori: Judy Dickinson held off Meg Mallon's charge with a string of back-side birdies en route to a 2-under-par 70 and a two-shot victory in the L.P.G.A.
Inamori Classic in Poway, Calif.
Dickinson, who posted 69s in each of the first three rounds, finished with an 11-under 277. (AP)  Crampton Wins One: Bruce Crampton ended a string of second-place finishes in the GTE West Classic, shooting a final-round 66 to set a tournament record and beat Chi Chi Rodriquez in the Senior PGA Tour event in Ojai, Calif. (AP) YACHT RACING  Rough Waters  A thunderstorm, rain and wind shifts of nearly 200 degrees created wildly differing results in the America's Cup trials yesterday off San Diego.
In the challengers' trials, Japan defeated Italy by 5 seconds in a race that knocked Italy from its first-place standing. (The race is subject to a protest by Italy.) Japan moved into the top slot in a tie with New Zealand at 42 points.
New Zealand beat Spain by 17:46.
France and Italy tied for second place, with 37 points each, after France beat Sweden by 22:32.
Challenge Australia won its first race of the trials, beating Spirit of Australia by 2:45.
In the defenders' trials, the yacht America3 claimed another victory at the expense of its stablemate, Defiant.
Instead of sailing the usual 20.3-mile course, the boats sailed a best two-of-three series on shorter courses.
America3 won the first two races, by :31 and 2:00.
The day's victory raised America3's overall score to 32 points, with Stars &amp; Stripes at 11, and Defiant, 8.
AUTO RACING  Excitement for Elliott  Bill Elliott held off Alan Kulwicki by 18 inches yesterday to win the Pontiac Excitement 400 in Richmond.
It was Elliott's second victory in a row and the richest victory of his career.
Elliott, who started from the pole, won $272,700.
The Dawsonville, Ga., racer came up with the 36th victory of his career as he led 348 of 400 laps on the .75-mile Richmond International Raceway oval. (AP) DOG SHOW  A Chow-Chow Victory  Champion Lov Chow's Risen Star, a Chow-Chow owned by Kitty and Joe Vaudo, Cheryl and Tim Lovett and Michael Lariza, was named best of 1,585 dogs yesterday at the Saw Mill River Kennel Club show at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
It was the 16th top award for the red dog and among the finalists he defeated was Champion Salilyn's Condor, the top winning English Springer Spaniel in the country, who on Saturday led the field at Rockland County's 56th Annual fixture.
N.H.L.
Shutout for Blackhawks  Ed Belfour stopped 33 shots yesterday for his fifth shutout this season and Jeremy Roenick scored his 51st goal as the Chicago Blackhawks beat the Boston Bruins, 4-0, in Chicago.


Clock Ticking on Search For Mayor in Jersey City
The search by the eight members of the City Council for someone to serve as mayor until a special election in November appears to have run out of time, but appearances in this city can be deceiving where politics is concerned.
The mayor's office became vacant Feb. 7 when Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of Superior Court removed Mayor Gerald McCann after his conviction in December on Federal fraud charges.
Under state law the Council had 30 days to name an interim mayor, so it would seem the appointment must be made by Monday.


Northstar Computer Forms reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Insituform Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Floyd Skillfully Etches a Doral Victory
With the coolness and control built over nearly 30 years of winning professional tournaments, 49-year-old Raymond Floyd held off the hot Fred Couples today to win the Doral Ryder Open.
Playing less than perfect tee-to-green golf but artfully avoiding mistakes, Floyd shot a final-round 70 over the Doral Country Club's Blue Monster course that was good enough for a 17-under-par total of 271 and a two-shot victory over Couples and Keith Clearwater.


Royal Palm Beach Colony Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Communication Intelligence reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Farrel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of March8: TUESDAY  Consol Nat Gas Co Fleetwood Entrps Inc Flightsafety Intl Household Intl Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec Tri-Contl Corp WEDNESDAY  CBI Inds Handleman Co Heinz H J South New Engl Telcom Wallace Comp Svc THURSDAY  Atlantic Ener Inc Humana Inc Idaho Pwr Scor US Corp Vestaur Secs Inc FRIDAY  General Cinema Corp SUNDAY  Health Equity Pptys


Serv-Tech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First U.N. Officers Arrive in Yugoslavia
The United Nations' effort to prevent a resumption of Yugoslavia's brutal civil war took a decisive step forward today with the arrival of the military commanders who have been entrusted with establishing peace in Yugoslavia.
The commander of the 14,400-member peacekeeping force, Lieut.
Gen.
Satish Nambiar of India, was greeted at Belgrade airport by senior officers of the Yugoslav Army.
Accompanying the 56-year-old officer on the flight from New York was a 35-member advance party of United Nations military and civilian officials that included five other generals, from Argentina, Canada, France, Kenya and Nigeria, and a Russian colonel, still in a Soviet uniform.
He will command a 900-man battalion from the former Soviet army in one of three "protected areas" in Croatia that the United Nations force will patrol.


Why SUNY Has to Spend More per Student Than CUNY
To the Editor:
More than 250 professors and students at the City University of New York, you report Feb. 27, have sued New York State, "contending that the way it finances public higher education is racially discriminatory."
There is a reason CUNY's expenditures per student are less than those for the State University of New York, and it has nothing to do with the racial make-up of their student bodies.
City University benefits from being in New York City and therefore can hire large numbers of adjuncts whose wages are much lower than those of full-time faculty members.
SUNY campuses, on the other hand, are in areas of the state where there are no large pools of adjuncts.


Review/Ice Skating; Boitano and Witt Bring Show to the Garden
"Brian! Brian!," teen-age girls and matrons scream.
North America's newest matinee idol is not a movie actor but an ice skater.
Brian Boitano's technical excellence is beyond reproach.
Tossing off perfect triple axels is still like falling off a log for the 1988 Olympic gold medalist.
But no one really gets turned on by a revolution in the air.
The fan-club squealing responds rather to Mr.
Boitano's singular mix of refinement and athleticism; the elbow-swinging all-American jock who stands revealed in his vulnerability.
The romantic image is inescapable.


Russian 'Women's Day': Condescending Candy
Soviet Communism tried to create a New Soviet Man, but post-Communist man is behaving just as badly toward women as his predecessor.
Or so said some of the women of Moscow today, International Women's Day, the one day of the year when men here are formally urged to refrain from behaving like chauvinist pigs.
The former Government, which tried to politicize everything, made this a national holiday and talked about "international solidarity with women," especially those of the working classes, but never pushed it too hard.


Dinkins Is Hospitalized With the Flu


Ski Resort and Albany Argue Over Use of Creek
Schoharie Creek, which rises on Twin Mountain in the Catskills and flows gently west and north 85 miles to the Mohawk River, has become a river of controversy.
A prime trout fishing stream, the creek supplies water for New York City's Schoharie Reservoir and hydropower for the New York Power Authority's Blenheim-Gilboa electric generators.
It also provides water to make snow at the huge Hunter Mountain ski resort, and that has stirred a dispute between the resort's owners and New York State.


Healthdyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spy vs. Spy in the Hunt for America's Cup
As the Italian yacht Il Moro di Venezia competed in an America's Cup trial race last month, an odd-looking object floated into view.
It was a buoy about 4 feet square, with a beacon suspended in the middle of four floats.
An unsuspecting boater might have seen it as an object from outer space.
But the Italians knew better.
"I could see that it wasn't a normal lobster pot," said Paul Cayard, the skipper of Il Moro di Venezia.
"It went by about 10 feet to leeward of us. I pointed it out to the race umpires, who picked it up and took it into shore."


In Taiwan, Independence Demand Grows
To the Editor:
"Don't Stifle Democracy in Taiwan" (editorial, Feb. 22), arguing against the possible dissolving by Taiwan's Nationalist Government of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party for having advocated the island's independence from mainland China in elections last year, is certainly on target.
The Taiwanese independence issue will not go away.
The Kuomintang Government on Taiwan should understand this and relinquish the 44-year-old legal fiction of its authority over mainland China.
Brave Taiwanese of all ages, inside and outside the system, many educationally trained and politically inspired by their stays in the United States and other world democracies will not permit this to happen.
These brave patriots need world news media attention directed toward their personal sacrifices.


Will Picket Line Join Red and Blue Lines?
If Players Union vs.
Team Owners were a hockey game instead of a collective-bargaining crisis, it would be easier for fans to understand the showdown that will take place in Manhattan this morning when the two sides meet to try to avert a National Hockey League strike that could threaten the Stanley Cup playoffs.
So think of it as a hockey game.
It is late in the third period.
The Players Union is leading, 7-1.
If it doesn't panic, it will win its first championship ever.
The Team Owners, the defending dynasty, are playing with two men in the penalty box.
Some of the owners' sticks are broken.
Their skate blades are dull.
And the ice is tilted toward their goal.


Goldcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nina Jo Simelson and Jonathan D. Kaplan Wed
Nina Jo Simelson, the daughter of Jerry and Sandra Simelson of Tappan, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Jonathan David Kaplan, a son of Jack and Gloria Kaplan of East Meadow, L.I.
Rabbi Israel Noble officiated at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.


Menachem Begin, Guerrilla Leader Who Became Peacemaker
Menachem Begin, the Israeli Prime Minister who made peace with Egypt, lived much of his life in the opposition.
A Jewish underground leader before Israel gained independence in 1948, he openly fought the established Zionist leadership of the struggle against British rule.
Then for nearly three decades, he headed Israel's major opposition party.


From Tiananmen Square to New York Sweatshops; One Woman's Fight to Better the Lot of Workers Under Communism and Capitalism
Lu Jinghua moved excitedly among the garment workers sitting awkwardly in undersized chairs at Public School 105 in Brooklyn, passing out leaflets and preaching worker solidarity.
"The union is for the benefit of the workers," Ms.
Lu told them in Chinese, as she circled the classroom decorated with alphabet letters and paper snowflakes.
"It will fight for benefits for you. Unionize!"


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit . . .
Jan.
Tuesday  Productivity . . . 4th Qtr.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Retail Sales . . .
Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Producer Prices . . .
Feb.
Business Inventories . . .
Jan.


DCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Endotronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Algorex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zeus Components Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stacy Waldman Has Wedding
Stacy Pamela Waldman, a law student at New York University, and Daniel Adam Alper, a tax lawyer in New York, were married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated at Abigail Kirsh at Tappan Hill.
Mrs.
Alper, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael H. Waldman of Westport, Conn.
Her father is the president of MHW Inc., a Westport real-estate development company of which her mother, Jessica Waldman, is controller.


Dynamic Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Colrain Journal; Peace Advocates Turn Tax Resistance Into a Ritual
Every Thursday morning for 14 weeks, a small group of out-of-towners has trudged down a dirt road in this quiet Berkshire community carrying colorful hand-sewn banners to the doorstep of a small white farmhouse.
Stopping in the front yard, they are greeted by others, who form a circle and join hands to sing songs of defiance and world peace in a ceremony evocative of the 60's.
They have come to protest the size of the nation's military budget in a house that has become a symbol of tax resistance.


With Head Shaved And Fists Cocked, Domi Finds Trouble
Goon.
There it was, that word.
Coming from Bob Probert, of all people, wayward enforcer for the Detroit Red Wings.


Military Service
To the Editor:
In "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17), Walter A. McDougall, referring to himself and other Vietnam veterans he served with, asserts: "We just hoped to get home in one piece. We weren't heroes, but we were citizens, and if one of us becomes President, he will have the right to ask other citizens to take the same risk. Mr. Clinton, in my view, does not."
Of the seven United States wars that lasted more than a few months, only one began under a President who had had previous active military service: the Korean War under Harry S. Truman.


International Corona reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


World Economies


Article Questions Sale Of Stock by Bush Son
President Bush's oldest son had access to detailed information on a Texas energy company's finances when he sold $848,560 worth of its stock a week before the company announced poor quarterly earnings, U.S.
News &amp; World Report has reported.
In its issue published this weekend, the magazine said George W. Bush, the President's son, was a director of the Harken Energy Corporation and on a company committee reviewing ways to restructure the business when he sold the shares on June 22, 1990.
Citing documents filed at the Securities and Exchange Commission, the magazine said membership on the committee gave Mr.
Bush "detailed knowledge of the company's deteriorating financial condition."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Tsongas Runs Hard on a Tightrope As He Reluctantly Goes on Offensive
Paul E. Tsongas, who leapt to the top of the Democratic Presidential field as a candidate above rough-and-tumble politics, sat back in his stocking feet on his campaign plane and allowed that his one big regret so far was using commercials that attacked Gov.
Bill Clinton.
"I don't like it," he confided. "It doesn't sit well with me."


Lafayette Goes Up The Down Staircase
As he was about to launch into an unrehearsed pep talk, while his players sat in rows of three and four in the stairwell at Bronx Community College, Ira Levine was interrupted by the opening of the door leading to the gym one flight up on the fourth floor.
"Where are you taking them?" said a woman in a blue security uniform, a crackling walkie-talkie in her hand.


Bali Jewelry Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colombia Ends Luxuries at Drug Lord's Jail
The Government ordered a crackdown at the jail where the drug cartel leader Pablo Escobar is imprisoned after discovering that it had been equipped with luxuries like carpets, bathtubs and a boardroom table, a newspaper reported today.
The Bogota daily El Tiempo said Government officials inspected the prison in mid-January and found that Mr.
Escobar, the boss of the Medellin cocaine cartel, and 14 other suspected traffickers were living "in extraordinary comfort."


DRCA Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ruling Helps Nestle in Bid
A French court has dealt a blow to the Agnelli family of Italy in its battle to keep Nestle S.A. from seizing control of Source Perrier S.A., the world's largest mineral water company.
The Nimes Commercial Court ruled on Friday that an Agnelli-controlled holding company, Exor S.A., and two allies had violated exchange rules by failing to inform regulators when they raised their stake in Perrier above a third in May 1990.
As punishment, it froze a third of Exor's voting rights in Perrier for two years.


Farmers Wary of Efforts to Manage Growth
Spring has arrived only in the heated greenhouses on New Jersey's vegetable farms, where seedlings are set out to start the season's crop of melons, cucumbers and cabbages.
But farmers like Erwin Sheppard are already raising a political crop of objections over New Jersey's efforts to manage growth in the state.
New Jersey's pioneering state land-use plan, which is intended to direct growth to already-developed areas, has won over nearly all of the state's fractious business groups except the farm community.
As now written, the plan frowns on any development in farm-designated areas that is not directly related to agriculture.
Farmers like Mr.
Sheppard say that if they cannot sell to real-estate developers, the price of their land will be depressed.


Analysts Still See Room For Fed to Ease Further
Some credit market analysts maintain that the Federal Reserve Board needs to lower short-term interest rates further, even though recent economic statistics point to a revival in business activity.
That view is not popular with most market participants, who have pushed up short-term and long-term rates sharply over the last two months.
Indeed, at current levels, short-term rates suggest that traders expect that the next move by the Fed will be to tighten monetary policy.


Potgietersrus Journal; Yes for de Klerk? The Idea Splits His Own People
The lampposts of Potgietersrus have been enlisted in the struggle for the hearts and minds of its Afrikaans-speaking inhabitants.
"Yes for F. W.," say the placards hung by the National Party, urging support for President F. W. de Klerk in a referendum he has called to gauge white support for a negotiated future without apartheid.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Clinton-Tsongas Ads Provide a Little Drama in Florida Contest
For all their griping about the clogged airwaves, Floridians ought to be grateful for the commercials that Paul E. Tsongas and Bill Clinton have put on television here.
What little drama there is to this state's fly-by Presidential campaign, they are providing.
It is true that the commercials are not particularly sensational when compared with, say, ones about furloughed murderers.
But for Floridians watching the campaign on television, they are pretty much all there is to see.


Seth Low's Mayoralty
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 22 report on Mayor David N. Dinkins's moving the New York City Government to Brooklyn's Borough Hall for a week refers to Seth Low as "Brooklyn's chief executive when the modern city came together in 1898." Brooklyn's last mayor was not Seth Low, but Frederick W. Wurster.


Hollywood Park reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Vanguard Cellular Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


East-West Differences Still Foil German Papers
Under Communism it was said people read novels for the truth, since the newspapers printed fiction.
So there was little surprise after the Berlin wall fell in late 1989 that West Germany's newspapers rushed into news-starved East Germany.
Within days, Bildzeitung, Germany's largest tabloid, was selling more than a million copies a day in the east.
Others, like the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, encouraged western Germans to give reduced-price gift subscriptions to friends in the east as a means of getting a foot in the door.


Roy Rogers Account To Jordan, McGrath
Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc. is back in the fast-food business, as Hardee's Food Systems Inc. has named the New York agency to handle its Roy Rogers account.
The decision was yet more bad news for Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, which has been the Hardee's agency since 1985.
Ogilvy won the Roy Rogers account from Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., when Hardee's acquired that chain in 1990.


Federal Agencies in Rift Over Milken and Drexel
A split between two Federal agencies that have sued Michael R. Milken and hundreds of other former Drexel Burnham Lambert executives may provide a wedge for an out-of-court settlement of the case.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, which is seeking to recover millions lost on high-risk junk bond investments in the savings and loan crisis, appears to be pressing for the acceptance of a $1.3 billion settlement that was rejected last week by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, lawyers involved in the negotiations said yesterday.


R-Tek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fonar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Israel May Forgo Guarantees
Israeli leaders may abandon their request for United States loan guarantees in the face of demands that they stop building Jewish settlements in occupied territories.
Page A3.
In Britain, No Sign of Revival
With the longest recession since World War II, Margaret Thatcher's "economic miracle" is looking a lot less miraculous.
Page D1.


Otto Klineberg, Who Helped Win '54 Desegregation Case, Dies at 92
Otto Klineberg, whose pioneering studies on the intelligence scores of black students helped win the Supreme Court's landmark school desegregation case in 1954, died on Friday at the Carriage Hill nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


How Congress Can Preserve Choice
Pro-choice advocates are understandably worried that the Supreme Court will soon overturn or narrow the 1973 Roe v.
Wade decision protecting a woman's right to choose abortion.
They and their Congressional supporters are therefore moving to protect that right legislatively with a bill known as the Freedom of Choice Act.
President Bush is already promising a veto.
Mr.
Bush is hostile to liberty on two fronts.
He first attacks on the judicial front, appointing Supreme Court justices likely to be unsympathetic to safeguards that have existed for nearly 20 years.
Those justices want to force women to fight politically for their liberty.
But then Mr.
Bush says that even if women muster a political majority in Congress, their bill "will not become law as long as I am President."


Bush's Health
To the Editor:
In your editorial concerning the possible recurrence of Paul Tsongas's cancer (Feb. 23), you fail to mention the most obvious solution to deflate this potential campaign issue.
Mr.
Tsongas could do what George Bush failed to do in 1988: he could nominate a Vice-Presidential candidate who would be a credible replacement for him should his cure not prove durable.


CHRONICLE
"How do you get to Carnegie Hall? Practice," goes the old joke.
What DR.
ELIESER KAPLINSKY has been practicing, at least professionally, is medicine, but nonetheless he is going to play at Carnegie Hall next month.
And therein lies a tale.
Dr.
Kaplinsky, who is chief of the Heart Institute at Sheba Medical Center in Tel-Hashomer, Israel, studied violin as a child with Ilona Feher, who also had as pupils, SHLOMO MINTZ and PINCHAS ZUCKERMAN.
Though Dr.
Kaplinsky became a cardiologist, he continued to play the violin for pleasure.


Hampton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Women's Group Sponsors a Rally for the Environment


Drivefone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


As Leader Lies Ill, Hasidim in Brooklyn Wait and Pray
Followers of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the 89-year-old head of the Lubavitch Hasidim, sang Hebrew prayers of supplication without pause over the weekend as their leader, known as the Rebbe, stayed in his adjacent private quarters in Brooklyn recuperating from a stroke he suffered one week ago today.
"He's been praying so much for us -- now it is time to pray for him," said Rabbi Yehudah Krinsky, a close aide to Rabbi Schneerson who is a spokesman for the religious community.


Bridge
The second-biggest Calcutta tournament in the world, apparently, is the one played annually in Toronto.
It is topped financially only by the "Cavendish" event staged each May in New York City.
The 1992 Canadian event was played Feb. 29 and March 1, and the winners were Piotr Gawrys and Krysztof Lasocki of Poland.
Brian Glubok and Jim Rosenbloom of Manhattan placed second thanks to a remarkable result on their final deal, shown in the diagram.
A former world champion arrived at the table mumbling that he was "down 1,000." He was referring to his imp scores for the boards already played, but the words were prophetic.


Goodard Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Line Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Benefit for Dance Theater
The modern-dance companies of Mark Morris, Garth Fagan and Doug Elkins will join with Ladygourd Sangoma, the music-and-dance troupe, in "A Tribute to the Work of D.T.W." at 7:30 tonight at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
The performance, a benefit for Dance Theater Workshop, will be followed by cocktails, dinner, dancing and shopping in a private party at Barneys New York from 9:30 P.M. to midnight, with a percentage of the evening's sales to be donated to Dance Theater Workshop.
Tickets are $50 for the performance alone; $175 for the performance and party.
Reservations: (212) 691-4823.


Fidelity Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; A Little Romance Mixed With a Hint of Gunrunning
Whenever "The Winter in Lisbon" loses its bearings, which is every few minutes, the camera pans dreamily over the Lisbon harbor at sunset while the movie's woozy theme song, "Magic Summer," trickles in the background.
The film, which is at the Quad Cinema, is a romantic thriller that wants to be a combination of "The Maltese Falcon," " 'Round Midnight" and "A Man and a Woman." In the Spanish-French-Portuguese co-production, directed by Jose Antonio Zorrilla, Christian Vadim plays Jim, a cadaverous young jazz pianist and heavy smoker who falls for Lucrecia (Helene de St. Pere), a femme fatale with unsavory connections.
Dizzy Gillespie plays Bill Swann, an ailing jazz trumpeter who leads the quartet in which Jim performs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; CLINTON DEFENDS REAL-ESTATE DEAL
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that he and his wife, Hillary, did nothing improper when they entered a real-estate partnership with the owner of a savings and loan institution that was subject to state regulation.
Speaking to reporters as he campaigned through Texas today for votes in the Democratic Presidential primary on Tuesday, Mr.
Clinton said that an article about the partnership in The New York Times on Sunday was misleading and that he and his wife lost more than $25,000 in the joint venture.


The High Price of Getting Caught


S-K-I Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Dance in Review
Amiel Malale Dance Dia Center for the Arts
The effect of the evening of dances presented by Amiel Malale on Thursday night in SoHo was something like staring into the clear, pure gaze of a madman as he repeats some essential truth ad nauseam.
One survives and even learns something.
At times, the experience is almost pleasurable.
But it is a tremendous feat of endurance.


Novametrix Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Miyazawa Is Blamed in Part As Party Loses Local Election
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, whose Government has been hit by scandals and criticism of its leadership, was set back again today when the ruling Liberal Democratic Party's candidate narrowly lost a parliamentary election in a district considered one of its strongholds.
The defeat of the party's candidate in the election in Miyagi prefecture, a rice-growing region of northern Japan, was prompted by mounting scandals throughout the Government and general criticism of Mr.
Miyazawa's leadership, political analysts said.


The Politics of Declining Incomes
Americans' after-tax income is lower than it was three years ago, when George Bush became President, the Government has reported.
Many economists say the decline in this income gauge during the Bush Presidency could be an ominous portent for his re-election chances, and they cite the so-called pocketbook index to prove it.


Trimac Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Faster Chip Technology Developed
A Silicon Valley start-up company said today that it had developed a technology to vastly increase the speed of memory chips and computers and that it had licensed the technology to three big Japanese chip makers.
Rambus Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., said the technology would provide a tenfold increase in the speed at which information was transferred from memory chips, which store information, to processors, which perform calculations.


Basketball; Miami Wins Women's Big East
Even though they had won at least 20 games in each of the last three seasons, no one expected too much of the Miami women's basketball team during its first season in the Big East.
But the Hurricanes proceeded to post an unpredented Big East mark of 18-0 record in conference play, along with winning 28 consecutive games following an opening-game loss to Florida State.
Earlier today, The Associated Press ranked them No. 6, the highest ever achieved by a Big East women's team.


Basketball; Here Comes the Big Guy, Just in Time for Big East
Robert Werdann felt like a rookie again.
During his first scrimmage in nearly two months, the senior center of the St.
John's Redmen found himself on the move, near the basket, in the type of situation he has experienced hundreds, maybe thousands, of times.
His body was going in one direction, and a pass made him stretch the opposite way.
Normally, at this point in the season, Werdann would effortlessly collect the pass.
But after missing 18 of the last 19 games with an injured calf muscle, including the 16 games since he aggravated his injury in practice Jan. 10, everything Werdann has done has required an effort.


Note and Bond Rally Continues
Treasury notes and bonds yesterday continued the rally that began Friday as investors and speculators seemed to have decided that the sharp increase in yields on those securities the last two months has made them much more attractive.
By late in the day, the Treasury's 5 3/8 percent two year notes were offered at 99 3/4, up 7/32 on the day, to yield 5.51 percent.
As recently as last week, two-year notes were yielding 5.65 percent, up from 4.62 percent on Jan. 8.


Monarchists Dust Off Past To Belgrade Rule
On a hill above old Belgrade, about 25,000 Serbs gathered today to sing old nationalist anthems, celebrate their Orthodox faith and repudiate the Communist past.
For many in the crowd, this included calls for the restoration as king of Crown Prince Alexander, the London-born head of the family that was Yugoslavia's monarchy until it fled Hitler's Panzers in 1941."
The occasion was a rally to challenge the Serbian Government, a nominally socialist administration that is in reality, with the neighboring Romanian Government, one of the last of Europe's ruling Communist hierarchies.


Milton Gladstone, 77, A Retired Publisher
Milton H. Gladstone, a retired publisher of how-to and test-preparation materials in New York, died on Feb. 21 at the Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
His family said he died of complications after a brief illness.


INSIDE
U.S. May Shift on Yugoslavia
Secretary of State Baker suggested that the Bush Administration might be ready to recognize Yugoslavia's breakaway republics.
Page A8.
Christian Scientist Resigns
The longtime chairman of the Christian Science Church resigned amid a bitter internal dispute over the church's direction.
Page A16.
Death Sentence Overturned
The Supreme Court overturned a death sentence on the ground that the a convicted murderer's First Amendment rights were violated.
Page A14.
Drexel Deal Back on Track
Winning the right to see some financial data, the F.D.I.C. is now backing a $1.3 billion settlement of claims against Drexel executives.
Page D1.
Dinkins in Hospital Again
Hours after leaving the hospital, Mayor Dinkins returned for treatment of a bacterial infection and may stay several days.
Page B1.


Stop &amp; Shop Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; Eyeing November, Democrats Shiver
Despite all the partisan hullabaloo leading up to Super Tuesday, all the proclamations of inevitable victory in November, a gnawing anxiety grips Southern Democrats.
They have a wounded bird in their sights, but they fear they lack the ammo to bring him down.
President Bush is in terrible trouble.
It shows in the national polls, where his approval rating is down to 40 percent.
It shows in his floundering campaign, his search for themes, his aides' short fuses.
And it shows here in the South, where like Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan, Mr.
Bush built his majority in the electoral college and where he hopes to do so again this year, to make up for the possible loss of California with its 54 electoral votes.


Electrocom Automation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; CAMPAIGNERS RUSH TO SUPER TUESDAY WITH A TESTY EDGE
The three remaining Democratic Presidential candidates scoured Florida and New England for votes yesterday, in person and on television, on the eve of 11 Super Tuesday contests that will choose 783 convention delegates and set the stage for a potential showdown next week in the industrial Midwest.
Right up to the final hour, the campaign had a nasty edge, with the rivals questioning each other's programs and at times their motives.


Bridge
The diagramed deal, from a Calcutta event played Saturday at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, at 4 East 80th Street, is a tale of two leads.
At one table the bidding followed the diagramed route to three no-trump, which appears easy to make.
The East and West players were Krysztof Lasocki and Pyotr Gawrys of Poland, who had won a much bigger Calcutta event in Toronto a week earlier.
West led the club king, in the hope of finding his partner with length in that suit, and struck gold.
South thought it likely that West was leading from a king-queen-ten combination, and allowed the king to win.


Accountability by Sledgehammer
Many hands worked the frauds and failures of the savings and loan industry, which are costing taxpayers billions in bailouts and lost savings.
Incompetent or crooked managers plundered thrift institutions and overwhelmed regulators with legions of lawyers and accountants, and pressure from friendly members of Congress.
Some of the blameworthy have been held to account while others, like the "Keating Five" gang of Senators, have escaped with wrist-slappings.
The latest judgment is against the huge New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, which is settling with the Office of Thrift Supervision for $41 million.
The settlement follows charges that the firm improperly withheld damaging information about an S.&amp; L. client.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Conservatives; Bush Gets Two Cheers From Religious Right
Four years ago South Carolina proved to be the Waterloo for the Presidential hopes of Pat Robertson, the television evangelist who sought to pull together conservative Christians to form a united and potent political force.
The outcome was no surprise to many political analysts.
Considering how theologically fractured the millions of Christians are, it followed that they would be politically fractured, too.


Hechinger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Some Big Changes At Martin Marshall
Martin Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell in New York has changed its management and its name with the retirement of John Martin, 50 years old, as the agency's president and chief executive.
Bo Mitchell, 44, chief operating officer and director of client services, has succeeded Mr.
Martin at the newly renamed Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell.
George Jaccoma, 58, chairman of strategic and creative services, became chairman, and Dan Marshall, 60, the executive vice president and creative director, added the duties of secretary and treasurer.


Removal of Nitrates
Scientists say they have found a way to use a plant enzyme to rid underground drinking water of nitrates, a dangerous and increasingly widespread pollutant.
They say the method is very effective, but they still must work out technical problems to make it economically feasible.
The discovery is important because nitrates are reaching dangerous levels in groundwater in the United States, and scientists have had little success in finding effective treatments to reduce those levels.
Nitrates are most commonly used in fertilizers, especially sodium and potassium nitrates.
Numerous water wells have had to be abandoned because of the lack of a way to deal with the problem.


Times Tells Deliverers to Expect Layoffs
The New York Times Company has notified the union at a wholesale newspaper distribution operation that all delivery employees will be laid off on May 11, when the Times Company expects to take control of the operation.
The Times Company said last month that it planned to acquire the operation, the Metropolitan News Company and Newark Newsdealers Supply Company, from Robert B. Cohen.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
Together Metropolitan and Newark distribute more than half of the copies of The New York Times sold in the New York area.
The two units also distribute The Daily News, The New York Post, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today and many other papers.


Where Coffins Come in Size Young
When the echo of gunshots dies down and the smoke fades, Benjamin Robinson goes to work.
He hauls a gurney from his hearse, wheels it through the Kings County morgue to the refrigerator where the lifeless, blood-streaked body of Teraya Starnes, forever 16, waits for the final trip home to Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Mr.
Robinson, the director of the Merritt Green Memorial Chapels, has made this grim journey countless times before, and although he has the steely demeanor of the former police officer that he is, it still rattles him when his passengers are children.


Age Before Championships? Not for the Almost-50 Floyd
Besides a record that ranks him as an all-time great, Raymond Floyd is destined to leave golf with many treasures.
One of the best short games ever seen.
The presumptuous verve with which he walks after long putts before they drop.
The focused intensity of the glazed on-course expression his peers call The Look.
Even the lyrical nickname he doesn't particularly like -- Tempo Raymundo.
But most of all, Floyd will be remembered as the elite player who palpably enjoyed competing -- win or lose -- more than any other.


BRIEFS
*
Elf Aquitaine, France's state-controlled oil company, has had its share price set by the Government at 360 francs, or $63.60, for the 2.3 percent stake of the company to be sold. *
Ford Motor Co., Detroit, introduced a 32-valve version of its V-8 engine.
The four-cam, 4.6-liter modular engine will be manufactured at Ford's Romeo, Mich., plant for use in the 1992 Lincoln Mark VIII.


Bills in Trenton Aim at Conduct Of Youngsters
New Jersey lawmakers from both sides of the aisle have introduced a spate of bills that attempts to legislate the conduct, and in some instances the morals, of the state's young people and increase the liability of parents who allow their children to stay out late or consistently play hooky.
Wending through the Legislature are bills that would require high school seniors to perform community service as a condition of graduation; authorize municipalities to enact curfews; increase the penalties for parents who fail to insure that children attend school; require parental notification before an abortion is performed on a minor, and allow high school officials to institute mandatory steroid testing for athletes.


Haiti's Ousted Leader to Seek Support in U.S.
Fearing that the military will try to thwart a recently negotiated plan for his return, the exiled President of Haiti intends to bring his case for increased pressure on the Haitian junta directly to the American people this week.
"How can we ask the Haitian people to remove these criminals with their bare hands?" the exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said in an interview by telephone on Saturday from Caracas, the capital of Venezuela, where he has lived since he was overthrown in a military coup led by Gen.
Raoul Cedras on Sept. 30.
"The putschists have all the weapons."


People
*
Pamela D. Brick was named to the new position of president at Genecom, New York, the medical education unit of Robert A. Becker Inc.
She was previously a vice president and group project manager at Health Science Communications Inc., New York. *
Michael LaMonica was named creative director at Beber Silverstein &amp; Partners, Miami.
He was previously a creative director at Bauerlein Inc., New Orleans.


Witness Says Tape May Support Officer's Claim
A major witness in the trial of four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist testified today that the videotape of the incident showed the motorist making what might have been an aggressive move toward one of the officers, although she did not recall him doing so.
The witness, Officer Melanie Singer of the California Highway Patrol, made the admission during a grueling cross-examination by Michael P. Stone, the lawyer for Laurence M. Powell, one of four Los Angeles police officers charged with assault and excessive use of force in the March 3, 1991, beating of Rodney G. King.


Q&amp;A
Pigeon Colors
Q.
Why do flocks of city pigeons have hardly any two that match?
A.
Because there is no advantage for city pigeons in having one color rather than another, said Dr.
Charles Walcott, executive director of the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology.


Sphinx Poses Riddle About Its Own Fate
THE Sphinx, ravaged by time and the crush of human beings who come to gaze or settle near its great stone paws, has coughed up a new riddle for the modern age: What can be done to save the ancient monument?
In an effort to curb the effects of erosion, pollution and sewage creeping into the water table, 70 international experts gathered in Cairo last week to discuss measures to preserve the great stone sculpture with its human head and lion's body.


Citicorp Names Briton To Head Asset Group
Citicorp has decided to centralize control of its large and far-flung investment advisory service and has hired W. Neville Bowen, a British executive, to run the new group, to be called Global Asset Management.
Mr.
Bowen, who is 56 years old, has spent 23 years at the Hill Samuel Investment Management Group in Britain, the last 6 as chief executive.
He comes to Citicorp just as Richard S. Braddock, the banking company's president, says the asset-management business will be one of Citicorp's "most important growth areas over the next decade."


Christian Science Head Quits Amid Money Fight
The longtime chairman of the Christian Science Church resigned yesterday amid a bitter internal dispute over the church's direction and finances, and the church simultaneously abandoned his ambitious and expensive dream of building a cable television channel into the church's principal ministry to the world.
The church announced that the money-losing Monitor Channel, a 24-hour public affairs and news channel started last April, was for sale and that it would be closed if no buyer could be found by June 15.


Blizzard Disrupts the Denver Area and the Plains States


Hewlett's 'Consummate Strategist'
As a young manager at the Hewlett-Packard Company two decades ago, Richard A. Hackborn was once taken aside by William Hewlett, the company's co-founder, and given a piece of advice that kept Hewlett-Packard from a head-on collision with I.B.M. in mainframe computers.
"Never try to take a fortified hill," Mr.
Hewlett said, "especially if the army on top is bigger than your own."
Mr.
Hackborn took that advice to heart.
Instead of being a challenger, he has become king of one of the highest, most heavily fortified hills in the entire computer business.


Sanctions on Iraq Punish the Children
To the Editor:
"How to Squeeze Saddam Hussein" (editorial, Feb. 13) dismisses using force as too dangerous and fomenting upheaval as too risky for "prying the dictator off his perch." But favoring an international embargo on the assumption that it will encourage Iraqis "to rid themselves of Saddam Hussein" ignores the facts.
Before the embargo began, there was no indication it would have such an effect, and the embargo has not weakened Saddam Hussein's power.
According to reports by the international study team, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent, American Friends Service Committee, Catholic Relief Services and the United Nations, the sanctions are causing widespread starvation, not widespread revolution.


French Socialists Look to Rightist Discontent
By condoning a series of stormy demonstrations against the far-right National Front, France's faltering Socialist Government has turned the front's leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, into the central figure of the campaign for crucial regional elections this month.
Even after protesters clashed with the police in several French cities last week, Prime Minister Edith Cresson gave them her blessing.
"If I were not Prime Minister, I could easily take part in such demonstrations," she said.
"I am certainly not going to tell Socialists not to demonstrate."


QVC Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Eavesdroppers, Beware
To the Editor:
Marjorie F. Iseman (letter, Feb. 13) tells how the writer Arthur Kober baited eavesdroppers.
He did something similar to me in a crowded elevator in Rockefeller Center.
He asked me in a resonant voice, "Is your brother still in jail?" Eyes swiveled.
I muttered something.
He said, "Tell him his best chance is to admit writing the bad checks, but to deny the extortion charge."


Baseball; 2 Tests and 3 Strikes: Yanks Say They're Finished With Perez
Angry over reports that suspended Yankee pitcher Pascual Perez questioned the results of his recent positive drug tests, General Manager Gene Michael today called Perez's claim "preposterous" and said the team had no intention of taking him back when his one-year suspension ends, even though it will retain the rights to the right-hander.
"I don't want him," Michael said after reading accounts of Perez's allegation.
"Look at the contract he had, and he let us down for three years. No way. Let someone else do it."


Another Year for Brown
The American League president, BOBBY BROWN, agreed yesterday to a one-year contract extension through Dec. 31, 1993.
Brown, who succeeded LEE MacPHAIL as league president on Jan. 1, 1984, said he made the decision after a unanimous request from the 14 clubs at last week's owners meetings.


New Technique in Lab Prevents Rejection Of Organ Transplants
IN experiments that may revolutionize organ transplants, scientists have temporarily paralyzed the immune systems of mice, slipped in hearts from unrelated mice and watched with astonishment as the animals regained their normal immune systems but did not reject their transplanted hearts.
The experiments, conducted in Japan and the United States in recent months, are the first to induce tolerance to foreign tissues without knocking out the immune system and without using powerful anti-rejection drugs, researchers said.


Cajoling Spare Change To Protect Lighthouse
It is not customary for Mary Angevine, weekend gatekeeper of the historic lighthouse at Long Island's outermost tip, to hand back change.
Rather, she lets the bills lie there at the ticket window between her and the visitors, an open green dare beneath her nimble pitch.
"Each boulder costs $300, and you can get your name put on it for that," she explains, savoring the rises and pauses of her well-worn appeal to win funds for the lighthouse's erosion-control project.
"People have been really nice, since, of course at this level, only the fish would see."


CHRONICLE
There will be 80 candles on the birthday cake -- or, rather, cookie -- that DEBORAH NORVILLE will help blow out tomorrow.
She will be helping to celebrate the 80th annivesary of the Girl Scouts of America.
The party, on the 86th floor observatory of the Empire State Building, is being given by the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York.
More than 50 current and past scouts, including three who won the Golden Eaglet award of the 1920's, will be on hand.
Many will stay on for the annual "urban campout" that night in the observatory.
To ask Ms. Norville about scouting is to evoke her years in Troop 1210 in Dalton, Ga.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Plastic Containers Inc., Syosset, L.I., has filed for $100 million of senior secured notes, due 2001, to be offered through Citicorp Securities Markets Inc.
The company is 50 percent owned by Viatech Inc. and 50 percent by Merrywood Inc.
Common  *
Burnham Pacific Properties Inc., San Diego, said it had completed a combined offering of 1.725 million common shares at $16 each and $75 million of 8 1/2 percent debentures, for a total of $102.6 million, through National Westminster Bank's capital markets branch in New York.
Burnham is a real estate investment trust that owns and manages 19 commercial properties in San Diego, Orange and Los Angeles Counties.
Ratings  *
Toronto Dominion Bank Ltd.'s long-term debt has been downgraded by Standard &amp; Poor's to AA from AA+, and the issues have been removed from S.&amp; P.'s Creditwatch.
The rating service cited the "continued worsening of the bank's asset quality and expectation of a prolonged decline of future profitabilty levels." *
Infinity Broadcasting Corp.'s senior subordinated debentures have been assigned a B2 rating by Moody's, which has raised the company's existing senior subordinated notes to B2 from B3.
Moody's said the company's capital structure had been improved by an equity offering.
Infinity, based in New York City, operates 17 radio stations in large national markets.


American Israeli Paper Mills reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Music; A Bulgarian State Choir With Regionalism Intact
When the Bulgarian State Radio and Television Female Vocal Choir toured the United States in 1988 after the surprising commercial success of its album "Le Mystere des Voix Bulgares" (Nonesuch), the choir's singular sound was enough to enthrall listeners.
Singing concert arrangements of traditional songs, usually unaccompanied, the choir of two dozen women sounds both angelic and, to American ears, gorgeously alien.
When the choir, conducted by Dora Hristova, came to Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night, some of the novelty had worn off, but familiarity makes the music barely less remarkable.


Albany Getting an Earful Over Congressional Map
It is not every day that Saul Weprin, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, gets telephone calls from the likes of Shimon Peres and Walter F. Mondale.
But then Congressional redistricting is far from an everyday matter.
Mr.
Mondale, the former Vice President, called Mr.
Weprin last month to lobby on behalf of Representative Charles E. Schumer, a Brooklyn Democrat whose district is threatened by the need to create a Congressional district that will have a majority of Hispanic voters.


Basketball; Knicks Take Bus and Pass a Milestone
It took the Knicks all of last season to win 39 games.
This season, they have done it with 20 games left to play.
Winning its fourth consecutive game, New York (39-23) rolled to an impressive 111-99 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers tonight at the Spectrum.
The Knicks led by as many as 20 points late in the third quarter, and they never trailed in the second half.


Voting Plan Approved by Veto-Proof Margin
In a vote that brought together an unusually combustible mix of political forces, the New York State Legislature approved a plan tonight for redistricting itself by a margin that would be large enough to override a threatened veto by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
In the Assembly, a group of Long Island Republicans, mounting an unusual revolt against their leadership that prompted one of their colleagues to label them traitors who had "sold out for their 30 pieces of silver," sided with the Democrats who control the chamber to pass the reapportionment bill.


Sports of The Times; This Time Tricky Dick Can't Pass
LONG before "point guard" was part of basketball's vocabulary, Dick McGuire was the prototype point guard on the prototype playground court.
He not only was ahead of his time, he was often at least one pass ahead of his teammates.
"I'd go to rebound," his younger brother, Al, recalled, "and the ball would hit me in the back of the head."


Munson Campbell, 67, Pro Hockey Executive
Munson Campbell, a former executive of two National Hockey League teams and a former advertising executive at The New York Times, died last Tuesday while on vacation in Barbados.
He was 67 years old.
He died after apparently suffering a heart attack, a family member said.


Yalta Journal; Picture Lenin and the Czar, Communing by the Sea
In Warsaw and other Eastern European capitals, the word "Yalta" often conjures up the conference at which the Western Allies of World War II in effect conceded to Stalin the right to dominate the countries from which the Soviet Army was driving its German foe.
It meant, until the collapse of Communist rule in 1989, 44 years of subjugation to Soviet power.
Not so here.
In the White Palace in nearby Livadiya, the hilltop castle of the last Czar where the leaders of the Allies, Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin, met in February 1945 to decide the future alignment of Europe, the passing of Soviet power is acknowledged only by an exhibition, alongside that devoted to the conference.
It honors the former owners, the Romanov dynasty.


Mueller Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


The Courage to Make Peace
Menachem Begin, who died yesterday, transformed Israel in two important ways.
Fifteen years ago he led the right-wing Likud bloc to triumph, ending 30 years of Labor Party dominance and shifting the balance of Israeli politics.
Months later, he boldly grasped the olive branch offered by Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt.
He agreed to trade the land of Sinai for the peace of Camp David, thus securing Israel's first -- and only -- peace treaty with an Arab neighbor.
Mr.
Begin's achievements have special relevance this year.
His political heir and successor, Yitzhak Shamir, seeks to extend Likud's political mandate in elections this June.
The winner, either Mr.
Shamir or his Labor rival, Yitzhak Rabin, has a historic opportunity to extend the Camp David formula at U.S.-sponsored peace talks.
For the first time, Israel is meeting face to face with
all
its Arab neighbors as well as Palestinians to discuss recognition, autonomy, borders and peace.


Group to Get Lottery Prize, Officials Say
A $5 million gamble has apparently paid off for a group of Australian investors.
A state official said today that the Lottery Department plans to pay the syndicate, International Lotto Fund of Melbourne, Australia, a disputed $27 million jackpot.


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


The Castration Option
Steven Allen Butler of Houston, Tex., is not a man to be trusted around little girls.
While he was on probation for molesting a 7-year-old, he repeatedly raped a 13-year-old.
Mr.
Butler, however, is not going to prison.
He requested surgical castration rather than a life sentence, and Judge Michael McSpadden said O.K.
If Mr.
Butler behaves himself for the next 10 years, his conviction for his second sexual assault will be removed from his record.
True, removing Mr.
Butler's testicles will reduce his sex drive, though it won't necessarily eliminate his ability to have an erection.
But is it going to decrease his hostility toward women in general and little girls in particular?
Possibly not.
Castration might even increase it.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Leaders of some of the nation's largest law firms disagreed whether Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler needed to settle a Federal ethics lawsuit quickly.
But the firm said it was faced with possible collapse if it waited.  [ Page A1. ]


Alexander's in Talks to Revise Bank Pacts
Alexander's Inc., the budget department store chain that occupies some of the world's most valuable real estate, said yesterday that it was negotiating with its banks to revise its loan agreements and to increase its revolving credit lines in an effort to shore up its faltering business.
In a statement, Alexander's said it had failed to meet all the requirements of some of the loan agreements that it is hoping to renegotiate with its group of banks led by Chemical Bank.


Accounts
*
Fisher-Price Inc., East Aurora, N.Y., to Waring &amp; LaRosa Inc., New York, for its Kiddicraft line of products for infants and pre-schoolers.
The agency, which already handles other Fisher-Price accounts, said that a print campaign would begin in the fall.
Billings were not disclosed.


Dress Barn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  NIXON CHIDES BUSH ON RUSSIA AID
Former President Richard M. Nixon has sharply criticized the Bush Administration for giving insufficient aid to President Boris N. Yeltsin's effort to transform Russia into a free-market democracy.
A1  GORBACHEV HAILED IN GERMANY
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, no longer beloved at home, is enjoying a hero's welcome during a triumphant eight-day tour of Germany.
A10  PEACE MISSIONS FOR THE CAUCASUS
Britain, Turkey and an Islamic coalition began peace missions as Azerbaijani troops continued to shell an Armenian-inhabited town.
A10  DISPUTE OVER NORTH KOREAN ARMS
The State Department has disputed the prediction by Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, that North Korea is on the verge of becoming a nuclear power.
A1  PENTAGON'S SEARCH FOR A MISSION
News Analysis: The Pentagon's draft policy statement that foresees a one-superpower world reflects intense pressure in the American defense establishment to define a robust mission for itself.
A12  AFGHAN PRESIDENT SEEKS U.S.
HELP
Abandoned by his former benefactors in Moscow, Afghanistan's President made an impassioned appeal to the United States to help his country become a bulwark against Islamic fundamentalism.
A3  ARISTIDE PLANS TOUR OF THE U.S.
Fearing that Haiti's military will thwart a recently negotiated plan for his return, the country's exiled President intends to take his case to the American people this week.
A5  CHOLERA AND LATIN POLITICS
One year after cholera broke out in Latin America, it carries a stigma that nations try to avoid at all costs.
This is illustrated by a political battle now going on between Argentina and Peru.
A6  U.S.
VIEW OF YUGOSLAV REPUBLICS
Secretary of State Baker suggested that after months of delay and deliberation, the Bush Administration may be ready to recognize Yugoslavia's breakaway republics.
A8
Thousands of Serbs challenged their Communist-style Government.
A8  France's far-right leader has been put in the political spotlight.
A8  Yalta Journal: Your view depends on whether you live there.
A4  National A14-22  ON THE EVE OF SUPER TUESDAY
The three remaining Democratic Presidential candidates scoured Florida and New England for votes on the eve of 11 Super Tuesday contests.
A1  ART OF DISPENSING FAVORS
The favors that President Bush dispensed as he campaigned in the South were a result of a formal effort to coordinate the policies and actions of the Federal Government with the political operations of the President's campaign.
A1  MENACE OR 'FUN GUN'
The Tec-9 semiautomatic pistol is described by its maker, Intratec, as a "fun gun" avidly sought by weekend shooters and collectors.
But some law-enforcement officials single it out as one of the biggest menaces on the streets.
A1  SORTING OUT LEGAL DEAL
Leaders of some of the nation's largest law firms disagree over whether the hasty decision by Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler to settle a Federal lawsuit was a desperate attempt to save itself or, in effect, a no-contest plea to charges it withheld damaging information about a client from Government inquiry.
A1  CALL FOR END OF 'JOE CAMEL'
The Surgeon General and the American Medical Assocation are demanding that the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company stop using the cartoon character Joe Camel in all advertising and promotions for its Camel cigarettes.
The campaign has long been criticized as being specifically intended to appeal to children.
A1  DEATH SENTENCE OVERTURNED
The Supreme Court overturned a death sentence on the ground that the prosecution violated a convicted murderer's First Amendment rights by telling the jury that he belonged to a racist prison gang.
A14  LIMITS ON LAWMAKERS' TERMS
The Supreme Court left intact California's limits on the terms of its state lawmakers.
A14  INDICTMENTS IN PLANT FIRE
Three officials of a North Carolina chicken processing plant were indicted on involuntary manslaughter charges in a fire last year that killed 25 workers.
A14  BATTLE OVER HOME RULE
A new District of Columbia ordinance that allows unmarried couples to register with the city may rekindle a dispute over statehood or home rule for the District.
A15  TURMOIL IN A CHURCH
The longtime chairman of the Christian Science Church resigned amid a bitter internal dispute over the church's direction and finances.
A16  OUT OF CONTENTION
As expected, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa withdrew from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
A20  TENUOUS HOLD ON RELIGIOUS RIGHT
President Bush's hold on conservative Christians appears somewhat tenuous as the campaign nears the Super Tuesday contests, where the religious right will be an important element.
A21  IN TROUBLE, EVEN IN TEXAS
President Bush is expected to sweep the primary in Texas on Tuesday.
But even in his adopted home state, many people say they are worse off economically under Mr.
Bush.
But voters do not seem to be switching parties.
News analysis.
A22
Tsongas's organizational problems in the Super Tuesday states.
A22  A key witness testified in motorist beating A18  Metropolitan Digest, B1 BATTLE OVER REDISTRICTING
Congressional redistricting is a high-stakes game of political survival in New York State, which will lose 3 of its 34 Congressional seats to reapportionment.
Those stakes have led to a flurry of heavyweight lobbying and a swirl of rumors.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  A museum gives television some respect.
C11  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  America only.
S.&amp; L. accountability.
Justice by castration.
The courage to make peace.
Letters A24  Russell Baker: Mesut, Ayaz and Franjo.
A25  A. M. Rosenthal: Candidates and the question.
A25  Daniel Schorr: How to lose the cold war.
A25  John Silber: How the Democrats can win.
A25  Sports B7-13  Science Times C1-9  Probing ancient history from the heavens with infrared cameras.
C1  Obituaries D23-26  ISRAELIS MOURN BEGIN
With old comrades and their children singing a militant Zionist anthem at his graveside, former Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel was laid to rest in the rocky soil of the Mount of Olives.
D25
Menachem Begin, guerrilla leader who became peacemaker.  D24


I.M.F. Is Found to Spur Growth, at Social Cost
A report by an independent panel of economists concludes that developing countries that follow the programs of the International Monetary Fund usually make substantial cuts in social welfare spending as well as large cuts in their top income tax rates.
But that conclusion, which tends to bolster longtime criticisms of the secretive international lending institution, was accompanied by another: Countries that adhere to I.M.F. programs increase their growth more and reduce their trade-deficit problems faster than do countries that fail to follow the fund's prescriptions.


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quotation of the Day
"I will pay any price, bear any burden, learn to speak Greek, develop a Southern accent, or learn to wear a turtleneck to insure that a Democrat is elected President in 1992." -- SENATOR TOM HARKIN.  [ A20:3. ]


Venture Capital Funds on Upswing
Venture capital funds, bloated in the mid-1980's but famished for the last few years, are again enticing investors.
Soaring prices for small-company stocks and a frenzied market for initial public offerings have nourished the recent returns of older funds, helping venture-fund managers raise capital for new ones.
Pension funds and university endowments are pouring more of their money into the portfolios of young companies that venture funds assemble.
Fund managers relish the prospect that President Bush's proposed cut in the capital-gains tax would bring wealthy individual investors back.


N.H.L. Players and Owners Break Off Talks
Contract negotiations between the National Hockey League Players Association and league owners broke off last night with little significant movement toward a settlement as the threat of a strike continued.
"We're less optimistic than we were this morning," said Bob Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association.
"As of tonight, we're very disappointed."


Panel Approves Compromise in Wage Bill
The Republican-controlled Assembly Labor Committee voted today to send to the full Assembly an amended bill that would reduce by half a planned 80-cent-an-hour increase but would still make New Jersey's minimum wage among the highest in the nation.
The Republican plan would increase the minimum wage to $4.65 an hour on April 1 and add an additional 40 cents an hour a year later.
The compromise, which was approved after six hours of debate, displeased both proponents and opponents of the original bill, which would have raised the minimum to $5.05 on April 1.


Israel Mourns Menachem Begin


Gotti Defense Challenges Details in Murder Story
A defense lawyer scornfully attacked the credibility of Salvatore Gravano yesterday, challenging his testimony that four gunmen all wore white raincoats and Russian fur hats when they killed Paul Castellano.
But Mr.
Gravano, a Mafia turncoat testifying as the prosecution's main witness against John Gotti, stuck to his story.
He recalled planning the murder of Mr.
Castellano, whom he depicted as the boss of the Gambino crime family, and said he and Mr.
Gotti met with the team of gunmen in a park shortly before the slaying on Dec. 16, 1985.


Hockey; Rangers Obtain Wells In a Trade With Sabres
General Manager Neil Smith, tinkering with a Ranger team that suddenly needs a tuneup, yesterday sent right-handed defenseman Randy Moller to Buffalo for aging left-handed defenseman Jay Wells.
Wells, 32 years old, is a 13-season bruiser with 157 penalty minutes and two goals this season.
He will fill a void at the left point that Moller sometimes had tried to occupy, often unsuccessfully.
Similarly, Wells often was forced to play the right side with the Sabres.


Vitamins Win Support as Potent Agents of Health
LONG consigned to the fringes of medicine and accorded scarcely more credibility than crystal-rubbing or homeopathy, the study of how vitamins affect the body and help prevent chronic diseases is now winning broad attention and respect among mainstream medical researchers.
Scientists, who thought that the basic questions in vitamin research had been solved and that the major benefits of the nutrients were to prevent diseases of deficiency like rickets and beri-beri, are learning that most of the vitamins -- from A through K and all the subvariants in between -- play far more fundamental and long-term roles in the body than anybody had suspected.


Review/Dance; Insistent Music With 2 Responses
What made the program that Feld Ballets/NY presented Sunday night at the Joyce Theater especially fascinating was the fact that it included two very different choreographic responses by Eliot Feld to insistent pieces of music.
"Ion" is one of Mr.
Feld's interpretations of Minimalist scores.
In this case, a recording of Steve Reich's "Electric Counterpoint" has inspired Mr.
Feld to devise a demanding solo for Buffy Miller in which the choreography is based on a steady accumulation of gestures.


Lawyers Under Fire; With U.S. Willing to Go After Law Firms, More Whistle-Blowing on Clients Is Likely
Leaders of some of the nation's largest law firms disagreed yesterday over whether the quick decision on Sunday by Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler to settle a Federal lawsuit was a desperate attempt to save itself or, in effect, a no-contest plea to charges that it withheld damaging information about a client from Government savings and loan investigators.
Legal ethics experts agree, however, that the episode further blurs the once-clear lines that governed lawyer-client relations in an adversarial system.
With Government regulators increasingly willing to pursue lawyers for possible ethics violations, they say, lawyers will be quicker to blow the whistle on wrongdoing clients or at least to distance themselves from them.


Nixon Scoffs at Level of Support For Russian Democracy by Bush
Former President Richard M. Nixon has sharply criticized President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d for what he calls the Administration's pathetic support of the democratic revolution in Russia.
He says one of the historic opportunities of this century is being missed.
In a memorandum circulated among friends and foreign affairs experts, Mr.
Nixon faults Mr.
Bush and other candidates for virtually ignoring the issue in the Presidential campaign.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., Los Angeles, a retailer, named Larry G. Petersen executive vice president and chief financial officer. *
Core Industries, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., a maker of electronics and other products, named David R. Zimmer president, chief executive and a director.


Ezra Denerstein, 73, Finance Executive For Bank Company
Ezra J. Denerstein, president of Sterling Bancorp, a bank-holding corporation with headquarters in New York, died in New York Hospital on Feb. 22.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died suddenly of an aneurysm, a family member said.


Lindros Again Says No
Eric Lindros turned down a contract offer from the Quebec Nordiques that would have earned him more than $55 million over 10 years, radio station CJRP in Quebec reported yesterday.


Trustees Set For Ex-Chief
Trustees were appointed today to run the estate of Asil Nadir, former chief executive of Polly Peck International P.L.C. of Britain.
Mr.
Nadir was forced into bankruptcy in January by creditors owed more than $:80 million, or about $137 million.


American Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Afghan President Says U.S. Should See Him as Ally Against Militant Islam
Abandoned by his former benefactors in Moscow and cast somewhat adrift in the new politics of the region, Afghanistan's President made an impassioned appeal to the United States today to help his country become a bulwark against the spread of Islamic fundamentalism in Central Asia.
In an interview here, President Najibullah also pleaded for immediate economic and humanitarian assistance from Washington, which long backed the Afghan fundamentalist guerrillas fighting his Government.
He also promised that he would release four Afghans who worked in the United States Embassy and were convicted of espionage in 1983.


Argentina Deal Seen for Ford
The Ford Motor Company said yesterday that it was negotiating to sell 65,000 Ford Tempos to an association of taxi drivers in Argentina.
If completed, the deal would be among Ford's largest export orders ever.
Ford bid $550 million for the deal, according to Phoenix Plus, a Toronto-based vehicle sales and leasing company that is acting as the intermediary.


Candidates Should Get With the Campaign Finance Program
To the Editor:
"New York City's Campaign Finance Law: Some Playing Field" (letter, Feb. 19) by Andrew Stein, the City Council President, contains serious errors about the New York City campaign finance program.
*
Mr.
Stein's statement that the program has cost the city $27 million is surprisingly wide of the mark.
Mr.
Stein's confusion may be due to his recollection of the statement he signed in 1988, along with Mayor Edward I. Koch, Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin and Peter Vallone, the Council majority leader, in which he promised to set aside $28 million to provide public matching funds for candidates in the 1989 municipal elections.


Baseball; Safe by a Finger Tip


Washington Ordinance Tests Congress
The District of Columbia and Congressional conservatives are preparing for a confrontation over a new ordinance to allow unmarried couples to register with the city as domestic partners.
Although some members of Congress see the measure as a politically dangerous piece of gay-rights legislation, the liberal city government views it as a test of its sovereignty.
The measure would allow unmarried partners, including homosexual couples, to register as domestic partners and would expand health care benefits to the registered partners of city workers.


Staples Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


To Aid Understanding Of Mental Disorders
To the Editor:
In "The President's Sleeping Pill and Its Makers" (letter, Feb. 11), Peter Breggin says the American Psychiatric Association is heavily indebted to drug companies, citing a gift from the Upjohn Company of $1.5 million, which he says was used for lobbying and required continuing education programs for members.
The grant has enabled us to produce three acclaimed films for the public on depression, anxiety and panic disorder -- the most prevalent mental disorders, each under-recognized and undertreated.
We've produced mental-illness awareness guides for educators and nonpsychiatric health professionals.


Patterns
Who Knows What's Real?
The Milan fashion season began with a bang.
Giorgio Armani showed his fall collection on Saturday in his own palazzo, with the built-in runway and the flown-in stars.
Tina Turner, Kim Basinger and Alberto Tomba, the Olympic skier, were among those in the front row.
But the real fashion action was outside.
Robots prowled the streets carrying ray guns.
Harlequins raced around in Fiats.
Men in dresses sashayed down the alleyways, wobbling crazily in high heels.
It was the last night of Carnevale, and an epic all-day fashion event.


Amy Ogden Welcher; Church Leader, 104
Amy Ogden Welcher, a founder and first national president of Church Women United, a national ecumenical organization, died on Feb. 21 at her home at Avery Heights in Hartford.
She was 104 years old.
She died of heart failure, a family member said.


Lone Superpower Plan: Ammunition for Critics
The Pentagon's draft policy statement that foresees a one-superpower world in which no collection of allies or foes is allowed to become a rival reflects intense pressure in the American military establishment to define a robust mission for itself in the post-cold-war era.
Should this draft policy be issued this month to the military chiefs under Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's signature, the Bush Administration will find itself at odds with a number of its international allies and, domestically, with the Democratic majority that controls Congress.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Democrats' Diplomacy: They Need Each Other
Welcome to the N.F.L.
There are 13 Democratic primaries and caucuses over the next eight days, 11 of them on Tuesday.
They will produce 31 percent of the pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention.


World's Rarest Member of Dog Family Faces Extinction
IN the southern Ethiopian mountains, a jackal considered to be the world's rarest member of the dog family is faced with extinction, zoologists say.
The Simien jackal, an animal similar in size and color to a red fox but with long legs and a striking black and white tail, is being shot in a wave of lawlessness by herders roaming the upper reaches of the Bale Mountains, said Wildlife Conservation International, a branch of the New York Zoological Society.


The New York Premiere Of 1937 Britten Cantata
Benjamin Britten's cantata "The Company of Heaven" is to be given its New York premiere in a performance by the Central City Chorus on March 22 at 7 P.M. at the Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue, at 64th Street.
The cantata, which was only recently published, was written for a 1937 BBC radio broadcast.
It is scored for chorus, soprano and tenor soloists, speakers, timpani, organ and strings.


La Mama Runs Short Of Money And Time
The La Mama Experimental Theater Club, a downtown theater institution for 30 years, may soon close its doors.
"I don't see how we can go past the end of March," said Ellen Stewart, the founder and director of the theater institution, which is known simply as La Mama and has played a major role in the establishment of Off Broadway theater in New York City.


Swinging Into Spring


Hockey; Weather Gets Warmer, and Rangers Get Colder
For the Rangers, the omens are now in full bloom.
New York's star-crossed skaters were beaten badly last night by Washington, 5-2, their third straight defeat over all.
They were called for too many dumb penalties.
They were too slow to adjust on defense against the Capitals' big, mobile players.
In a game they had pointed to and talked about in the dressing room, they were a mess.


Seductively Subtle Art of Japanese Puppets
Minosuke Yoshida is a slight, avuncular man with a ready smile and angular features, but when this master of the stage is at his most expressive, filled with wrenching emotion or pathos, his face becomes a blank mask.
Instead, as he demonstrated, he conveys feeling with the most subtle movements of his fingers, lending an exquisitely expressive tilt to the head of the traditional puppet in his lap and transforming it into a maiden quivering with grief.
"When I go to the stage holding a puppet, I'm no longer Minosuke," he explained. (In a breach of normal Japanese etiquette, the Bunraku performers are known by their given names.) "The important thing is no longer what is on my face, but what is in the puppet's heart."


O'Brien Staying at B.C.
Boston College has given JIM O'BRIEN a multiyear contract extension as a reward for leading the Eagles to their best Big East record since he took over as head coach in 1986.
This season the Eagles are 15-12 over all and 7-11 in the league. (AP)


American Stores Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 1


Books of The Times; America's Big Built-In Gamble
Crapshoot  Rolling the Dice on the Vice Presidency  By Jules Witcover  450 pages.
Crown. $25.  'The President Has Been Shot'  Confusion, Disability and the 25th Amendment in the Aftermath of the Attempted Assassination of Ronald Reagan  By Herbert L. Abrams  Illustrated. 363 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $22.95.
Every four years, the electorate becomes aware -- all too briefly during the conventions and on Election Day -- that the second man on the ticket could well become the next Chief Executive because of a President's physical incapacity or assassination.
Two new books address the shortcomings of Vice-Presidential selection and Presidential succession.


WestAir Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Tarpley Joins C.B.A.
ROY TARPLEY, banned from the National Basketball Association for refusing to take a mandatory drug test, will return to pro basketball tonight as a member of the Wichita Falls Texans in the Continental Basketball Association.
Tarpley, 27, can apply for reinstatement to the N.B.A. after the start of the 1993-94 season.


Menachem Begin, Guerrilla Leader Who Became Peacemaker
Menachem Begin, the Israeli Prime Minister who made peace with Egypt, lived much of his life in the opposition.
A Jewish underground leader before Israel gained independence in 1948, he openly fought the established Zionist leadership of the struggle against British rule.
Then for nearly three decades, he headed Israel's major opposition party.


Otto Klineberg, Who Helped Win '54 Desegregation Case, Dies at 92
Otto Klineberg, whose pioneering studies on the intelligence scores of black students helped win the Supreme Court's landmark school desegregation case in 1954, died on Friday at the Carriage Hill nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about poverty on the East End of Long Island referred incorrectly to a fund raiser for a food bank and misidentified her former position.
She is Mardythe DiPirro, the former supervisor of Southampton, not East Hampton.


We Need a Global Warming Treaty With Clout; Link With Cholera
To the Editor
Cholera in the United States: curiosity or clarion?
Cholera is spreading in the Americas, and scientists have now found a possible link with global warming.
Your Feb. 18 editorial and "Lead Us to Rio, Mr. President" by Michael Oppenheimer (Op-Ed, Feb 22), on the United Nations conference on the environment and development, the so-called earth summit, in Rio de Janeiro next June, both urge the United States to join an international treaty on carbon emissions, a pact essential for our health.
Researchers on diarrhea in Bangladesh have long associated cholera cycles with the spring blooms of algae and plankton.
Dr.
Rita Colwell of the University of Maryland and others have isolated resting forms of cholera in a wide range of marine life.
Exposed to unfavorable conditions, the bacteria "hibernate"; with warming and increased nutrients, they emerge.


Market Place; Ionics: Pure Play In Pure Water
MORE than 40 years ago, a group of venture capitalists and engineers in the Boston area founded Ionics Inc., a company built on the belief that purifying water would become a big business.
Investors in Ionics think that day has arrived.
Shares in Ionics traded on the New York Stock Exchange last week at a high of $57.875, up $22 in a year and nearly triple the level of two years ago.
The stock has since dipped slightly, closing yesterday at $56.75, down 25 cents.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GOTTI LAWYER OUNTERATTACKS
A defense lawyer scornfully attacked the credibility of Salvatore Gravano, challenging his testimony that four gunmen all wore white raincoats and Russian fur hats when they killed Paul Castellano, boss of the Gambino organized-crime family.
But Mr.
Gravano, a Mafia turncoat testifying as the prosecution's main witness against John Gotti, stuck to his story.
B3.


Classical Music in Review
New Sounds  Merkin Concert Hall
Since 1982, John Schaefer has presented New Sounds, an hourlong contemporary-music program broadcast nightly at 11 on WNYC (93.9 FM).
He is also the host of a New Sounds concert series that is broadcast live from Merkin Concert Hall.
On Sunday afternoon, he presided over the third of this season's four concerts. (The last is on April 12.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media One Campaign That Stumbles to Success, Another That Seldom Stumbles; Buchanan Knows Tricks of the Trade
Chris Tremblay, an aide to Patrick J. Buchanan, had just struck gold.
As Mr.
Buchanan was preparing to address a crowd before the Southern Farm Bureau here, Mr.
Tremblay discovered that one of the local television stations had a remote truck outside and would be broadcasting some of the event live.


Burke's Next Stop: Minors in San Diego
Goaltender SEAN BURKE, who led the Canadian team to a silver medal in the recent Winter Olympics, signed a contract on Sunday night with the San Diego Gulls of the International Hockey League.
Financial terms of the deal, which runs through the rest of the season, were not disclosed.
The Gulls' owner, FRED COMRIE, said the contract includes an option for next season.


Another Vacancy at Top Of Johnson Products
The Johnson Products Company, the Chicago-based maker of hair-care products for black consumers, said yesterday that Eric G. Johnson, its president and chief executive, had resigned to pursue personal business interests.
The announcement once again placed in turmoil the leadership of the company, which makes Afro Sheen, Ultra Sheen and Classy Curl hair-care products.
Three years ago, George E. Johnson, the company's chairman and founder, resigned and transferred control of the company to his former wife, Joan B. Johnson.


Review/Fashion; Suits Take Many Guises In Milan
By simply switching his show from the last day of the week to the first, Giorgio Armani gave a new perspective to the Italian fall and winter openings.
Retailers, instead of sitting nobly through interminable first courses of secondary collections by top designers and wistful attempts by hopefuls to move to the top, plunged immediately into the meat and potatoes of the season.


I've Got the World on a Disk
CD-ROM, a technology that used to be as exciting as a 10,000-page statistical database, is trying to enter the consumer and education markets on the coattails of its flashier cousin, the audio compact disk.
To be successful in the consumer world, CD-ROM must prove itself to be colorful, musical, flashy, entertaining and inexpensive.
The Sony Corporation of America, maker of the Sony Laser Library CD-ROM system for I.B.M.
PC-compatible computers, appears to be on the right track.


Law Upheld On Zoning For Housing
A Superior Court judge has upheld a Connecticut law that was enacted to open the state's suburbs and small towns to builders of affordable housing.
In a decision released today, the judge, Marshall K. Berger Jr., swept aside the Town of Trumbull's objections to the law, which requires zoning officials who reject affordable-housing plans to show that their local concerns outweigh the region's need for such housing.


How Holyfield-Bowe Fell Apart
Since heavyweight Riddick Bowe turned pro in 1989, his manager, Rock Newman, has shrewdly maneuvered him toward the top of the rankings and into position for an eventual shot at the title.
But the question before the house is this: Did Newman blow a $6 million to $7 million payday when a title shot against the undisputed heavyweight champion, Evander Holyfield, was within his sights?


Pension Changes Urged After Maxwell Scandal
The ease with which Robert Maxwell plundered hundreds of millions of dollars from employee pension funds shows that Britain's regulatory system needs to be greatly strengthened, a parliamentary committee investigating the scandal said today in a report.
Lashing out in particular at the system of self-regulation instituted for the financial-services industry in the 1980's, the Social Security Committee said there was an "urgent need" to change Britain's laws.


Latin Nations Feud Over Cholera Outbreak
One year after cholera broke out in Latin America, it carries a stigma that nations and Governments try to avoid at all costs.
The fear of being branded as a country unable to control a cholera outbreak is best illustrated by a political battle now going on between Argentina and Peru.
On Feb. 14, Aerolineas Argentinas Flight 386 landed in Los Angeles.
The Boeing 747, carrying 322 passengers, took off from Buenos Aires, stopped in Lima to take on food, water and more than 100 travelers, and arrived in Los Angeles with five individuals showing signs of cholera.
That number grew to more than 50 in the coming days and one passenger died.


We Need a Global Warming Treaty With Clout
To the Editor:
In "Global Snub on Global Warming" (editorial, Feb. 18), you call on the Bush Administration to adopt "a more reasonable course" on global warming, but voluntary goals are not adequate.
Most European governments adopted such goals for limiting carbon dioxide emissions in 1989, but the Bush Administration refused to go along, saying that mere goals could not be taken seriously without measures to back them up.
Since then the Europeans have called for legally binding limits on carbon dioxide as part of the international climate treaty.
The Europeans are well along in implementing their own commitments.
It is too little and too late for the United States to adopt merely a goal.


Court's Ruling On Terms Gives Boost to Backers
The United States Supreme Court today left intact a 1990 initiative limiting the terms of California State officeholders, thereby giving a shot of adrenaline to similar measures under consideration in at least 16 states.
"What happened today will give momentum again to the term-limit folks, who lost it after the Washington election," said Bill Frenzel, a retired Minnesota Congressman and a guest scholar at the Brookings Institution, referring to the lone electoral defeat for a term-limits measure, in Washington State last fall.
"They will take heart and be encouraged to work harder."


Will the World Conquer Us in '92?
Listen carefully to anyone associated with the World League of American Football.
Listen very carefully.
Replay tapes of their remarks backward (but discard the satanic lyrics).
Nearly the same words are repeated, as if in a mantra:
"The product is better. The product is better."


On My Mind; Candidates And the Question
Even before he is sworn in, the man who wins the election will have to face for himself the most important question of his term.
So it was put to all the candidates:
"Should the U.S. take further steps to topple Saddam Hussein?"


H.J. Heinz Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


4-Year-Old Bronx Boy Is Beaten and Burned, and His Parents Are Charged
A 4-year-old boy, whose body the police said was covered with bruises and whose feet were red from burns, was listed in stable condition yesterday in a Bronx hospital, and his parents were under arrest and charged in his abuse.
The mother told the police that the father had become angry because the boy was jumping on the bed, said a police spokesman, Detective Ralph Saint Just.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media One Campaign That Stumbles to Success, Another That Seldom Stumbles; For Tsongas Camp, Things Go Right 'Now and Then'
For the Tsongas campaign, today was an exception.
The weather was postcard perfect as a Dixieland band played for hundreds of eager supporters who turned out for the candidate at an outdoor rally here.
American flags made a colorful backdrop next to the green-and-white Tsongas placards.


'900' Phone Number For Political Donors
The direct-marketing technology of "900" telephone numbers has been adapted for national political fund-raising in a project sponsored by a Washington-based political action committee.
The committee, the Gay and Lesbian Victory Fund, which raises money for openly gay candidates running for office around the country, last week opened a "900" line for contributors.
Callers can make contributions for up to five candidates, or to the fund itself, by dialing a nationwide number, 900-678-3863.
Each call will add $19.92 to a caller's phone bill.


Lawter International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stock Prices End Day Mixed, With Dow Down by 6.48
Stocks closed mixed in thin trading yesterday as investors found little reason to buy.
A few issues, which appeared attractive after recent sell offs, drew some interest.
Traders said activity was lackluster without any fresh economic data and none expected until Thursday, when February retail sales data will be released.


Review/Theater; Fateful Encounters At an Urban Crossroads
The intersection of life with chance seems to fascinate Richard Caliban as a playwright and director.
In his plays and his productions of plays by other writers, accidents occur that throw widely disparate people into juxtaposition -- accidents that prove to be fateful, even fatal.
In "Homo Sapien Shuffle," at the Public Theater, a man is killed in full public view in Grand Central Terminal.
But he is not the intended victim.
Why was he there, Mr.
Caliban asks, and who was meant to die in his place?
Moving backward, he describes the paths that led the participants and onlookers to the homicide.
These steps in time are intriguing, in characteristic Caliban fashion, but the play is too convoluted at the center to fulfill its role as a mystery.
In it, the playwright is not as artful as he was in his earlier "Rodents and Radios," which more successfully covered the globe in search of character enlightenment.


CSS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chess
Most players are more than happy to succeed now and then with unclear, speculative attacking play, but for the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, it's his accustomed style.
Incredibly confident, he makes violent attacks, replete with heavy sacrifices, work for him again and again.
It seems at times that he almost cannot go wrong.
And even when the stout defense of his persistent challenger, Anatoly Karpov, holds him off, the champion finds ways of redeeming his brave risks by at least drawing the games.
He appears to have the sort of charmed life that Mikhail Tal had back in 1960.


Amid Fervor and Memories, Begin Is Buried in Jerusalem
With old comrades and their children singing a militant Zionist anthem at his graveside, former Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel was laid to rest today in the rocky soil of the Mount of Olives, overlooking this city of troubles and dreams.
At his own request, Israel gave an unadorned farewell to Mr.
Begin, who had died 13 hours earlier and was buried before the sun faded, in accordance with Jewish practice.


Esquire Radio &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Top Health Official Demands Abolition Of 'Joe Camel' Ads
The Surgeon General and the American Medical Assocation joined yesterday to demand that the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company stop using the cartoon character Joe Camel in all advertising and promotions for its Camel cigarettes.
The unusual demand, which was rebuffed by the company, intensifies moves against a ubiquitous character long criticized as specifically designed to appeal to children.
"In years past, R. J. Reynolds would have us walk a mile for a Camel," the Surgeon General, Antonia Novello, said at a news conference in Washington, echoing the brand's most famous ad slogan.
"Today, it's time that we invite Old Joe Camel himself to take a hike."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; White House 'Funnel' Directs Aid To States With Primaries Nearing
The favors that President Bush dispensed as he campaigned throughout the South last week were a result of a formal, systematic effort to coordinate the policies and actions of the Federal Government with the political operations of the President's re-election campaign, say Administration officials and campaign workers.
A small group of White House officials, closely supervised by Mr.
Bush's chief of staff, Samuel K. Skinner, transmits requests from the campaign to Government agencies.
This arrangement is known as "the funnel." Criticism From Challengers
The benefits of incumbency are not new to office holders, from Presidents to mayors.
And in most instances, there is nothing illegal about the use of government largess for political purposes.
At the national level, chief executives of both parties have long exploited the powers of the Presidency in election years.


General Host Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Careers; Early Start To Job Study In Colleges
BIG or small, universities and colleges are worrying more about the job outlook for their students.
Perhaps surprisingly though, their concern is not so much for those graduating this recessionary year, but for those who are now just freshmen and sophomores.
Some college administrators say that juniors and seniors are already painfully aware of how bad the employment situation is.
But they say younger students may be unrealistically optimistic about how easy it will be to enter the career they want by the time they graduate.


Lofty Instruments Discern Traces of Ancient Peoples
WITH lofty perspective and vision no human eye can match, advanced technologies for surveying the landscape from satellites, the space shuttle and airplanes are changing the practices of archeologists and paleontologists exploring the buried remnants of past life.
Not that these explorers will be throwing away their spades and trowels, or finding much relief from long hours digging in the baking sun, but the technologies of remote sensing are becoming indispensable tools for telling them where to dig.
The result has already been some dramatic discoveries once thought impossible, leading enthusiasts to proclaim remote sensing the most promising new technique in archeology since the introduction of radiocarbon dating in the 1940's.


Folk Remedy Seems to Help Fight Vaginal Yeast Infections
EATING yogurt has long been popular among alternative healers as a remedy for vaginal yeast infections.
Because scientific evidence of its powers to cure has remained elusive, however, most doctors have hesitated to recommend it seriously as treatment for this ailment, which afflicts half of all women at some time in their lives.
But a small study published in the current issue of The Annals of Internal Medicine suggests that this inexpensive folk remedy may be as effective as its proponents contend.
The researchers at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park monitored 13 women while they ate yogurt containing a bacteria often added to commercial yogurt and while they did not.
While eating the yogurt the women had a third the number of yeast infections on average.


U.S. Is Expected to Pressure India on Nuclear Issue
The Bush Administration is expected to press India in high-level talks this week to drop its longstanding opposition to signing a treaty limiting the spread of nuclear arms, American officials say.
New Delhi will also be asked to join in regional talks with Pakistan on controlling nuclear development.
Pakistan, whose weapons program led to a cutoff of United States aid in October 1990, has refused to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty or to agree to international inspections and safeguards until India does.


9 Ounces of Agile Memory, to Go
DON'T let anyone put a Psion Series 3 in your hand. To see it is to want it.
The Series 3 computer is 6.5 inches by 3.3 inches by 0.9 inches, weighing nine ounces, with seven built-in programs: a word processor and outliner; a database; a schedule manager; a scientific and business calculator; a communications link; a world map with the time and dialing codes for 450 large cities; an alarm clock, and a language for writing your own programs.


F.D.I.C. Backs Deal By Milken
Winning the right to review some financial data in the deal, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation reversed course yesterday and agreed to support a plan allowing Michael R. Milken, along with hundreds of other former executives of Drexel Burnham Lambert and Drexel's insurers, to put up $1.3 billion to settle all civil litigation against them.
Although the basic economic terms of the settlement were not changed, the F.D.I.C. will now be allowed to review some information about the net worth of Mr.
Milken and some of the other executives.


Baker Hints at U.S. Shift On Slovenia and Croatia
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d suggested today that the Bush Administration might be ready to recognize Yugoslavia's breakaway republics after months of delay and deliberation.
En route from Washington to Brussels, where he will meet the foreign ministers of the new North Atlantic Cooperation Council on Tuesday, Mr.
Baker told reporters that he would also be holding separate discussions with leaders of the European Community on the status of the other Yugoslav republics that have sought to free themselves of Belgrade's rule.


LeBlanc Gets His Due
RAY LeBLANC, goaltending hero for the United States Olympic team in France, will get his one-game reward tonight when he appears in net for the Blackhawks in Chicago against the San Jose Sharks.
"Everyone needs that one little break to get into the National Hockey League," LeBlanc said yesterday.
"I've got that break now. It's up to me to take advantage of this."


Supreme Court Roundup; Unusual Use of the First Amendment Overturns a Killer's Death Sentence
The Supreme Court overturned a death sentence today on the ground that the prosecution violated a convicted murderer's First Amendment rights by telling the jury that he belonged to a white racist prison gang called the Aryan Brotherhood.
The vote was 8 to 1, with Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist writing for the majority and Justice Clarence Thomas casting the dissenting vote.


By Design; Spring Tonic in Straw
The men's wear influence on women's dress is only just beginning.
By next fall women may well be shoulder deep in natty tweeds and tailored attire.
Right now, they can ease into the feeling with a hat.
Think of those jaunty panamas worn by gentlemen in warmer climes.
Remember the dashing fellow in the coffee ads?
Forget the horse, cigar and mustache but keep the image of the smallish sombrero he has on his head.
That's the look.
It's just the sort of hat you want now, to add a touch of spring and a lot of polish to any kind of suit, tailored or curvy.


Richard Moser, 82, Rackets Investigator, Is Dead
Richard Goodwin Moser, who served as chief counsel to the Senate Committee on Organized Crime headed by Senator Estes Kefauver and who was chairman of the professional ethics committees of the New York City and State bar associations, died Tuesday in San Simeon by the Sound, a nursing home in Greenport, L.I.
He was 82 years old and lived on Shelter Island.
He died of a stroke, a family member said.


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Stock prices rebounded this afternoon to closed slightly higher in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues, which was down 76.87 points at midday, ended the day up 56.91, or nearly three-tenths of 1 percent, to 20,854.59.
On Monday, the Nikkei fell 195.31 points.


Classical Music in Review
Amsterdam Schoenberg Ensemble  Merkin Concert Hall
The Amsterdam Schoenberg Ensemble is a group that remembers Arnold Schoenberg and the tight, embattled circle of composers who gathered in Vienna in the first part of this century.
Saturday night's chamber version of Debussy's "Prelude a l'Apres-Midi d'un Faune" is a product of those private concerts long ago and helped to explain the enduring power of this piece.
With much of the orchestra color transferred to piano and harmonium, how can it survive?
Well, it does, and with its nature whole.
The answer may be this: that the beauty lies not in Debussy's gauzy orchestral complexity, but in something more fundamental, a design of simple wind solos held in miraculous balance.


Frederick E. Horn; Accountant, 79
Dr.
Frederick E. Horn, a certified public accountant who taught at Columbia University for many years, died on Feb. 28 at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Ridgewood.
His family said he died of heart disease.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; President Focuses on 'Family Values'
With Presidential primaries fast approaching in the Midwest's most urban states, President Bush declared today that the problems of big cities were rooted in the collapse of the family, and that the need for new solutions to the crisis was urgent and clear.
At the same time, Mr.
Bush appeared to argue against more Government programs directed at families, saying that many of them have hurt more often than they have helped.
His own prescription, delivered in a speech here to a meeting of officials in the National League of Cities, was limited.


We Need a Global Warming Treaty With Clout; Environment Refugees
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 18 editorial on global warming makes some strong points, but does not go far enough.
You fail to mention, for example, that the Union of Concerned Scientists, in a recent study, estimated that carbon dioxide emissions could be cut 25 percent by 2005 and 70 percent by 2030 with a net, cumulative savings of $2.3 trillion for the United States economy.
Thus, as opposed to the conventional wisdom, adopting energy-efficient technologies is good for the economy, the environment and the deficit.
To me, as someone who recently spent a year in Bangladesh, the threat of global warming has added meaning.
By the mid-21st century, the predicted rise in sea level would make thousands of my friends environmental refugees, with their homes and places of work submerged by the Bay of Bengal.


2 Large Agencies Merge in San Diego
ADC Stoorza and Franklin &amp; Associates, two of San Diego's three largest agencies, plan to merge through an acquisition of Franklin by Stoorza, Zeigaus &amp; Metzger Inc., ADC Stoorza's parent company.
The new shop, to be called Franklin Stoorza, will serve clients including the McDonald's restaurants in San Diego and the San Diego Padres baseball team.


Amid 'Shortage,' Young Physicists See Few Jobs
EVEN as leading scientists warn that America's educational system is failing to produce scientists fast enough to fill a glaring projected shortage, many young physicists contend that universities are already turning out far more physicists than there are permanent jobs.
If the job market for research physicists does not radically improve soon, they say, growing numbers of gifted young Americans will be turned away from careers in physics, a field deemed by many experts as vital to maintaining America's technological and economic health.


Business Scene; Moscow Subway Defies the Odds
EVERY Moscow subway station has a digital clock that if it were mounted in a New York subway station would be a source of endless public razzing.
The clocks time the intervals between trains.
Each has only three digits: two that count seconds and one for minutes.
The message is that trains are never more than 10 minutes apart, a boast the New York subway system does not dare to make.
The Moscow subway system -- carrying eight million riders a day, more than any other subway in the world -- works, and works well.
In a city where very little does function well, the subways are almost a haven from gray winter days, rundown buildings and rutted, slushy streets.
The social forces that made New York subways a world marvel in the early 20th century still appear to be powerfully at work in Moscow.


CHRONICLE
Overheard at the buffet supper at JIM and KATE LEHRER'S home in the Cleveland Park section of Washington Sunday evening: "This is the closest thing to a political-media-literary salon in Washington -- the A list of press in town."
Indeed it was.
Everywhere you looked in the crowd of 150 or so, there were faces from the Sunday morning talk-show circuit, from the evening news, from the halls of government.
Take for example, Roger Mudd, Judy Woodruff, Tim Russert, Andrea Mitchell, Jim Hartz, Katharine Graham, Ben Bradlee and Sally Quinn.


Dinkins Returns to Hospital After Blood Infection Is Found
After briefly leaving his sickbed to sign some bills at City Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins was readmitted to the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center yesterday for treatment of what his doctors said was a bacterial infection in his blood, perhaps transmitted through an old hernia scar.
Doctors and mayoral aides said a blood culture had revealed the infection just as Mr.
Dinkins was leaving the hospital in midmorning after going there early Sunday complaining of chills and high fever that doctors at first described as a case of the flu.
Doctors ordered him back for a full battery of tests and antibiotic treatments that might last several days.


Review/Television; A Look Inside a Hospital for the Criminally Insane
"Asylum," at 10 tonight on HBO, offers a close and sometimes painful look at the inmates of Patton State Hospital in San Bernardino County, California, home to people judged criminally insane.
The first glimpses of them, huddled alone or answering the off-screen interviewer or undergoing therapy, seem random.
But, as the hour goes along, you realize you are watching some of these men and women struggling to exorcise their personal demons, while others may merely be trying to con their public guardians.
"They don't get any worse than they get here," a doctor says.
Most are murderers, who have been diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenic, a catch-all category of mental illness that defies ready cure.
Yet the program reports that almost all those consigned to Patton are released after two or three years, and 88 percent stay clear of the law.
Presumably, most remain on prescription drugs.
In one of the documentary's few funny scenes, two inmates have a connoisseur-level discussion of medications they have known.


Machado Can't Leave
The Venezuelan judge who freed JULIO MACHADO from prison on Friday ruled yesterday that the Milwaukee Brewers' relief pitcher must stay in Venezuela for the time being.


Family of Dead Rock Fan Receives $250,000
The family of a rock fan who suffered fatal head injuries when a New Jersey state trooper hit him in the Meadowlands Sports Complex in November 1990 has settled a Federal civil rights suit for $250,000.
The payment, announced yesterday, closes a case that led to a five-month investigation last year into abuse of patrons at the sprawling sports complex and eventual reform of its hiring and training of security guards.


Basketball; Fordham Hopes to Avoid Another N.C.A.A. Almost
N.I.T. N.I.T. N.I.T.
It's not that Fordham's Fred Herzog has anything against the National Invitation Tournament; it's just that in the five years he has been at the school, that's all the 6-foot-9-inch player has seen.


Hibernians Lose Round On Parade
A judge for New York City's Commission on Human Rights yesterday denied a motion by the St.
Patrick's Day Parade sponsor to dismiss discrimination charges against it, leaving open the possibility that the sponsor would be forced to allow a gay group to march in the parade under its own banner.
Saying that the administration of the waiting list for groups wanting to march in the parade "remains a mystery," Judge Rosemarie Maldonado agreed with a lawyer for the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, R. Paul Wickes, who said that testimony from earlier in the day showed "the flexible way in which the waiting list has been administered."


'Weird' Bird Lives In Harems
WHILE harems of jealously guarded females are common among mammals, biologists had always thought they did not exist among birds.
Now, however, a tropical biologist has discovered a bird version of the harem system that rivals that of the elephant seal, whose harem system is the most extreme among mammals and where single males achieve almost complete domination of an entire colony's females.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Ensemble  Florence Gould Hall
The New York Chamber Ensemble offered its own songs of innocence and experience on Friday night.
From the five pieces played came one fresh, original voice and another tempered by time.


Basketball; Manhattan Squanders Chance to Gain Title
The Manhattan Jaspers, who have waited 34 years for a return trip to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, squandered their chance in the final two minutes of their Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference championship game against La Salle tonight.
The Jaspers, who led by 74-69 and were in possession of the basketball with just over two minutes left in the game, committed three turnovers in the remaining time.
Those errors allowed La Salle to escape the Knickerbocker Arena with a gritty 77-76 come-from-behind victory before 4,622 spectators.


Holtzman Bars Contract to Bronx Agency
The New York City Comptroller has moved to cancel a new city contract with a private social-service agency in the Bronx where a former official was accused of spending thousands of dollars in public funds on personal expenses and political contributions.
The Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, asserted that the city renewed a contract with the agency, Hispanic Health Services Inc., to provide housing for AIDS patients despite substantial evidence of questionable spending and a Federal investigation into the group's misuse of public funds.
The new contract, for $401,141, was to run through June 30.


Here, All the Treasures Are on Paper
HERE'S a story for those people who read prose for pleasure, who hold a new book, even a new old book, full of expectation and exciting promise as if it had been written just for them and left, like a sleeping princess in a witch's spell, as long as necessary for the appropriately appreciative eyes to arrive.
You can spot these addicted readers easily.
They're the ones who must study the remote channel-changer every time they seek the right button to flee "Jeopardy."
Many of these incurable readers dream of someday owning a bookstore, a vast cozy place bulging with thousands of volumes about everything imaginable -- and alphabetized by someone else.
Every book, well, nearly every book, will overflow with revelations satisfying even the most eclectic curiosities.
This store will have nothing to do with cash registers, employee tax forms and Danielle Steele.
Thousands of people, well, hundreds anyway, will shuffle its creaking wooden floors to browse, to sit in the thoughtfully placed chairs and even to buy some books to share ownership in the accumulated wisdom and felicitous phrases of authors they need never meet in person to know intimately.


Unusual Alliances Form on Tax Bill
Like sports fans speculating on the possible draft picks by pro teams, senators and their aides are now guessing what amendments will be proposed right after the Senate takes up tax legislation on Tuesday and which will be conspicuous by their absence.
Voting cliques are gathering around an assortment of probables.
Because the issue is money, the groupings are sometimes based on local interests as well as on party affiliations.


Value City Dept. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Paying Respects To TV
Is "Beverly Hills 90210" worthy of serious analysis at, of all places, a fine-arts museum?
Is "Hill Street Blues" comparable to Shakespeare?
Are television shows like "A Different World," "Maude" and "Star Trek: The Next Generation," cultural breakthroughs?
Virtually each night in the last week, hundreds of television writers, actors, producers and, above all, fans have been surging into the Los Angeles County Museum of Art to celebrate their favorite medium and, most significant, to validate television as a significant art form.


Cuomo Unveils Bond Plan In an Effort to Create Jobs
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today unveiled an $800 million economic development bond act proposal that is aimed at creating jobs for New York's failing economy but that represents, aides say, a scaled-back version of what he originally hoped to propose.
The proposal would enable the state to borrow $800 million for infrastructure improvements like roads and sewage hookups that make areas more attractive to businesses.
A portion of the money would go to each of the state's 62 counties; the rest would be allotted project by project.


Revco Expects an End To Long Bankruptcy
Revco D.S.
Inc., the drugstore chain that has been in bankruptcy since 1988, today was on the verge of emerging from Chapter 11 after nearly all its creditors agreed to back the retailer's reorganization plan.
Revco said creditors representing 99.74 percent of claims against it had voted to accept the plan.
The company said it hoped the vote would clear the way for approval of its reorganization by Federal Bankruptcy Judge Harold White at a hearing set for Wednesday.


U.S. AGENCIES SPLIT OVER NORTH KOREA
The State Department is disputing the prediction by Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, that North Korea is on the verge of becoming a nuclear power, senior Administration officials said today.
The issue, which has been debated vigorously, but privately, for months, was publicly disclosed after Mr.
Gates told the House Foreign Affairs Committee late last month that Pyongyang could have a nuclear weapon from within a few months to a couple of years.
He made the same prediction in closed testimony before the committee, officials familiar with his testimony said.


Review/Music; Trying Out the New Hall at Queens College
Subtly, over the last dozen years, the sound of music in New York concert halls has been changing.
Merkin Concert Hall, for example, is an almost ideal, intimate setting for chamber music; the sound reaches the ears without even the sense of an "acoustic" ambiance.
In addition, the renovations at Weill Recital Hall (formerly Carnegie Recital Hall) and Kathryn Bache Miller Hall at Columbia University have been welcome, along with such new contributions as Gould Hall at the French Institute/ Alliance Francaise and the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
I haven't heard performances in all of these halls -- the Walter Reade is just now beginning to present concerts -- but they seem to treat music with a combination of directness and detachment.
They have also all had their acoustics designed by Peter J. George and his company, Peter George Associates.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.50
6.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.01
4.02
5.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.12
5.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.15
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.92
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.95
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.76
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


J. P. Morgan Out $50 Million In Mortgage-Backed Trades
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company said yesterday that it had lost $50 million on mortgage-backed securities so far this year and that the head of the unit that trades in the investments had resigned.
Mohamad Sotoudeh, who quit as a managing director, was responsible for the analytical research and the investment positions that Morgan took in mortgage-backed securities, which are backed by pools of home loans.


Pistol Packs Glamour, Power And Reputation as a Menace
To Mike Solo, marketing and sales director at the Intratec gun plant here, the Tec-9 semiautomatic pistol the company makes is a "high-spirited" firearm ideal for home protection or target practice and a "fun gun" avidly sought by weekend shooters and collectors because Intratec knows how to "give people what turns them on."
But law-enforcement officials and gun-control advocates around the country take a decidedly different, and much dimmer, view of the 9-millimeter assault pistol with the ventilated 5-inch barrel and 32-round magazine that is manufactured at Intratec's small factory just off the Florida Turnpike and sells for only $260.
Citing statistics that indicate the Tec-9 is confiscated in crimes at a rate higher than any other weapon, compared to the number in circulation, many officials single it out as one of the biggest menaces on America's streets.
Powerful and Inexpensive
"We are running more and more into these exotic weapons, which serve no useful purpose," said LeRoy Martin, Superintendent of Police in Chicago, who is leading a campaign that urges the Illinois Legislature to ban the Tec-9 and weapons like it.
Futuristic and intimidating in appearance, as well as inexpensive, the gun has been a favorite of drug rings.


Intel Suit on Chip Transfer
The Intel Corporation today asked for a court order to block Chips and Technologies Inc. from transferring its design for a clone of Intel's best-selling computer chip to other manufacturers.
Intel sued Chips on Friday, contending that the smaller company's chip design infringed Intel patents for the 80386 microprocessor.
Chips must transfer the design to other companies because it has no manufacturing plants of its own.


Mayans' 'Big Bird'
THE largest Mayan sculpture yet found has been unearthed in Guatemala.
The 34-foot-wide, 16-foot-high sculpture was carved about 300 B.C. at the base of the tallest temple pyramid in Nakbe, an ancient Mayan city 350 miles north of Guatemala City.
"It's a bird head with an enormous beak that hangs down like an elephant trunk," said Dr.
Richard Hansen, an archeologist at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"Some guys call it big bird."


Rexene Official to Replace Chief Who Forced Him Out
The Rexene Corporation said yesterday that Andrew J. Smith had rejoined the troubled petrochemical company as chief executive.
Mr.
Smith replaces William J. Gilliam, who resigned last week as chairman and chief executive after months of criticism for his lavish spending habits.
After the resignation, Arthur L. Goeschel was named chairman.


Long Island Student Wins Westinghouse Contest
A Long Island youth who discovered a new way of tracing the history of pollution in bodies of waters won the first-place award in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search yesterday.
Kurt Thorn, a 16-year-old senior at Shoreham-Wading River High School, was selected as the nation's top high school scientist by the eight-member panel of eminent scientists convened by the National Academy of Science.


America Only
In the wake of the cold war, President Bush calls for America to take its place in a new world order . . . the Republican challenger Patrick Buchanan insists on a policy of America first . . . and the Pentagon now proclaims a global defense policy of America only.
The go-it-alone proposition is silly, the consequence of straining to justify extravagant military spending, and remote from the President's known internationalist views.
Then why on earth does the Administration allow the Defense Department alone to define the terms of national debate on U.S. strategy after the cold war?


John Forsyth Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out; Congratulating the Remaining Candidates, Harkin Ends Campaign
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, as expected, withdrew today from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, still embracing his unabashed message of liberalism that failed to catch fire during his six-month campaign.
In departing the race, Mr.
Harkin became the third Democratic casualty of the season; Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska withdrew Thursday and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia withdrew Jan. 8.


Menachem Begin, Guerrilla Leader Who Became Peacemaker
Menachem Begin, the Israeli Prime Minister who made peace with Egypt, lived much of his life in the opposition.
A Jewish underground leader before Israel gained independence in 1948, he openly fought the established Zionist leadership of the struggle against British rule.
Then for nearly three decades, he headed Israel's major opposition party.


Observer; Mesut, Ayaz and Franjo
Once in a blue moon I wander into the foreign-news pages of The New York Times and always come out exhilarated.
My doctors think it's escaping the suffocating languors of the post-cold-war, small-bore American news that does the trick.
They believe that anyone whose world is limited to Clinton-Tsongas, Bush-Buchanan, Marlin Fitzwater, Mayor Dinkins, Grammys, Tonys, Oscars and accounts of the execution-of-the-day in Texas would be exhilarated by any change whatever of news milieu, including even the sports pages.


Leona Helmsley Is Told She May Have to Serve Jail Term
With Leona Helmsley quietly sobbing in the front row and her lawyer arguing that a jail term would be a death sentence for Mrs.
Helmsley and her husband, Harry, a Federal judge warned yesterday that the self-styled hotel queen would get no special treatment from him.
"It's time for you to get realistic," said the judge, Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
"There is a nation out there, and a community, and my job is to take into account the nation and the community in the enforcement of the law."


Baseball; Howe Tries Hard to Keep From Striking Out
There was no more heartwarming and triumphant story in sports last year than Yankee pitcher Steve Howe's comeback.
And none that has greater potential for heartbreak than Steve Howe's story this spring.
Broke, out of baseball for three years, but still possessing a left arm that throws fastballs at 90-plus miles an hour, and seemingly having succeeded in his fight against drug addiction, Howe, then 33 years old, begged for a tryout last spring.


Haunting Effects Of Line Drives
The imprint of stitchwork ran in a neat crescent across Wally Whitehurst's forearm.
Call them the tracks of his fears.
"You always wonder which will be the last one," Whitehurst said soberly.


Gorbachev the Tourist Finds Admirers in Germany
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, no longer beloved at home, is enjoying a hero's welcome during a triumphant eight-day tour of Germany.
Crowds have followed the former Soviet President everywhere, calling his name and showering him with flowers.
Politicians have clamored to speak with him and to share the immense popularity that he enjoys here.


Kit Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Shevardnadze to Head a Top Georgian Panel
The former Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, was chosen today to be chairman of a new top state body in the Caucasian republic of Georgia, according to a decree read on the Georgian radio.
Mr.
Shevardnadze, who returned to his native Georgia last week after seven years in Moscow, is to head the republic's State Council, vested with executive and legislative power in the aftermath of a monthlong civil war.


Clary Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colonial Intermediate High Income Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


IPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Forstmann &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; Super Tuesday Transforms Campaign
Southern Democratic leaders achieved today what they sought in vain to do four years ago: They gave a mighty heave forward to the Presidential bid of a moderate candidate from their own region.
Whether the heave will prove decisive, and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas will capture the nomination in New York this summer, remains to be seen, of course.
But his sweep of the Southern states on Super Tuesday 1992 established him as his party's undisputed front-runner with a big lead in convention delegates and gave him a shot at clinching things for all intents and purposes this month.


BASEBALL: The Utility Player: A Specialist Who Needs No Special Spot; In Gallego, Yankees Find One Whom Many Consider the Best
One day, he is the shortstop. The next day, it's second base. Tomorrow, third?
Mike Gallego is familiar with the pinball pattern his career has taken.
He is a utility specialist, a job that no one wants but somebody has to do.
It's him.
So what?


Market Place; Buying Exxon, Commission-Free
DO you want to own stocks, but hate brokers?
The Exxon Corporation has a program for you.
Exxon, the nation's largest oil company, announced a plan yesterday that for the first time enables investors to buy Exxon shares without ever talking to a broker, or ever paying any commissions.


Tight Budgets Bring Abandonment of Pets
As the region's economy continues to sputter, increasing numbers of household pets are being turned over to animal shelters, animal-welfare officials say.
"People who have lost jobs are saying they can't afford their pets anymore," said Marc Paulhus, a vice president of the Humane Society of the United States.
"In the last six months, we've heard from animal shelters that an increased number of animals are being turned over because of direct or secondary effects of the recession." Statistics Are Scarce
Statistics on the abandonment of pets are scarce.
But the Bide-a-Wee Home Association, which operates three shelters in Manhattan and on Long Island, said 1,701 animals were given up for adoption from September through February, compared with 1,295 in the comparable period last year, a 31 percent rise.
As a result, for the first time Bide-a-Wee now has a two- to three-month waiting period for accepting animals for adoption, said George Wirt, a spokesman.


Latshaw Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Bank Fund, C.D. Yields Are Mixed
Yields on bank money market accounts and short-term certificates of deposit showed mixed results for the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, which tracks bank rates.
"No one yet has a firm handle on when, or whether, interest rates will rebound from their current flatness," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"Just as many institutions are raising rates as are lowering them, which reflects the general uncertainty."


A University Provost Is Named at Harvard
The president of Harvard University, Neil L. Rudenstine, has appointed a provost to oversee academic planning and fund-raising for the university's 11 schools, fulfilling a promise he made when he became president last July.
The new provost is Jerry R. Green, a professor of economics at Harvard, who becomes the second to hold the post in Harvard's 356-year history.


Tejon Ranch Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; The Rangers' Political Insurance
THERE will not be a hockey strike.
The Rangers will reach the Stanley Cup final.
Remember, you read it here first.
The reason the players will not go on strike and the Rangers will not fold is because that would work to the best interests of the Democrats, and everybody knows they haven't gotten anything right since the bicentennial.
1976! 1976! 1976!
That ought to be a chant, like the 1940! chant the Rangers hear whenever they skate out to Long Island.
The Democrats are holding their national convention in Madison Square Garden in mid-July, and can start building the massive stage and the television platform as early as May 19.
But their contract says they cannot raise a single hammer in the main arena as long as the Rangers or the Knicks are still active.


Arbour Gets Victory No. 700 and a Star
Coach Al Arbour of the Islanders had every right to crack jokes about being named the game's top star tonight.
After all, he is now one of only two coaches with 700 or more victories in the National Hockey League.
"I didn't get it too often as a player," Arbour said about being selected as the top star in the Islanders' 5-2 triumph over the Flyers at Nassau Coliseum.
"I'd like to thank Scotty Bowman for giving me a chance to coach."


New Rochelle Votes to End Exclusive Contract to Develop Island
The New Rochelle City Council, in a stunning move likely to create deep divisions here, unanimously decided tonight to end its contract with the designated developer of a $1 billion residential colony proposed for Davids Island.
The five Council members, three of them elected last November, had been widely expected to approve a five-year extension of the agreement giving Xanadu Properties Associates, based in Honolulu, exclusive development rights to the island, a deserted Army post less than a mile offshore.


Vogue's Plans for Centennial: A Big Issue and a Big Party
THIS is the season for prominent New York institutions to boast about their ages.
First, Brooke Astor celebrated her 90th birthday with a party for hundreds at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
The Metropolitan Opera recently marked 25 years at Lincoln Center.
Now Vogue, another New York staple, is celebrating its 100th anniversary with a record number of pages for its April issue, a hardcover book and a party at the New York Public Library.
For magazines, not only is aging proof of survival of the fittest, but editors and publishers view anniversaries as a golden opportunity to sell advertising.
And in this bleak magazine environment, no sales stone can be left unturned.


Morgan Stanley Makes High-Level Changes
In response to the growth of its global operations and the increasing complexity of its domestic ones, Morgan Stanley Group Inc. announced high-level changes yesterday that included the promotion of John Mack to head a new operating committee.
Mr.
Mack and the committee will take responsibility for day-to-day operating matters from Morgan's top two executives, Richard B. Fisher, the chairman, and Robert Greenhill, the president, who will continue to steer the firm's strategy and policy.


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Delta Computec reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Tsongas Unable to Break Clinton's Grip on Several Important Constituencies
Once again today, Paul E. Tsongas's voting strength was limited to upper-income, highly educated whites, and he was unable to crack into Bill Clinton's basis of support among other Democrats, surveys of voters leaving the polling places showed.
That breakdown was especially bad news for Mr.
Tsongas, since the surveys showed the Democratic electorate in Florida to be much more heavily white and much more highly educated than it is likely to be in most primaries down the road.


Zeus Components Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senior U.S. Officials Assail Lone-Superpower Policy
Senior White House and State Department officials have harshly criticized a draft Pentagon policy statement that asserts that America's mission in the post-cold-war era will be to prevent any collection of friendly or unfriendly nations from competing with the United States for superpower status.
One Administration official, familiar with the reaction of senior officials at the White House and State Department, characterized the document as a "dumb report" that "in no way or shape represents U.S. policy."


Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


NATO Eyes Military Role To Halt Azerbaijani Feud
A conference of Western and former East bloc nations today discussed for the first time a possible military role as well as a political one for NATO in ending disputes within the former Soviet Union.
Later, after a meeting with European Community ministers devoted to Yugoslavia, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said the United States would move quickly to recognize the independence of Croatia and Slovenia and would coordinate with European nations the recognition of the other Yugoslav republics, which could come as early as April.


Bond Broker Is Target Of Inquiry
New York City is investigating whether the investment bank underwriting $1 billion worth of city debt improperly bought city bonds with the intent of selling them back to the city at a premium, officials said yesterday.
The focus of the investigation is the First Boston Corporation.
In late February, the company bought $13 million of $84 million of bonds that the city planned to repurchase.
That could have given First Boston a profit at the expense of the city.


Economic Scene; A Plan to Bankroll Deposit Insurance
COULD Uncle Sam again be caught holding the bag in a banking scam on the scale of the savings and loan debacle?
Knock on wood, probably not.
Last year Congress ordered Federal deposit insurers to take over ailing banks before the institutions managed to throw good taxpayer money after their own bad debts.
And under rules that go into effect next year, banks that are inclined to take chances will be obliged to buffer the risk with more capital.


Porta Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastern German Quits Over Link to War Atrocity
A 70-year-old politician from the former East Germany, who was jailed for four years by the Communists for his liberal views, resigned today from his local parliamentary seat after disclosures that as a young soldier he took part in a firing squad that executed six Ukrainian Jews.
The decision by the politician, Gustav Just, a prominent Social Democratic deputy in the legislature of Brandenburg state, was the latest human drama to unfold as the result of the release of information from the files of the Stasi, the East German intelligence agency.


Countrywide Credit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eating Well
IT took 2,000 typewritten pages to spell out the nutrition labeling proposals published by the Food and Drug Administration in November.
That's chicken feed compared with the pages and pages and pages used by the public to comment on those proposals.
Everyone who wanted to have a say on the proposals, which are intended to clarify existing labeling regulations, had until the end of February to do so.
The agency will have to put in some heavy overtime to get all the comments sorted, read and processed to meet its November deadline for issuing final regulations.


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; A Belle Epoque Killing That Wasn't a Murder
The Trial of Mme.
Caillaux  By Edward Berenson Illustrated. 296 pages.
University of California Press. $25.
This is how Edward Berenson's fascinating "Trial of Mme. Caillaux" -- the unfolding of a crime of passion that captivated all France on the eve of World War I -- begins:


Dura Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continental Air Plans To Add More Service
Continental Airlines said yesterday that it was expanding service at a number of its hubs, partly because of an increase in passenger traffic.
Robert R. Ferguson, chief executive of the Houston-based airline, also said the carrier would not emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy until the end of the summer, two months later than it had predicted in a reorganization plan filed last month.
Continental has been under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since Dec. 3, 1990.


Ailing Ito Withdraws From the World Finals
A lingering cold has knocked MIDORI ITOout of the world figure skating championships in Oakland, Calif., later this month.
The absence of the Olympic silver medalist leaves KRISTI YAMAGUCHI of Fremont, Calif., the Olympic champion and defending world champion, as the overwhelming favorite, and two other Americans, NANCY KERRIGAN and TONYA HARDING, as strong medal contenders.
Kerrigan was the bronze medalist in Albertville, France.
The men's competition will also be without the Olympic silver medalist.
PAUL WYLIE, who had planned to make the Olympics his last competitive event, was not among the three men entered by the United States.
They are CHRISTOPHER BOWMAN, who was fourth at the Olympics; TODD ELDREDGE, who was 10th, and MARK MITCHELL, who was the first alternate to the Olympic team.


Food Notes
Irish Food Across the Sea
A gift basket of Irish food to celebrate St.
Patrick's Day can now be ordered through Hibernian Baskets in Wharton, N.J.
Prices for delivery in Ireland start at $45.
For those who want gift baskets sent to friends or relatives in Ireland, the company also delivers Irish gift baskets there,starting at $30.
For information: (800) 777-7783.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Illinois and Michigan; Presidential Campaign Moves North for First Big Fight on Neutral Ground
Before sunset can deepen into night over the South on Super Tuesday, the Presidential campaign will hurry north for what many consider the first major confrontation in regionally neutral territory: the Rust Belt states of Illinois and Michigan.
Some are calling this region "a mini-America," with the outcome likely to be especially important to the Democrats.


Schools Show All Kinds of Sexual Inequality; A Change in Textbooks
To the Editor:
You do curriculum reform no service in your report on "How Schools Shortchange Girls," the review of research conducted by the American Association of University Women.
The study asserts, among much else, "Textbooks still ignore or stereotype women, and girls learn almost nothing about any of their most pressing problems, like sexual abuse, discrimination and depression" (front page, Feb. 12).
This is an astonishing set of charges.
Any critic or scholar during the last 10 years who has compared the place of women in schoolbooks today with the texts of the past will discover greatly expanded coverage and profound changes in content, interpretation and language.
Moreover, the curriculum should not be confused with a program of therapy.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Democratic Presidential campaign in Dade County, Fla., described the Jewish vote there incorrectly.
According to estimates by Democratic Party officials, Jewish voters represent more than half of the Democratic vote in the county, not half of the overall electorate.


Two-Day Rally Ends on Late Selling
Prices of Treasury securities fell and interest rates rose in thin trading yesterday, ending a two-day rally.
Most of the selling occurred late in the session, after rumors that Congressional Republicans had reached a compromise on taxes and that President Bush was not doing well early on in the rash of Super Tuesday primaries.


Harbour Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Altron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Toronto Journal; 12 Minutes From Downtown, Elves Are Rejoicing
They're a hearty people, like Elizabeth Amer, a third-generation islander, who has just come off the icy ferry from the mainland trundling a "bundle buggy" with food and supplies for herself, her three cats and her dog.
Ms.
Amer, whose living-room window frames the sleek, silvery skyscrapers of downtown Toronto a mile across the water, is one of 650 residents of a sickle-shaped archipelago known locally as the Island.


Innocent People Lose Homes: Law's Strange Twist
A mother living in the Henry Jackson Houses in the Bronx is fighting for her 21-year-old son.
After he was arrested for possessing several vials of crack, she was ordered to vacate the apartment unless she agrees to exclude him.
She yearns to try to keep him off streets that she fears will swallow him whole.
"They're not giving him a chance to straighten out his life," she said.
"They're pushing him right back into trouble, right?"


Review/Theater; A Black Family Confronts AIDS
If you believe that all theater must succeed as art and art alone, don't even think about seeing "Before It Hits Home," Cheryl L. West's crudely written play about the impact of AIDS on a black Midwestern family.
Predictable in plot and populated by characters who often seem like archetypes instead of people, "Before It Hits Home" is a melodrama that owes its powerful passages, almost all of which occur after intermission, to the quality of its acting and the urgency of its explosive subject.
Unlike the transcendent plays born of the epidemic -- most recently Terrence McNally's "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," Scott McPherson's "Marvin's Room" and Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" -- Ms.
West's utilitarian piece is disposable eyewitness journalism, destined to be forgotten the moment AIDS has been eradicated.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Technicality Keeps Tsongas and Brown on Ballot
In the latest battle for places on New York's April 7 Democratic primary ballot, a State Supreme Court Justice yesterday dismissed a lawsuit intended to prevent Paul E. Tsongas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. from competing.
But the decision, based on a technicality that apparently has never been invoked before in such a lawsuit, angered members of the New Alliance Party, which had brought the suit.


Edper Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Voter Turnout: Seven Early States


Northwest and Others Revive 30-Day Fares
Northwest Airlines sewed another patch in the crazy quilt of airline fares yesterday when it said it would revive its 30-day advance-purchase fares.
By the end of the day, American, Delta, United and USAir had dutifully matched the discounted, nonrefundable fares, effective immediately.
The reductions will provide savings averaging about 10 percent on most fares in the 48 contiguous states.
Round-trip flights between New York and Los Angeles and between New York and San Francisco will cost $498 under the new 30-day fare.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Hartmax Specialty Stores Inc., Chicago, a unit of Hartmax Corp., named Daniel M. Davis executive vice president and divisional manager of menswear. *
Integra Financial Corp., Pittsburgh, a bank holding company, named Robert O. Blomquist executive vice president, in addition to his duties as chief credit officer.


Investors Title Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Honors
*
Frank Perdue, chairman of the executive committee, Perdue Farms Inc., and Herbert M. Baum, president of the Campbell North and South America division of the Campbell Soup Company, are the recipients of the 1991 Edison Achievement Awards for marketing innovations from the American Marketing Association.
Robert W. Woodruff, longtime top executive of the Coca-Cola Company, was named to receive a posthumous award.
The awards will be presented in New York on April 2.


SBS Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bill Clinton, in Black and White
Of all the numbers pouring forth from Super Tuesday, an exemplary one stands out.
While winning half the total Democratic vote in Florida, Bill Clinton, white Southerner, won approximately
75 percent
of the black vote.
Governor Clinton may or may not go on to win the Democratic nomination, and he may or may not give President Bush a hard run in the fall.
But either way, that one figure gives healthy evidence, probably for the first time since Robert Kennedy's Indiana primary campaign in 1968, that it is politically possible to bring poor blacks and blue-collar white voters together.
It is finally possible for Americans to transcend racial division and look instead to mutual interest.


Robotic Vision Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lazard Fund Is Said to Seek Stake in Continental Cable
Corporate Partners, a $1.6 billion investment fund run by Lazard Freres &amp; Company, is negotiating to invest an estimated $250 million in Continental Cablevision Inc., the nation's third-largest cable television systems operator, a media analyst said yesterday.
The senior managing director of the fund, Lester Pollack, declined to confirm or deny the negotiations yesterday.
No one could be reached at Continental Cablevision late in the day.


Review/Rock; U2 Restyled, With Props and a Nod to the Fringes
Amid a shimmering haze of sustained electric guitar, Bono strutted onstage at the Nassau Coliseum tonight to unveil U2's new style.
He was dressed in shiny black leather, wearing sunglasses, with his hair slicked back, and as he sang he smiled, preened, even pumped his hips with a leer.
He looked like someone trying to play a rock star on Broadway.
Luckily, he had help: a barrage of video images and, more important, the songs from "Achtung Baby" (Island), U2's first album since 1988, and the backing of a band that invented one style and is ready to take on more.


Colon Abscess Is Diagnosis For Dinkins
The chills and fever that sent Mayor David N. Dinkins to the hospital were caused by diverticulitis, an inflamed abscess on the wall of his colon, his doctors said yesterday.
They said the Mayor would remain on powerful intravenous antibiotics and away from City Hall for several days at least.
But doctors said a range of tests found no evidence of colon cancer, the worst possibility that they had considered and one that prompted some prominent news reports yesterday.
Indeed, they said, the Mayor's temperature had returned to normal, and the infection appeared to be responding to the drugs.


Doctors Give Johnson Green Light
Sounding more and more like a man planning to end his retirement, Magic Johnson said yesterday that his doctors have given him permission to return to professional basketball.
Johnson, who plans to play in the Olympics this summer, said he was still undecided about whether he would return next season.
But Johnson said he met with his team of doctors in California about three weeks ago, and that he continues to feel terrific.


IMRE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russia Reportedly Orders Expulsion of Honecker
Russia's Justice Ministry said yesterday that it had ordered the expulsion of the former East German leader, Erich Honecker, Russian press reports said.
The ministry gave no date for Mr.
Honecker's departure, however, and officials acknowledged that under international law they cannot force him to leave his refuge in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow.
Mr.
Honecker appeared yesterday at an embassy window. (Agence France-Presse)


Jaspers Hit End Of Line
In the early hours of the morning after, Steve Lappas was still at it.
The Manhattan coach was pacing, talking in his gravelly voice, waving his hands wildly in the air and shaking his head.
Monday night, Lappas had gone through those motions in vain, as his Jaspers suffered a heartbreaking loss to La Salle, 77-76, in the championship round of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference basketball tournament.


Cardis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Watsco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tuesday Morning reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vista Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pennsylvania Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


North Korea Cargo Ship Said to Elude U.S. Force
A North Korean cargo ship suspected of carrying Scud-C ballistic missiles destined for Syria eluded a United States naval task force and made it into port in southern Iran on Monday, Administration officials said today.
This morning American intelligence agencies reported that the ship had begun unloading its cargo.


Pentagon Space-Arms Stance Faulted
The Pentagon is speeding ahead with plans to loft weapons into space despite a new law meant to bring the "Star Wars" anti-missile program down to earth, Congressional investigators said yesterday.
The General Accounting Office, in a 50-page report, said the Pentagon's strategy for developing space arms was risky technically and could result in "schedule delays, escalating costs and performance problems" in systems meant to destroy enemy missiles.
If such systems failed, the report noted, "millions of people could be killed."


The Pop Life
Springsteen Strategy
Two Bruce Springsteen singles, "Human Touch" and "Better Days," were released last Thursday to stores in the form of a cassette single.
They form an advance guard to the March 31 release of Mr.
Springsteen's "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" (Columbia), his first albums since "Tunnel of Love" in 1987.
People in the industry are speculating about the potential for Mr.
Springsteen's success, the predominant theory being that he now has to depend on the baby-boomer market, because younger CD buyers will be unfamiliar with his work.


St. Patrick's Day Parade Requires No Permit
To the Editor:
Despite all that has been written about the controversy over the St.
Patrick's Day parade permit, I have not seen any mention that the St.
Patrick's Day parade does not need a permit.
The latest round of litigation in United States District Court by the Irish Gay and Lesbian Organization seeks to revoke the Police Department parade permit and prohibit the parade (news article, March 3).
It could be said, without considering the constitutional right to parade, that the Irish have a preconstitutional right to parade.
Irish troops in the British army paraded in New York City during the Revolutionary War.
The parade this year is the 231st annual, so the St.
Patrick's Day parade easily qualifies for the exemption in the New York City Administrative Code, Chapter 1, Section 10-110 Processions and Parades, b.


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


BANK OVERDRAFTS SPLIT REPUBLICANS
With the House poised to begin debate on how many members should be publicly criticized for abusing their House bank accounts, Republican leaders and junior members today maneuvered to coordinate their strategies and maximize their political advantage.
Most Republicans want to disclose the names of more than the 19 members and five former members that the ethics committee recommended last week.
But they want to draw the line of disclosure at different numbers, from 66 to as many as the 355 who wrote at least one overdraft in a recent 39-month period.


LeBlanc Smooth on N.H.L. Ice
Ray LeBlanc tipped his stick to the crowd at Chicago Stadium tonight one more time and headed for a last television interview, a final moment in the big city.
The goaltending hero for the United States Olympic team had been granted his one night by the Blackhawks, and he had not goofed it up.
LeBlanc stopped 21 of 22 shots, most of them harmless enough, and beat the expansion San Jose Sharks, 5-1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Privately owned savings and loans posted their first profit in five years last year, earning almost $2 billion, regulators reported.
They said the turnaround represented the clearest sign so far that the bailout had pulled the industry out of its crisis.  [ Page D1. ]


Bio-Technology General reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bridge
On a traditional bridge cruise, tourists see a lot of sea and some ports.
An alternative gaining in favor is the land cruise, in which a group flies to a foreign destination and combines sightseeing with bridge against local enthusiasts.
These are some trips scheduled during the next four months:
Hungary-Austria, April 20 to April 30: (206) 738-0143.
Australia, April 16 to May 8: (800) 548-8062.
England, May 13 to May 27: (800) 999-TRAV.
South Africa, May 18 to May 31: (800) 431-9698.
England, July 5 to July 23: (800) 548-8062.


Greyvest Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Personal Computer Can Be Very Personal Indeed
Hey!
Who is this Uncle Ezra?
The bookstore just put out this big display of "The Best of Uncle Ezra," Volume II, and I don't even know who the guy is.
I've heard kids at Willard Straight Hall talking about him but he sounds pretty weird.
Fess up.
Tell Me. -- Insistent Dear In,
Calm down.
Every month, 300 of you send your uncle messages and he never asks who you are, does he?
You see, there are times when anonymity is acceptable, even preferred, in this complex world of ours.When we started this experiment in 1985 as the first computerized counseling service on a major American college campus, we wanted to give Cornell students a chance to let off steam.


Biotechnology Development reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Carpenter Technology Corp., Reading, Pa., a metals company, sold $100 million of 9 percent sinking fund debentures due in 2022 at 99.485, to yield 9.05 percent, through First Boston and Morgan Stanley.
Common Stock *
Byosys, Palo Alto, Calif., a bioinsecticide maker, sold 2.6 million common shares at $12 each through Kemper Securities Group and Vector Securities International. *
Hutchinson TechnologyInc., Hutchinson, Minn., a computer components maker, filed for one million common shares to be sold through Montgomery Securities and Dain Bosworth Inc.
Ratings  *
Puget Sound Bancorp debt has been placed on Standard &amp; Poor's Creditwatch with positive implications following announcement of its acquisition by Keycorp, which has higher ratings.
"Puget's ratings likely will be equalized with those of Keycorp," S.&amp; P. said. *
Spain, which will be the host for the Olympic Games this summer, has had its double-A long-term debt rating and its A1+ commercial paper rating affirmed by S.&amp; P. The rating service pointed to Spain's relatively low external debt, continuing integration into the European Community, tight monetary policy since 1989 and ability to contain moderate fiscal deficits.


Theater in Review
The Best of Schools  Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Sunday By Jean-Marie Besset; translated by Mark O'Donnell; directed by Evan Yionoulis; set design by Karen TenEyck; lighting design, Greg MacPherson; costume design by Anky Frilles; production stage manager, David Waggett; presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Gil Bellows, Jonathan Friedman, Fiona Gallagher, Mira Sorvino, Justin Scott Walker and Danny Zorn.
At the outset of "The Best of Schools," Jean-Marie Besset's bemused detachment from his characters makes one hope for a whole evening of ironic pleasure from the five conceited students at a Paris business school and one street hustler who inhabit this new play.
But before long most of these people begin to talk alike -- terribly seriously if not with much feeling -- about careers, ecology, sex, class and loneliness.
Exit irony.


Bush Plans Trade-Policy Change Soon
Despite a chorus of objections, the Bush Administration is expected to change its antitrust policies within 7 to 10 days to allow Justice Department lawsuits against the American operations of foreign cartels, senior Administration officials said today.
Attorney General William P. Barr said on Feb. 21 that he foresaw such a policy change, but today's comments put a specific time frame on the Administration's action.
The comment provoked criticism from Japanese officials, who called the plan unacceptable, and complaints from the State Department, which had not signed off on the decision.


Lannet Data Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Cash Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Vashon Island Journal; Islanders Envision a Bridge Too Near
Nearly three million people live in the urban donut that surrounds this small island in Puget Sound, but after midnight, when the last ferry sails for Seattle, Vashon is another world from another age.
Like other islands in Puget Sound, Vashon clings to its rural rhythms, immune from octoplex theaters and housing developments named after romance novels, because the sound protects it like a moat.


Officials Assail Plan For U.S. Supremacy
Senior White House and State Department officials have harshly criticized a draft Pentagon policy statement that asserts that America's mission in the post-cold-war era will be to prevent any collection of friendly or unfriendly nations from competing with the United States for superpower status.
Someone familiar with the reaction of senior officials at the White House and State Department characterized the document as a "dumb report" that "in no way or shape represents U.S. policy."
Article, page A6.


Medsonic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Synbiotics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mallard Coach Co.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 26


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.87
6.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
4.01
5.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.11
5.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.06
7.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.87
8.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.88
9.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.76
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


ASA Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


How Criminals Get Guns: In Short, All Too Easily
In one sad neighborhood here, where funerals for young men and boys are now commonplace, people say the "Gun Man" drives through the streets, selling pistols from the back of a light-blue van.
Not far away in a violent patch of Chicago's South Side, Federal agents arrested a different man, a licensed gun dealer, on charges of selling weapons illegally to undercover officers in dark alleys and crumbling garages.
Before he was caught, the authorities say, he sold hundreds of firearms to gang members and anyone else with fistfuls of dollars.


Simms Says He Is in No Rush to Leave Giants but Won't Push to Stay
While Phil Simms loosened up his 36-year-old arm at the Giants' conditioning camp yesterday, his agent, David Fishof, made appointments with other clubs to talk to the free-agent quarterback about leaving New York.
Simms, though, sounded more realistic -- perhaps even fatalistic -- about remaining a Giant.
Not, mind you, that it would be so terrible.


Piper Aircraft Takeover Is Set
The Silicon Disk Corporation said it would buy the 50 percent of the Piper Aircraft Corporation that it does not already own for more than $75 million of Silicon Disk stock.
Romeo Charlie Inc., a holding company, will sell the stake for a million Silicon Disk restricted common shares and a million Silicon Disk series AAA convertible preferred shares.


Kansas Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Panel Proposes Budget Increases For New York City Council Staff
The New York City Council Finance Committee proposed a $29 million budget for the Council's operations yesterday that would enlarge its central staff but provide no extra money for members' district offices.
At a time when other city agencies are facing Draconian budget cuts, the committee voted 12 to 0 to recommend a spending plan that would swell the Council's spending in the fiscal year beginning in July by $3.5 million, a 16 percent increase over this year.
Two committee members were absent.


Citizens Security Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trial Date for Clair George
Judge Royce Lamberth of Federal District Court today set July 13 for the Iran-contra trial of Clair George, who was chief of the Central Intelligence Agency's clandestine operations around the world from 1984 to 1987.
Mr.
George has been indicted on 10 felony charges of perjury, false statements and obstruction of Government inquiries into the Iran-contra affair.


Dealing of Baumgartner Called Strictly Business
Early last week, after the Islanders joined other National Hockey League teams in voting to authorize a strike, a group of reporters followed Ken Baumgartner into the locker room after practice in Nassau Coliseum to discuss the matter.
Not only is Baumgartner the team's representative to the N.H.L.
Players Association, but he is also a member of the nine-player bargaining committee that is seeking a new collective bargaining agreement.


Suffolk Rights Panel Is Vowing To Resist Effort to Dismantle It
Officials of the Suffolk County Human Rights Commission, who have watched their power dwindle in a tug of war over the commission's survival, vowed today to fight plans to dismantle the agency.
Joseph A. Tursi, chairman of the commission, said it had requested legal opinions from the State Division of Human Rights and the State Attorney General's office on whether the functions of the commission, a semi-independent county body, could be placed under the authority of the County Executive's office.
He said legal action had not been ruled out.


Catellus Development reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Turnover Spree Takes Nets To 0-4 on Their Western Trip
After falling behind by 11 points in a third quarter marred by their 10 turnovers, the Nets gave the Golden State Warriors a battle and closed the deficit to 3 points with two minutes to play before accepting a 129-122 defeat at the Oakland Coliseum tonight.
The loss completed an 0-4 Western trip for the Nets, who now head for Boston and Madison Square Garden before returning home for 11 of their last 18 games.
That's when and where they'll have to make their run for the playoffs.
A Sloppy Game
Drazen Petrovic had 25 points for the Nets, but it was the free-throw shooting of Chris Dudley down the stretch that kept them within reach in the closing minutes.
Dudley sank six in the last three minutes and 9 of 11 in the game, getting the score down to 123-120 with 2:15 left.
But the Nets were unable to score again until the last 16 seconds, when Petrovic made his last basket unopposed.


Beard Finally Showing His Stuff
Moments after Howard University had beaten Florida A&amp;M for the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference tournament title in Norfolk, Va., Butch Beard received a congratulatory hug from his son, Cory, along with a heartfelt apology.
"I'm sorry, Dad," Cory Beard told his father. "I should've been able to help you win."


Come Clean on the House Bank
"I don't know how some members slept at night," says Representative Matthew McHugh, chairman of the House Ethics Committee, speaking of the big overdrafts some Congressmen ran up, penalty-free, at the now-defunct House bank.
No doubt plenty of lawmakers are having sleepless nights this week.
Out of the 435 current House members, fully 296 cashed one or more bad checks, and a bitter, potentially career-killing fight now looms over whose names and bank records the House will make public.


WorldCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Analogic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Maria-Helena Vieira da Silva, 83, Portuguese-Born Painter, Is Dead
Maria-Helena Vieira da Silva, a painter prominently associated with the School of Paris, died in Paris on March 6.
The Portuguese-born artist was 83 years old and had lived in Paris since 1928.
She died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the French Ministry of Culture.


Arbor Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Franklin Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pirates Get Gibson in Trade for Heaton
Kirk Gibson, a World Series hero who was relegated to a reserve role with Kansas City, moved to the Pittsburgh Pirates today in a trade that, when originally conceived, was linked to a trade of Barry Bonds.
The Pirates sent relief pitcher Neal Heaton to the Royals and restored Gibson to a starting status while they continued contemplating a trade for Bonds, their superstar, who plans to be a free agent next November.


Put Politics in Its Place
The two Congressional tax-writing committees have passed their anti-recession plans.
As the strict party-line votes make clear, these plans have little to do with economic stimulus and everything to do with political stimulus.
It has been a classic election-year set piece: The Democrats stick it to the rich, and the Republicans bullyrag the Democrats for raising taxes.
Senator Bob Dole explained the game this way: "While Democrats  [ get ]  their issue of 'class warfare,' they've got to explain to the people why they voted to raise taxes." Meanwhile, the President has promised a veto, and the prospect is for no pro-growth package this year.


Rogers Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BET Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Companies' Team Effort Yields Hotel in Rochester
For five years, all that existed of this city's long-awaited Hyatt Regency Hotel was a 27-story skeleton of girders and concrete that marred the downtown skyline and embarrassed City Hall.
Last week, though, the $47 million, 350-room hotel finally opened -- but only after 10 locally based corporations, including the Eastman Kodak Company, Wilmorite Inc. and Bausch &amp; Lomb, provided $10 million in start-up funds and virtually built it themselves.


Healthcare Compare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Altex Resources (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big Winners At Addy Show
BBDO and Chiat/Day/Mojo were the top winners at the annual "Best of New York" Addy awards presentation in Manhattan last night.
BBDO won 10 Addys for work for clients including Pepsi-Cola, Diet Pepsi, Visa and Du Pont Stainmaster carpets.


Oppenheimer Capital L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Schools Show All Kinds of Sexual Inequality; Greater Expectations
To the Editor:
We wholeheartedly endorse "How Schools Shortchange Girls," the American Association of University Women report (front page, Feb. 12).
At girls' schools across the country, we have long held that girls suffer in coed learning environments where, statistically, teachers pay more attention to boys and outdated stereotypes are fostered, even unwittingly.
By the same token, it has been shown in study after study that girls who attend all-girls' schools -- private and public -- benefit enormously by breaking conventional stereotypes and outperforming girls educated in traditional coed environments.


Unitog Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Elbit Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Gay Men's Concert
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus is to present a salute to Leonard Bernstein at its concert on March 22 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The hosts for the concert, called "Bernstein," are to be Betty Comden and Adolph Green.
The program, which is to benefit the chorus's AIDS Outreach Program, includes excerpts from Bernstein's Mass, "Candide" and "West Side Story" and other selections.
Gary Miller conducts.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Minor Earthquake Strikes Long Island
A minor earthquake struck the eastern end of Long Island and Connecticut late yesterday afternoon, the National Earthquake Information Center said.
Officials at the center, a division of the United States Geological Survey, described the earthquake as "very minor." They said it registered 2.8 on the Richter scale, which measures ground motion as recorded on seismographs.


Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Officials May Strike
The PGA Tour's field staff, disappointed by the Tour's latest offer in a labor dispute, said through its negotiator yesterday that it may go on strike at the Honda Classic this weekend at Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
RICHARD PHILLIPS, a labor lawyer who also represents major league baseball's umpires union, said the 19 members of the Professional Association of Golf Officials "absolutely" could stage a work stoppage by Friday's second round.
The field staff, which unionized on Aug. 2, is responsible for several functions at the tournaments, including making pairings and rulings at the 111 events on the regular, Senior and Hogan tours.


Humphrey Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Potato, a Food For All Seasonings And Pocketbooks
POTATOES never go out of style, but they deserve more than being relegated to the side.
They should be right up there with pasta and risotto: centerpieces, main dishes, a total experience.
They're fast, they're packed with vitamins, they're cheap, and they're efficient carriers for all of the world's truly great condiments: butter, cream, rosemary and ketchup.


Colombian Accused as Drug Figure Draws 6-Year Term for Giving a False Name
Nearly six months after his arrest on a rainswept street in Queens, a young Colombian who authorities in South America say is a vicious drug-cartel assassin was sentenced yesterday to six years in prison for giving a false name to Federal officers as they surrounded him, guns drawn, at a corner pay phone.
The sentence imposed on the young man, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, by Judge Jack B. Weinstein in Federal District Court in Brooklyn was far more severe than the maximum of six months suggested in sentencing guidelines.


No Headline
Hans Zeisel, a professor emeritus of law and sociology at the University of Chicago whose studies of the legal system, and juries in particular, are considered landmarks in the field, died Saturday at his home in Chicago.
He was 86 years old.
Dr. Zeisel died of liver cancer, his daughter, Jean Richards of Manhattan, said.


Bryant College Seeks Update on Gambling Inquiry
The president of Bryant College will meet with the Rhode Island State Police today to receive a report on the status of an investigation into illegal student gambling at the school.
"We basically want to meet to be updated on the investigation," said William Trueheart, the Bryant president.
"We really don't know the extent of the gambling on our campus and we're eager to find out."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Sandy Alomar Jr., catcher; Carlos Baerga, second baseman; Charles Nagy, pitcher; and Mark Whiten, outfielder, on three-year contracts.
Agreed to terms with Steve Olin, Dave Otto, Dennis Cook and Scott Scudder, pitchers, and Glenallen Hill, outfielder, on two-year contracts.
Agreed to terms with Rod Nichols, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Renewed the contracts of Alex Cole, outfielder, and Carlos Martinez, first baseman.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Greg Colbrunn and Jimmy Kremers, catchers, and Jeff Fassero and Doug Piatt, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Renewed the contracts of Steve Frey and Mel Rojas, pitchers, and Wilfredo Cordero, shortstop.


Study Says 'Spring Borrowing' Ban Has Little Effect
The 1990 law aimed at halting New York State's practice of borrowing billions of dollars each spring for routine expenses has had just a minimal effect on improving the state's troubled financial picture, a watchdog group said yesterday.
The report by the group, the Citizens Budget Commission, on the spring borrowings was disputed by the Cuomo administration and State Comptroller Edward V. Regan.
They said the law was achieving its aim and represented a significant first step toward insuring greater fiscal responsibility.
When it was enacted, the law was hailed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as "the most sweeping fiscal reform in a generation."


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sunshine-Jr. Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Cuba Seeks Friends and Tourists in Caribbean
For many in the Caribbean, the most readily visible face of Cuba was long represented by olive-green military advisers, or young bearded doctors sent abroad from Havana to share the fruits of the revolution in the hopes that others might deecide to emulate it.
But as leaders of the English-speaking Caribbean gathered here recently to discuss issues of common concern like tourism and regional economic integration, they were joined by what Havana hopes will rapidly take hold as its new image.


Helping Car Buyers Spot Damage Under the Paint
All that glitters is not original equipment.
To help prospective buyers of used cars detect which ones have been in accidents or had rust damage repaired and then painted over, an entrepreneur in Florida offers a simple tool.
The device, a magnetic gauge, operates on the principle that multiple layers of paint or filler weaken the attraction between a magnet and the underlying steel in a car's body. (Such a tool will be no help, of course, on cars made with plastic or glass-fiber body parts.)


Accounts
*
Colgate-Palmolive Co., New York, to Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, as sole agency of record for Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and the former Soviet Union.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Viva International, Fairfield, N.J, to Graf Bertel Advertising Inc., New York.
Other New York agencies in a review for the designer eyewear company's $3 million account were Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners, Ciociola &amp; Company, Frankfurt Gips Balkind, Griffin Bacal and Lois/USA.


Skylink America reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Vicorp Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 16


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Regency Cruises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Officer in Teaneck Death Is Placed on Sick Leave
Gary Spath, the Teaneck police officer acquitted last month in the fatal shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell, was placed on paid sick leave today, and his future with the Teaneck Police Department remains uncertain.
"He's not permitted to go back to duty from a medical standpoint," Officer Spath's lawyer, Robert L. Galantucci, said after he and the officer met for 30 minutes with Teaneck's Town Manager, Gary A. Saage.


Dinner Where? Why, Madison Square Garden
FOR years, stadiums, arenas and ballparks around the country have relied on food-service companies to deal with the logistics of serving thousands of sports fans.
Until last year food operations at Madison Square Garden, the home of the Knicks basketball and Rangers hockey teams and the site of countless other events ranging from professional wrestling to the dog show, were handled by Harry M. Stevens, a food-service company that has concessions at scores of sports arenas nationwide.
But the Garden, which spent $200 million last year giving itself a make-over, decided it wanted an improved menu to match its classier look.
So last year it hired an executive chef to run its own food service.
He is Paul Cyr, a man accustomed to feeding the hungry masses as former head chef at the Sheraton Center Hotel in Manhattan and the Shangri-La Hotel in Singapore.


Personal Health
BEVERLY W. was a 35-year-old teacher when a voice disorder changed her tutorial tones into a whispery rasp that threatened her career, her social life and her self-esteem.
Harry S. was a 60-year-old news reporter when the same disorder turned his once-fluid interviews into slow and painful exercises.
Both had developed a perplexing disorder, now called spasmodic dysphonia, that affects the muscles controlling the vocal cords.
It changes normal speech into strained, strangled or whispered sounds marked by sudden starts and stops.
It can make normally sociable people reluctant to go out in public or talk on the telephone.


The Bank of New York Appoints New President
Throughout the 1980's, Thomas A. Renyi handled some of the more difficult assignments at The Bank of New York.
Among them was overseeing the transition team to merge the Bank of New York with the Irving Bank Corporation, which it acquired in 1988.
Mr.
Renyi's efforts were rewarded yesterday -- one day after his 46th birthday -- with his appointment as president of The Bank of New York Company, the holding company.


The View From the Bench; Once a Prosecutor, Now a Federal Judge: A Harried but Happy Life in the Law
At 5 A.M., he wakes to down a bowl of cold cereal in an otherwise sleeping house in the remote northern suburbs.
By 6:05 he is on his Metro-North train, another harried commuter balancing legal briefs and statute books on his lap.
A little more than an hour later he is waiting on the Grand Central subway platform for a No. 4 or No. 5 express to Brooklyn Bridge, and by 7:30 he is at his desk on the fifth floor of the columned United States Court House on Foley Square, sipping from a container of steaming tea.


Expenditures At the OTB In Question
In the last two years, with profits on the decline, New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation spent $20,000 to remodel an executive bathroom, almost $3,000 for flowers and $1,050 for political contributions, former employees and City Council investigators said.
The City Council's Finance Committee will question OTB officials about the expenditures and the agency's overall financial outlook at a hearing tomorrow.


Book Notes
Dell Bows Out
Editors at Dell Books thought they had the perfect way to capitalize on the interest in John Gotti's racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
They were going to edit the transcripts and the secret F.B.I. tapes and rush out the kind of quickie book that has become a staple of the publishing house.


60-Minute Gourmet
ONE-PAN main courses are irresistible to busy home cooks, especially those who work outside the home all day.
Many people believe that French cooking calls for three or four pans rattling on the stove, all of which must be removed simultaneously.
The truth is that the essence of French cookery -- the saute -- almost always involves only one pan.
Consider the dish here, pork cutlets with mustard sauce.
Eight boneless pork loin slices are seasoned and sauteed in oil (a nonstick pan minimizes the oil).
When the meat is done, it is removed and the sauce is then made in the same pan.


Harold H. Fisher, 92, a Lawyer Who Investigated Lindbergh Case
Harold H. Fisher, a special assistant to the New Jersey Attorney General in the Lindbergh baby murder trial and a partner in one of the state's leading law firms, died on Friday at Mountainside Hospital in Glen Ridge, N.J.
He was 92 years old and lived in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He died of pneumonia, a member of the family said.


For Some in U.S., Peace In Salvador Brings Fear
Six weeks after the war ended in El Salvador, tens of thousands of Salvadorans in the United States are worried that peace may make their already tenuous position here even worse.
"Everyone is shaking," said Manfredo Granados, a 31-year-old refugee in the Washington suburb of Langley Park, Md.
"People don't know what is going to happen to them."


American Precision Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; Yodelers Meet Cowboys in Milan
A folkloric tide is coursing through the fall and winter fashion shows here, diverting attention from the prevalence of pants and the diversity in skirt lengths.
It inevitably brings back memories of London in the 60's and the era of costume dressing.
Rifat Ozbek, who works in London but shows his clothes here, is the inevitable leader.
His reference is to the Confederacy.
That's what his program said.
The very first number was a floor-length white coat with a fitted waist and black military stripes.
It was worn with a tall black witches' hat.
Antietam meets Salem.


Page America Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eskimo Pie Corpp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Wine Talk
EVERY year at this time, Wine and Spirits, a consumer magazine for wine enthusiasts, publishes a survey of what people are drinking in restaurants.
Since many people try out wines in restaurants before taking them home, the survey, while not scientific, gives some insight into what will be happening in wine shops this year.
The current report, in the April issue, indicates that Americans are continuing their tried and true wine-drinking patterns.
Chardonnay is still the all-out favorite wine.
Make that California chardonnay: of the 15 top chardonnay producers cited in the poll, 13 are California wineries.
Sonoma-Cutrer Vineyards is in first place, Kendall-Jackson Vineyard second and Robert Mondavi Winery third.


Howtek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Posts Loss for '91
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. yesterday announced a loss for last year, as expected, though some results were better than financial analysts had anticipated.
The London-based advertising company, which owns Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, Backer Spielvogel Bates and Campbell-Mithun-Esty, among others, reported a pretax loss of $:58.4 million, or $103.3 million, after charges of $:54.9 million, or $97.1 million.
That compared with pretax income of $:14.6 million, or $25.8 million, in 1990.
Dollar figures are based on the company's conversion rate of a pound equaling $1.768.


G.O.P. Move In Senate For Tax Cut
Republicans in the Senate called today for passage of a tax cut for families, a cut that President Bush had proposed and then de-emphasized, as they sought a politically comfortable stance for opposing the Democratic proposal of tax cuts for the middle class and increases for the well-off.
They announced their plans, but not how they would pay for the cut, after their leaders met with President Bush in the White House and as the Senate began debating a Democratic tax bill that its sponsors say would make the tax code fairer.


New Fax Services
The Bell Atlantic Corporation is offering three new fax services through local telephone companies.
Fax Overflow, with a monthly fee of about $10, will accept a second fax call while one is in progress.
Fax Mailbox, about $15 a month, holds messages for retrieval.
Fax Broadcast, $5 a month, allows messages to be sent to several locations at once.


'Anglo' Vote May Decide Apartheid Referendum
With a week to go before South Africa's whites vote on whether to continue the Government's pursuit of an end to apartheid, both those for and against agree that the attitude of this country's English-speaking whites may prove decisive.
As a result, campaigning is particularly intense here in Natal Province, where the majority of whites speak English as their first language.
One such person is Bruce Scott, an amiable young civil engineer, who takes pride as a South African in the colonial roots of his British forebears, and expresses fear about what would happen if apartheid was abolished from society.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
Sometimes what turns out to be a surprisingly pleasant day simply sneaks up on a New Yorker, perhaps leaving the trace of a satisfied smile or wonder of wonders, a warm feeling about the city itself.
Last Thursday, for instance.
It had not been my all-time greatest day at work.
By five o'clock I was Mr.
Gloom.
Then a friend phoned to say he had an extra ticket for that night's opening of "Marvin's Room" in the Village followed by a party at La Boheme next door.
What had I to lose?
I was depressed anyway.
The play was fine and I even found myself laughing.
The party was a crush of familiar and not-quite-so-recognizable faces.
I saw Al Hirschfeld eating pizza without soiling his snowy beard.
I spotted Madeleine Kahn, looking terrific, coming away from the buffet table somehow juggling two full dinner plates and a large beverage.
"May I have your autograph?" I asked.
Her laughter made me feel really great.
When Eileen Heckart brushed by, my friend stopped her and said, "Would you like to meet a man who thinks you're wonderful?" She said yes, smiled and shook my hand.
My friend and I walked around the Village and wound up at cafe on Charles Street.
It was warm enough to sit outside.
We had double espressos and talked about Italy.
The waitress joined our conversation: it turned out that her relatives in Milan are good friends with people I know who live in a nearby town.
"I used to see you passing by with your dog," the waitress said.
"I had to put him to sleep," I told her.
She looked sad.
"From now on I will wave to you," she promised.
The world seemed small, gentle and friendly again.
In my apartment building elevator, another tenant, a man from India, got on.
"I miss your dog very much," he said as he got off on his floor.
Nothing significant happened last Thursday.
I went to a play, on to a party, spoke to two actresses I admire, had espresso outdoors, made friends with a waitress and was comforted by a neighbor.
All in all it was a good day to be a New Yorker.
. . .
A fellow we know was on a bus heading home after working late when he heard two men -- early 30's -- in deep conversation concerning adjustable mortgage rates, property taxes and such.
Man one:
My wife and I just moved to Bloomfield. We got a nice place there, beautiful old house.
Man two:
What style?
Man one:
Cape Cod. Built in 1956.
Man two:
Wow! They don't make houses like that anymore.
. . .
GOING PLACES
Waiting curbside for the bus, I glimpse a length  of trolley track once paved over but  now laid bare by traffic's fierce erosion.
And for a flash in time  the token in my hand  becomes a nickel  as I stand among fedoras  and hear the clank and squeal  of metal wheels that bring to me  this little folding step  that pops down like a genie's palm  and says hop up kid we're going places.
But here's my bus.
Now look at that.
The sign across its front says  Limited.
I couldn't have said it better. -- MARCEL J. SISLOWITZ
. . .
Zabar's on a recent Saturday afternoon.
I pick out a wedge of ripe Brie to have the next day at a brunch for the naming of my new granddaughter.
A voice: "Why would you take that one when there are others right next to it that are a dollar a pound cheaper?"
"I didn't notice," I admit sheepishly. I pick out a less expensive piece.
"I couldn't believe it," the voice persists, "when I saw you pick up the first one."
I move over to the counter to get some chevre.
The loudspeaker announces an instant special: whole wheels of Brie for $3.99, reduced from $12.99.
The voice is back: "Did you hear that?"
"I heard it, but I don't know where they are."
"I'll find it," she says. She is back almost instantly. "Come with me."
Obediently, I follow to a table near the checkout.
None of the wheels are ripe enough.
I explain that I have to have one that can be eaten tomorrow.
"Here," she says, "take mine," offering me a ripe wheel priced about the same as my much smaller wedge.
"I don't need one for tomorrow." Delighted, I accept.
"Where are you from?" she asks. "Seattle," I answer.
"I could tell you were from out of town."
"But I lived here for years," I protest.
"Well," she says, "you've lost your edge." -- EVELYN KLEBANOFF


Ag-Bag International Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cruise America reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


N.H.L. Aides Accused On Strike Replacements
The head of the union for players in hockey's top two minor leagues charged yesterday that two National Hockey League general managers approached at least two minor league teams this week in an attempt to find replacements for major league players if they strike.
Curt Leichner, general counsel and executive director for the Professional Hockey Players Association, said by phone from Portland, Ore., last night that he would not identify the major league general managers or the minor league teams because, he said, he could jeopardize the careers of the player representatives who reported the meetings to him.


LOTTERY WILL PAY DISPUTED JACKPOT
Virginia State Lottery officials said today that an Australian syndicate had broken the game's rules in the course of buying five million tickets in 72 hours, but that the group could still collect the $27 million jackpot.
Kenneth W. Thorson, the state lottery director, said the group had acted improperly when it paid for millions of tickets at the headquarters of a grocery and convenience-store chain, then collected the tickets in bundles from the individual stores.


Cabano Transportation reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


American Culture Examined as a Force That Grips the World
It goes down easy.
It feels good.
It's popular culture, and America does it better than anybody else.
But is the country's best-performing export sending out the right message to avid consumers around the globe?
The American Enterprise Institute, a high-minded conservative think tank, rounded up several platoons of cultural critics, political thinkers and foreign observers for an all-day worryfest today entitled "The New Global Popular Culture," devoted to slow mastication of three questions: Is it American?
Is it good for America?
Is it good for the world?


Rams Gain N.C.A.A. Berth for First Time in 21 Years
Fordham had three 1,000-point scorers on the same team for the first time in school history this season.
It had 20-victory seasons last year and the year before.
But despite those happy achievements, it wasn't until tonight that the Rams got the one thing they had wanted but hadn't attained since 1971: a bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
The Rams automatically received the N.C.A.A. berth with a 70-65 victory over Bucknell in the second annual Patriot League championship game, ending five years of frustration for Coach Nick Macarchuk, who had come within one game of the N.C.A.A. tournament three times since coming to Fordham in 1987.


Foreign Airlines Go on Offensive
Alarmed by the recent encroachment of United States airlines, a growing number of foreign carriers are fighting back.
Instead of merely tussling over market share, some of those carriers are now struggling for their lives.
Many foreign airlines that were once content with flying to America's coasts are now adding international flights to the interior.
Cities like Charlotte, N.C., Minneapolis and Detroit are becoming gateways.
And some airlines are asking their governments to shelter them from the competitive storm by forcing American rivals to raise their fares.


Advance Ross reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oklahoma Executes Man Convicted in '77 Slaying
A convicted killer whose death sentence was at first overturned because the trial judge had told the jury not to be swayed by sympathy was executed at the state penitentiary here early today, two years after the United States Supreme Court reinstated the sentence.
The 37-year-old prisoner, Robyn Leroy Parks, was put to death by injection, becoming the second person executed in Oklahoma since the High Court in 1976 let the states resume capital punishment.


Third-World Lands Tell Iraq to Meet Truce Terms
Third world members of the United Nations Security Council told the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister today that he must pledge total compliance with its terms for ending the Persian Gulf war when he appears before the full Council on Wednesday to answer charges that Baghdad is still trying to preserve its weapons of mass destruction.
The Council has already accused Iraq of failing to cooperate with its obligation to eliminate all nuclear, chemical and biological weapons as well as its long range missiles and threatened "serious consequences" if Baghdad does not now do so.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Tocchet Paces Penguins  Rick Tocchet scored twice late in the first period and Joey Mullen got his 40th goal of the season last night in the Pittsburgh Penguins' 5-2 home-ice victory over the Calgary Flames. (AP) Blues 5, North Stars 2: Brendan Shanahan scored twice, ending a five-game goal drought, and Brett Hull got his league-leading 67th as St.
Louis defeated visiting Minnesota.
Hull and Ron Wilson scored short-handed goals for the Blues. (AP) BIATHLON  Kirchner Triumphs  Marc Kirchner of Germany won the men's 20-kilometer World Cup event yesterday in Skrautval, Norway, while the unblemished shooting of Hildegunn Fossen of Norway gave her first place in the women's 7.5-kilometer sprint.
Kirchner missed once to bring his first-place time to 1 hour 1 minute 52 seconds.
Fossen won the women's sprint in 26.02 with no penalty laps, while Ann Briand of France finished .12 seconds behind despite two extra laps for missed targets. (AP) SKIING  Guy Outclasses Rivals  Fabrice Guy of France virtually clinched the men's Nordic combined yesterday in Trondheim, Norway, by outclassing his rivals in the jumping event.
With his three jumps of 117, 107.5 and 122 meters in the event, he collected 227.5 points, almost 28 points ahead of Klaus Ofner of Austria and more than 30 points ahead of third-place Jari Mantila of Finland.
Guy will start today's 20-kilometer cross-country race with an overwhelming time advantage of 4 minutes and 37 seconds over Ofner. (AP)  YACHT RACING  Stars &amp; Stripes Mishap  The 110-foot mast of Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes snapped and toppled into the Pacific Ocean off San Diego yesterday during a race with Bill Koch's yacht, America3.
None of the 17 crew members aboard Stars &amp; Stripes were injured.
America3 was ahead at the second mark by 35 seconds.
In the challengers' races, New Zealand and Japan won their races yesterday, assuring both teams a place in the semifinals later this month.


Family Steak House-Fla.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big O Tires reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Theater in Review
Bert Sees the Light  45th Street Theater 354 West 45th Street Manhattan Conceived and directed by R. A. White; set designer, Mr.
White; lighting designer, Dave Feldman; costume designer, Virginia M. Johnson; general manager, Stephen W. Nebgen; production stage manager, Jill Cordle.
Presented by Sito Productions and Mr.
Feldman, in association with Gentlemen Productions.
WITH: Jack Black, Molly Bryant and Michael Rivkin.
On the day after the Reichstag fire, Bertolt Brecht fled Germany and spent the next eight years wandering around Europe, "changing countries more often than his shoes," as he once wrote about himself, until he finally landed in Hollywood in 1941.
Brecht didn't have any better luck in tinseltown than any of the other literati who tried their hand there, but he stayed until 1947 when the House Committee on Un-American Activities started asking questions about his politics.
He promptly caught the next boat back to Europe.


Don't Dump More of Mentally Ill on the Streets
To the Editor:
"For the Homeless, Practicality" (editorial, Feb. 24), your endorsement of New York State's newest crusade to slash spending by effectively jettisoning thousands of mentally ill patients onto the streets is sadly ill advised.
The proposal, as suggested by Richard C. Surles, the Mental Health Commissioner, is flawed because it cannot obtain, under budgetary constraints, the funds to transfer patient care properly to community settings.
Using the news media to float these grandiose schemes is hardly a historic breakthrough, therefore, but rather an injustice.
An injustice to the patients, their families and the communities that will bear the brunt of a well-packaged dumping of additional homeless people onto our streets.


Theater in Review
Manhattan Class One-Acts  Manhattan Class Company 120 West 28th Street Manhattan Through March 21 Presented by Manhattan Class Company, Robert LuPone and Bernard Telsey, executive directors; W. D. Cantler, associate director.
Group, A Therapeutic Moment, written and directed by Ethan Silverman.
WITH: Genie Francis, Karen Evans-Kandel, Sonja Lanzener, Matthew Lewis, Michael Louden and Jacquelyn Reingold.
Mixed Babies, by Oni Faida Lampley; directed by Jennifer Nelson.
WITH: Lisa C. Arrindell, Kathryn Hunter, Sonja Martin, Gwen McGee, Elise Neal and Afia Thomas.
A.
M.
L., by Ms.
Reingold; directed by Brian Mertes.
WITH: Ashley Crow, Calista Flockhart, Michelle Hurd, Robin Morse and Erin Cressida Wilson.
St.
Stanislaus Outside the House, by Patrick Breen; directed by Mr.
Silverman.
WITH: Danielle DuClos, Seth Gilliam, Jamie Harrold, Portia Johnson and Curtis McClarin.


Allstate Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Leaseholds reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Japan Denies Chip Pact Has Failed
Japan's electronics industry today denied American charges that a semiconductor trade agreement with the United States was "on the verge of failure."
Until recently, the Bush Administration hailed the agreement as the model of its future economic relations with Japan.
But on Monday, an American group, the Semiconductor Industry Association warned that the agreement was near collapse because United States companies had failed to gain a larger share of the Japanese market.


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Quotation of the Day
"The hay's in the barn." -- GOV. BILL CLINTON.  [ A18:3 ]


Liqui-Box Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 4


Cooper Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 6
Feb. 28
Mar. 8
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.4
6.7
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.5
2.7
3.0
Gasoline stocks
225.4
229.6
220.1
Distillate stocks
105.7
108.4
101.5
Crude imports, daily
5.5
5.6
5.1
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.8
1.8
Crude stocks
346.9
339.8
330.2
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
80.0
79.2
84.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Russians Get U.S. Help On Baring Soviet Files
In an effort that would have been unthinkable just two years ago, American scholars have been examining Soviet records and coaching Russians on how to ferret out the secrets buried deep in 70 years' worth of paper accumulated in the archives of the many bureaucracies of the former Soviet Union.


A.T.&amp; T. Global Service
A.T.&amp; T. announced a new service yesterday that is intended to link the computers and telephones operated in different countries by large multinational organizations.
The company said its first customer was J. P. Morgan, the financial-services company, which has about 10,000 personal computers around the world.


Baltek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Televideo Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Newcor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Jim Hjelm's Private Collection Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


INSIDE
Condimental Drift
Salsa toppled ketchup from the condiment throne last year, signaling the rise of ethnic foods in the American diet.
The Living Section, page C1.
Sexual Harassment in School
Girls in junior high and high schools are tentatively challenging the "boys will be boys" status quo, sometimes in court.
Education, page B8.
Noriega Won't Testify
Lawyers for Manuel Antonio Noriega rested their case after the general told a judge that he had decided not to testify on his own behalf.
Page A14.
Dinkins Felled by Abscess
The chills and fever that sent Mayor David N. Dinkins to the hospital were caused by an inflamed abscess in his colon, his doctors said.
Page B1.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Dresser Industries, Dallas, an energy concern, selected Indresco Inc. as the name for the company to be formed in the previously announced spinoff of its industrial operations. *
First American Title Insurance Co., Santa Ana, Calif., acquired Preferred Land Title Services, New York, for an undisclosed sum.


Devlieg-Bullard reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Family Rituals May Promote Better Emotional Adjustment
THE question "Who's coming to dinner?" has taken on new meaning for researchers who find that household rituals like gathering for meals are a hidden source of family strength.
Casting an anthropologist's eye on rituals of family life, the researchers find that when families preserve their rituals, their children fare better emotionally, even in the face of disruptive problems like alcoholism.


Hurco Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Big East Tournament Tickets Go On Sale
Tickets to tomorrow night's opening round of the Big East Conference basketball tournament, made available as part of an unused student block distributed to member schools, will go on sale at 3 P.M. today at the Madison Square Garden box office.
The tickets, priced at $10 apiece, are for the doubleheader matching Boston College against Providence and Pittsburgh versus Miami.


CHRONICLE
SHANE E. BALLARD was in gym class at the Fashion Institute of Technology when he learned that he was one of six New York winners of the 1992 Lord &amp; Taylor Dress Design Competition.
"I was ecstatic, incoherent when I heard," the 19-year-old student from Newark, Del., said yesterday.
That was understandable considering how serendipitously he entered the competition.
"One of the other contestants didn't submit any work, so the day before the sketches were due, my professor, Dara Daroche, was asked to select a student who could put together three sketches," he explained.
"I ran around getting fabric swatches, came up with a concept and did it in one night."


Vornado Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Maine Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ezra Denerstein, 73, Finance Executive For Bank Company
Ezra J. Denerstein, president of Sterling Bancorp, a bank-holding corporation with headquarters in New York, died in New York Hospital on Feb. 22.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died suddenly of an aneurysm, a family member said.


New Mainstream: Hot Dogs, Apple Pie and Salsa
KETCHUP, long the king of American condiments, has been dethroned.
Last year, salsa -- a retailing category that includes picante, enchilada, taco and similar chili-based sauces -- took the condiment crown, outselling ketchup by $40 million in retail stores.
Industry analysts were quick to confirm that salsa's ascension was not the work of fringe or elitist groups with aberrant appetites.
"The taste for salsa is as mainstream as apple pie these days," said David A. Weiss, the president of Packaged Facts Inc., a market-research company in New York.


1991 Profit Is Reported At S.&amp; L.'s
The nation's savings and loan institutions that remain privately owned posted their first profit in five years last year, earning almost $2 billion, regulators reported today.
They said the turnaround represented the clearest sign so far that the Government's multibillion-dollar savings and loan bailout had pulled the industry out of its crisis.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DOCTORING DOCUMENTS
The administration at the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn altered important internal documents to mask breakdowns in a critical program designed to root out bad doctors and improve medical care.
The alterations, made before an inspection by regulators last year, involved substantive rewriting of minutes of confidential meetings at which doctors, nurses and administrators are required to discuss problems with patient care, including their own mistakes, and take corrective action.
A1.
SISTER OF MOB INFORMANT IS SHOT
The 38-year-old sister of a Federally protected mob informant who is a potential witness in the trial of John Gotti and in the coming trial of another reputed Mafia leader was shot twice in Brooklyn, in what the police suspect was a Mafia hit.
A1.
INQUIRY INTO BOND SALE
New York City is investigating whether the investment bank that is underwriting $1 billion worth of city debt improperly bought city bonds with the intent to sell them back to the city at a premium, officials said yesterday.
B3.
SIX YEARS FOR LYING
Nearly six months after his arrest on a rain-swept street in Queens, a young Colombian who authorities in South America say is a vicious drug-cartel assassin was sentenced to six years in prison for giving a false name to Federal officers as they surrounded him, guns drawn, at a corner pay phone.
B3.
SPENDING IS QUESTIONED AT OTB
In the last two years, with profits on the decline, New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation spent $20,000 to remodel an executive bathroom, almost $3,000 for flowers and $1,050 for political contributions, former employees and City Council investigators said.
B3.
REGION
DEBT LAW IS CRITICIZED
The 1990 law aimed at halting New York State's practice of borrowing billions of dollars each spring for routine expenses has had just a minimal effect on improving the state's troubled financial picture, a watchdog group said.
But the report was disputed by the Cuomo administration and State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, who said the law was achieving its aim and represented a significant first step toward insuring greater fiscal responsibility.
B5.
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE
Gary Spath, the Teaneck, N.J., police officer acquitted last month in the fatal shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell, was placed on paid sick leave, and his future with the Teaneck Police Department remains uncertain.
B5.
FIGHTING FOR SURVIVAL
Officials of the Suffolk County Human Rights Commission, who have watched their power dwindle in a tug of war over the commission's survival, vowed to fight plans to dismantle the agency.
The commission's chairman said legal action had not been ruled out.
B5.
Ferraro releases five years of income-tax returns.
B4.
New Rochelle City Council votes to end contract to develop island.
B5.
After five years, Rochester finally gets its Hyatt.
B5.
About New York B3


American Health Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Benguet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.C.C. Compromise Is Seen on Radio Ownership
Under pressure from Congress and facing internal disagreement, members of the Federal Communications Commission are moving away from a staff proposal that would have greatly increased the number of radio stations that a single company may own, industry executives and Congressional aides said today.
The retreat marks a setback for the hawkishly deregulatory agenda of the F.C.C. chairman, Alfred C. Sikes.
Mr.
Sikes has argued that current station-ownership restrictions are obsolete and have contributed to the severe depression afflicting much of the radio industry.


Schools Show All Kinds of Sexual Inequality
To the Editor:
"Bias Against Girls Is Found Rife in Schools" (front page, Feb. 12), your coverage of "How Schools Shortchange Women," a report by the American Association of University Women Educational Foundation, documents a situation classroom teachers have long recognized.
As an experienced high school and college teacher, I often find I have learned the names of the boys before the girls.
In classroom discussions, boys are often deferred to by the girls and the teacher.
These are not the shortcomings of male teachers alone.
A female colleague and committed feminist admitted that she unconsciously favored the boys.
The association's report may stir the consciousness of teachers and encourage them to compensate for what is often unintentional bias.


Noriega Defense Team Rests Without General Testifying
Lawyers defending Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega in his cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering trial rested their case today after the deposed Panamanian dictator told Judge William M. Hoeveler that he had decided not to testify in his own behalf.
With reporters present, General Noriega met with Judge Hoeveler in his chambers before court was called to session this morning and said he had elected not to take the stand because "my presentation would have to be limited." He added that his lawyers had advised him that his testimony would not be able to include, as he had hoped, "political matters, issues of the war and the invasion" of his country by American troops in December 1989, which resulted in his arrest.


Charming Shoppes reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


The Need to Lead, for Russia
Election year: It's the best time for politicians to show leadership.
Freedom in Russia: It's the finest imaginable cause.
But even as Russia urgently asks for aid that could mean the survival of reform, President Bush dithers.
His response has been, as Richard Nixon puts it, penny-ante -- "pathetically inadequate."
Patrick Buchanan still can't win more than a protest vote with his "America first" campaign.
Yet he has Mr.
Bush cowering, leaving Secretary of State Baker to take the lead.
The Democrats, meanwhile, hang back, waiting for the President.
If America stands for anything, it is freedom.
If Mr.
Bush stands for anything, he must now explain to Americans the need to help it thrive in Russia.


Michigan Eases Ban On Force
Retreating from a national trend toward banning corporal punishment of students, Michigan yesterday became the first state to ease such a ban when Gov.
John Engler signed a bill supported by many teachers and opposed by many parents.
Although the new legislation continues to outlaw "hitting, paddling, spanking or slapping," it does allow school personnel to use "reasonable physical force upon a pupil as necessary to maintain order and control in a school or school-related setting." And it spells out, in more detail than the previous law did, the circumstances under which force may be deemed "necessary."


Four A's Nominees For Advisory Panel
The advisory council of the American Association of Advertising Agencies has nominated executives to assume the organization's top positions for 1992-1993.
Robert L. James, chairman and chief executive of McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, was nominated chairman.
Mr.
James, now serving as the 1991-92 vice chairman of the Four A's, would succeed Alex Kroll, chairman and chief executive of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York.


Scheib (Earl) Inc. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cablevision Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IRT Property Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Income Tax Returns Released by Ferraro
Seeking to sidestep the quicksand that engulfed her 1984 Vice Presidential campaign, Geraldine A. Ferraro yesterday released five years of personal income taxes that showed she and her husband, John A. Zaccaro, earned an average of nearly $400,000 a year between 1986 and 1990.
She acted a week after one of her principal rivals for the Democratic nomination for the Senate, the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, released her taxes and challenged others to do so.


Japanese Mistranslated on Work Ethic
To the Editor:
The problem with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's now infamous remark that Americans lack a work ethic is that he never said it.
It was a mistranslation by the press that has helped inflame anti-Japanese feeling in the United States to what some observers say is the highest level since World War II.
Despite protests by the Japanese Government and press, the American press has continued to repeat the misquotation, apparently relying on the original mistake.
You state Feb. 4 (front page) that Mr.
Miyazawa "said that America 'may lack a work ethic.' " A Feb. 13 front-page article refers to "Mr. Miyazawa, who said that Americans 'may lack a work ethic.' " A Feb. 18 article states he "even characterized American workers as lacking a work ethic."


Dell Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Westcott Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lakers Abuzz Over Triumph Against Knicks
When the final buzzer sounded, everyone in Madison Square Garden was staring at the referees, who had gathered in a huddle at midcourt.
If Xavier McDaniel's 20-footer had beaten the buzzer, a sensational game was going into overtime.
If McDaniel's shot was ruled late, the Knicks would lose.
Finally, after about 10 seconds, Referee Darell Garretson waved his arm, ruling that McDaniel's shot was no good.
McDaniel fell to the court in disappointment while the Los Angeles Lakers hugged one another in jubilation after an emotional 106-104 victory last night.


Hospital Rewrote Reports In Failed Accreditation Bid
The administration at the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center altered important internal documents to mask breakdowns in a critical program designed to root out bad doctors and improve medical care.
The alterations, made before an inspection by regulators last year, involved substantive rewriting of minutes of confidential meetings where doctors, nurses and administrators are required to discuss problems with patient care -- including their own mistakes -- and take corrective action.
Complaints Nationwide
The system of self-policing, an elaborate program known as quality assurance, is the industry's main tool for monitoring and improving health care in the nation's hospitals.
It is mandated by law in New York State.


Enhance Financial Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Infection Is Serious but Treatable
Diverticulitis, the intestinal inflammation that struck Mayor David N. Dinkins, is a serious ailment that is common, especially among older people.
As in the 64-year-old Mayor's case, diverticulitis can be complicated by an abscess that can spill bacteria into the bloodstream to cause chills and a high fever.
Diverticulitis and the abscesses generally respond to antibiotics like those being given by vein to Mr.
Dinkins at New York Hospital.
But if they do not, surgery may be needed.


Atrix International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Homestyle Buffet Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 1


Biowhittaker Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Heritage Media reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keycorp, by Looking West, Skirts Pitfalls Close to Home
In the mid-1980's, Victor J. Riley, chairman of Keycorp, wanted very much to expand his Albany-based banking company into neighboring New England, but was generally excluded by state laws that fostered mergers of local banks and kept New York rivals locked out.
Frustrated, Mr.
Riley turned westward and starting acquiring banks in the Northwest states.
It was a change of course he does not regret.


Bluefin Tuna and African Elephants Win Some Help at a Global Meeting
Bowing to opposition from wildlife groups, five African nations today abandoned their attempt to relax international protections against trade in the hides and meat of elephants, which are believed to be threatened with extinction.
But a separate attempt to impose a nearly total ban, in the north Atlantic, of the fishing of bluefin tuna, another species believed endangered, was dropped because of opposition by the United States, Japan and other countries.
Instead, the United States, Japan, Morocco and Canada said they would be willing to adopt a voluntary reduction of their tuna catches by 50 percent.


Critic's Notebook; Defendants Contend With Video
It is a trial by video of video.
Some analysts of the case against the four Los Angeles police officers charged with beating Rodney G. King a year ago say no charges would have been brought if an amateur videoist had not pointed his camera out his window that night.
All agree that the trial, which began last week and is being carried by Court Television, must center on a fragment of video tape.
At issue, along with what the defendants did to Mr.
King and why they did it, is how much truth lies in the stark image.
For the prosecution the sight of four white police officers clubbing and kicking an unarmed black man who was stopped for speeding speaks for itself.
In using the tape as the focus of his opening statement, Deputy District Attorney Terry White was relying on a scene that had already stunned the nation.
A year later, it has lost none of its impact.


Nixon's 'Save Russia' Memo: Bush Feels the Sting
By warning that the United States has provided "pathetically" insufficient assistance to Russia, former President Richard M. Nixon has stung the Bush Administration and focused attention on an issue that the Administration and Congress have been hesitating to address for months.
President Bush's discomfort was evident today when he was asked about Mr.
Nixon's critique just before a meeting with Republican leaders.
First, Mr.
Bush said he and Mr.
Nixon had spoken and they were actually in total agreement.
Then Mr.
Bush said his Administration had already done a great deal -- contradicting Mr.
Nixon's whole critique.


BASEBALL: The Utility Player: A Specialist Who Needs No Special Spot; Pecota of Mets Has Been Used At All Nine Positions in Majors
Bill Pecota doesn't have to refer to personal notes or consult any record of baseball statistics.
The numbers come easily and are offered without pause: 2 innings, 26 pitches, 20 strikes, 6 balls, 4 hits.
"And one run," said Pecota, "so I have an earned run average."


WestAir Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Sister of a Mob Informant Is Shot, Apparently as Mafia Vengeance
The 38-year-old sister of a mob informant under Federal protection was shot twice yesterday morning in Brooklyn, in what the police suspect was a Mafia hit.
The woman's brother, Peter (Fat Pete) Chiodo, is a potential witness in the John Gotti trial and the coming trial of another reputed Mafia leader.
But law-enforcement officials would not speculate on which of the many, tangled cases for which Mr.
Chiodo is a key witness might have prompted it.


CHRONICLE
HENRY MANCINI, the composer, conductor and arranger, and JAMES GALWAY, the flutist, are joining forces this afternoon to record the official United States Open theme that is to be played on CBS television during the tennis matches in August.
How do you create a melody that conveys the sense of serving, volleying and lobbing?
"You don't," Mr.
Mancini said Monday when he arrived in New York to prepare for the session.
"The music won't evoke tennis because that is not my thing; it will just be an opening and closing piece. When I composed it, I had Galway in mind. If I make it right for him and it has energy, it will be right."


Star-Studded High School Assemblies


Allercare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Algoma Steel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schools Are Newest Arenas For Sex-Harassment Issues
The vulgar writing in the bathroom stall was a daily humiliation for Katy Lyle, a form of illegal sexual harassment that the people in charge ignored despite a year and a half of complaints.
And so the young woman took legal action, filing charges with the state, preparing for a trial and finally reaching a settlement that clarified sexual harassment policies and paid her $15,000 for "mental anguish."


C.I.A. Chief Vows Broad Authority to Deputy
Robert M. Gates has ordered the man chosen as his deputy to go over his head and report directly to the President should Mr.
Gates ever be seen to be violating the law in his position as Director of Central Intelligence.
Vice Adm.
William O. Studeman, the nominee for Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, told a Senate panel during his confirmation hearing today that Mr.
Gates "has given me full authority to essentially go around him -- in fact enjoined me -- and stated under the strongest possible terms that that should in fact occur if in fact it is my belief that he is not behaving in the proper manner as it relates to covert action, illegal activities" or other questionable actions.


Chasing the Wild Wind for Thrills and Profit
TO Jim Leonard, a hurricane hobbyist, winter here is wimpy, what with travel-poster skies, slow-motion surf and nary a tropical disturbance in sight.
"BOR-ing," he said.
"Not even a thunderstorm."
Last autumn, as soon as the hurricane season ended, Mr.
Leonard did what only the most fanatical storm chaser would do: He quit his job, that of a dispatcher for the Florida Power and Light Company, packed his rain gear and moved 8,000 miles to Guam.
"Nonstop action: typhoons year-round, maybe 20, 25," he said in a telephone interview.
"Super typhoons, too."


Studios And Critics: How Near Is Too Near?
In 1976, a studio publicity executive telephoned a well-known film critic who had just seen and enjoyed "Joseph Andrews," a film starring Ann-Margret.
The critic, like several others, often worked hand in hand with studios to provide favorable quotes in reviews for use in publicity.
The studio executive said, "I need something for Ann-Margret."


Dell Computer Profit Rose 79% in Quarter
Posting especially strong gains in foreign sales, the Dell Computer Corporation said today that profits in the fourth quarter rose 79 percent, exceeding most Wall Street estimates.
The company also announced a 3-for-2 stock split.
"The strong sales were even more of a blowout than was expected," said Eugene G. Glazer, technology analyst at Dean Witter Inc., in New York.
"They are gaining big chunks of market share around the world. You look at other big-name companies, and nobody's close."


Advanced Polymer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Affirms Suit by Lesbian Over Withdrawal of Job Offer
A Federal district judge in Atlanta yesterday let stand a lawsuit brought against the Georgia Attorney General by a lesbian lawyer whose job offer was rescinded after she disclosed that she was planning to marry another woman.
In her lawsuit the lawyer, Robin Joy Shahar, is seeking monetary damages and a reinstatement of the job offer.
Ms.
Shahar, a 1991 graduate of Emory University Law School, had worked for the Georgia Department of Law the summer before her graduation and was offered a permanent job in the department after her graduation.
She accepted the job and was told to report for work last Sept. 23.


Health Insurance of Vermont reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The 'St. John Passion'
The Ascension Music Chorus and Orchestra, under the direction of Dennis Keene, is to present Bach's "St. John Passion" on March 18 at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street.
The soloists are to include Patrick Romano as the Evangelist, Eric Johnson as Jesus and Charles Robert Stephens as Pontius Pilate.
Arias are to be sung by Susanne Peck, soprano; Alexandra Montano, alto; Tom Allen, tenor, and Kevin Deas, bass-baritone.
Tickets are $12 in advance or $15 at the door.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


Restaurant Enterprises Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


General Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Public &amp; Private; Marking Time
Prisoner 81-G-98 is reading A. N. Wilson's biography of Trollope.
"What a piece of scholarship!" she says in a letter, which might just as well apply to her life at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility.
During the course of a single year, she reads many periodicals as well as biographies of Queen Victoria, Tolstoy and Lyndon Johnson and some Dostoyevsky, Gogol and Eudora Welty.
Jean Harris, the former head of the Madeira School and a convicted murderer, is one of the best known and surely one of the best read inmates in America.
She writes, too, and her latest book is a collection of letters sent to the writer Shana Alexander.
They raise the question of why, after more than a decade, our society still bothers to allocate scarce resources -- $25,000 a year by some estimates, $40,000 by her own -- keeping someone like Mrs.
Harris in prison.


Staples Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


TIS Mortgage Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; A Common Language Of Layered Loudness
Perhaps modern music does have a common language.
Sunday's American Composers Orchestra concert at Carnegie Hall shared elements as identifiable as the 6/4 chords and deceptive cadences of our forefathers.
A desperate loudness characterized much of the afternoon.
Both Julia Wolfe's "Window of Vulnerability" and Olly Wilson's Sinfonia offered portents of doom followed faithfully by doom itself.
Anxiety about the world was rivaled only by a fear of not being noticed.
The introductory crashes of percussion, timpani and brass made sure that among listeners, professional and otherwise, there would be no nodding off.


TENNIS: When There's a Burden Beyond the Lines; With Stakes High, So Is the Pressure Often Brought by Tennis Dads
Lately, as the stars of women's tennis get younger and million-dollar bank accounts pre-empt the more traditional rites of adolescent passage like the diploma and driver's license, the tennis dad has become the most un-invisible, and in some cases most unsympathetic, figure on this grand scene.
Like the ubiquitous stage mother, he is always there, a full-time drill sergeant on the homefront and a general waiting prominently in the wings at show time.
He props the child star up for every command performance, decides how many performances there will be, and because managing a sports prodigy's career is a salaried position, reaps revenues along with all that paternal glory.


Dr. Louis Venet, 77, a Surgeon And Specialist in Breast Cancer
Dr.
Louis Venet, a prominent breast-cancer specialist and surgeon who was associated with Beth Israel Medical Center for more than five decades, died on Feb. 21 at Waterbury Hospital and Health Center in Connecticut.
He was 77 years old and lived in Southbury.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Dow Up 15.87 in Busy and Volatile Trading
Stocks made modest gains in heavy trading yesterday, with bouts of program buying adding a fair amount of volatility.
After being ahead as much as 30 points during the day, the Dow Jones industrial average gave half of that back to end at 3,230.99, up 15.87.
Ricky Harrington, director of equity investment for Marion Bass, was not surprised by the market's performance, noting four days of declines that saw the Dow drop about 80 points.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ONE-SUPERPOWER PLAN CRITICIZED
Senior White House and State Department officials harshly criticized a draft Pentagon policy statement that America's mission in the post-cold-war era will be to maintain the United States as the only world superpower.
A6  NORTH KOREAN SHIP REACHES IRAN
A North Korean cargo ship suspected of carrying Scud missiles destined for Syria is said to have eluded a United States naval task force and reached port in southern Iran.
A6  EAST AND WEST DISCUSS NATO ROLE
Western and former East bloc nations discussed a possible military role for NATO in ending disputes within the former Soviet Union.
Washington also said it would soon move to recognize the independence of Croatia and Slovenia.
A3  A KEY GROUP IN SOUTH AFRICA VOTE
The attitude of South Africa's English-speaking whites may prove decisive to the vote on whether to continue the Government's pursuit of an end to apartheid.
A3  GERMAN QUITS POST OVER WAR ROLE
A 70-year-old politician from the former East Germany resigned his local parliamentary seat after disclosures that as a young soldier he took part in a firing squad that executed six Ukrainian Jews.
A7  ACCORD ON PROTECTING ELEPHANTS
Five African countries abandoned their attempt to relax international protections against trade in the hides and meat of elephants, which are believed to be threatened with extinction.
A8  IRAQI OFFICIAL WARNED AT U.N.
Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister was warned that he must pledge total compliance with the United Nations Security Council's terms for ending the Persian Gulf war.
A8  NIXON PUTS FOCUS ON AID TO RUSSIA
News Analysis: By warning that the United States has provided insufficient assistance to Russia, former President Richard M. Nixon has stung the Bush Administration and focused attention on the issue.
A12  DIGGING INTO SOVIET ARCHIVES
In a once-unthinkable effort, American scholars have been examining Soviet records and coaching Russians on how to ferret out the secrets buried deep in 70 years' worth of accumulated paper.
A12  SHEVARDNADZE CHOSEN IN GEORGIA
The former Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, was named chairman of a new top state body in his native Georgia.
A13  Cuba presented a new image to its Caribbean neighbors.
A9  Toronto Journal: A "magical" island in a bustling city.
A4  National A14-21  CLINTON AND BUSH PREVAIL
Governor Clinton swept to victory in Democratic Presidential primaries across his native South.
The triumphs included a decisive one in Florida, where former Senator Tsongas had hoped to edge him.
On the Republican side, President Bush continued to deny Patrick J. Buchanan a victory, although again there was a sizable protest vote.
A1  CLINTON'S GREAT LEAP FORWARD
News analysis: Southern Democratic leaders achieved what they sought in vain to do four years ago, giving a mighty heave to the Presidential campaign of a moderate candidate from their own region.
A1  Tsongas was unable to break into Clinton's base of support.
A18  Now the campaign heads north, to neutral territory.
A19  A New York judge upheld ballot positions for Tsongas and Brown.
A18  FIREARMS FOR THE ASKING
The illegal river of weapons that flows through the streets of the nation's cities is fed by many tributaries.
A1  FEAR AMONG SALVADORANS
With the war in El Salvador now over, tens of thousands of Salvadorans whose legal presence in the United States is only temporary are worried that they will be deported.
They do not want to leave, and the Government of their native country does not want them back.
A14  WHEN THE BOSS STRAYS
Robert M. Gates has ordered the man chosen as his deputy to go over his head and report directly to the President should Mr.
Gates ever be seen to be violating the law in his position as Director of Central Intelligence, the deputy-designate told a Senate committee.
A17  THE NORIEGA DEFENSE RESTS
General Noriega said at his drug trafficking trial that he had decided not to testify in his own defense, and soon afterward his lawyers concluded their case.
A14  PRELUDE TO AN IMMINENT SKIRMISH
With the House debate on check-writing abuses now at hand, Republican lawmakers maneuvered to coordinate their strategies and maximize political advantage.
A17  'STAR WARS' DIRECTION FAULTED
Congressional investigators said the Pentagon was proceeding with plans to loft weapons into space despite a new law meant to redirect the "Star Wars" anti-missile program toward ground basing.
A20  Vashon Island Journal: A separate world wants to stay that way.
A14  The Government cut back its medical marijuana program.
A21  Virginia said a syndicate could collect a lottery jackpot.
A21  Education Page B8  SEX HARASSMENT IN THE SCHOOLS
Following the lead of women in the workplace and on college campuses, female students in high schools and junior high schools are tentatively challenging the "boys will be boys" status quo.
Michigan is the first state to ease a corporal punishment ban.
At Cornell, hundreds of students have the same favorite uncle.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 MOB INFORMANT'S SISTER SHOT
The sister of a Federally protected mob figure who is a potential witness in the trial of John Gotti was shot and seriously wounded outside her home in Brooklyn, in what the police suspect was a Mafia hit.A1  HOSPITAL REWROTE REPORTS
The administration at the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center altered important internal papers to cover up breakdowns in a program aimed at identifying bad doctors and improving medical care.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-12  Health Page C14  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Sports B9-15  Obituaries B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The need to lead, for Russia.
Clinton, in black and white.
House bank: come clean.
Letters A22  Anna Quindlen: Marking time.
A23  Jordan Steiker: Can they execute the innocent?
Probably.
A23  Ernest F. Hollings: Put politics in its place.
A23  Yoshiaki Yoshimi: Japan battles its memories.
A23


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; CLINTON TAKES FLORIDA EASILY, SWEEPING PRIMARIES IN SOUTH; PROTEST VOTES STILL DOG BUSH
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas dominated former Senator Paul E. Tsongas today in the biggest test so far of the primary season, winning a string of victories in his native South, including a decisive triumph in Florida.
The Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses, held in 11 states, gave Mr.
Clinton a powerful lift in his drive for the Democratic Presidential nomination as the race moves on to the March 17 contests in Illinois and Michigan.
For Mr.
Tsongas, those contests now become critical as he seeks to repair the damage caused by his heavy losses across the South, most tellingly in Florida, the one Southern state where he had hoped to hold the line.


Jerome Hall, 91, Legal Scholar Who Was Professor and Author
Jerome Hall, an authority on American criminal law and jurisprudence, died on March 1 at the Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco, his hometown.
He was 91 years old.
The University of California's Hastings College of Law in San Francisco, where he was professor emeritus, said the cause of death was pneumonia.


New Sony CD-ROM Unit
The Sony Corporation introduced the prototype of a new portable CD-ROM player today with a full keyboard, a liquid crystal display and the MS-DOS operating system software used in I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.
The unit, which measures 7 inches wide by 2 inches high by 6 inches deep, is designed to run multimedia software applications and play standard audio compact disks.


Corrections
An illustration in Science Times yesterday about the use of thermal mapping cameras in archeology misstated the unit of measurement for the wavelengths they detect.
It is microns, not angstroms.


Financing Research For Nonmilitary Uses
To the Editor:
"Research Spending Is Declining in U.S. as It Rises Abroad" (front page, Feb. 21), reporting on the findings of the National Science Board, points to the need to rethink our country's science strategy in the wake of the demise of the Soviet Union.
In the 1980's, the boom in research and development spending (particularly Federal spending) was fueled by huge increases in military spending and was skewed toward development, rather than toward basic research.
That's one reason that all the additional research money did relatively little to improve our economic competitiveness.


It's All in the Cards


Bonilla's Seasoning Spices His Career
Throughout his childhood in the Bronx, the constraints of climate and economics left Bobby Bonilla wildly hungry for more baseball.
And so it was more just the desire to play than to succeed spectacularly that Bonilla's start in professional baseball, late and unremarkable as it was, satisfied most.
"I'd had potential, had talent as a kid," said Bonilla, the $29 million right fielder for the Mets.
"But I didn't have the opportunity to play enough. So when I was signed by the Pirates, I was crazy just to play. I loved it. But there was some serious seasoning to be done."


Maple Leaf Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Editor of El Diario Slain by Queens Gunman
The former editor in chief of El Diario-La Prensa, the city's leading Spanish-language daily newspaper, was shot to death last night as he sat in a restaurant in Jackson Heights, Queens, the police said.
The journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, was sitting in the Meson Asturias restaurant at 40-12 83d Street when one or two gunmen walked up to him and shot him at point-blank range shortly after 9 P.M., the police said.


Williams (W.W.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Physician Services reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Goody Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Korean 'Comfort Women' Not Prostitutes
To the Editor:
I am dismayed by "Japanese Didn't Invent Military Sex Industry" (letter, Feb. 23) by Rita Nakashima Brock.
I couldn't help feeling a great deal of admiration for Professor Brock's efforts against sexual exploitation of Asian women.
As she indicates, sex industries in Asian countries prospered during and after wartime.
In a sense, invading soldiers took women as war trophies.
Women of occupied countries were exploited willingly and unwillingly.


Patience Is Only One Of Thomas's Virtues
It sounds like something Yogi Berra might have said, or should have said.
"If I'm going to make an out," Frank Thomas said, "I'm going to make an out on a pitch I can hit."


Quiksilver Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Republicans' Tax Plan Is Rejected by Senate
Voting almost entirely along party lines, the Senate tonight rejected, 60 to 37, a Republican tax measure.
The defeat surprised no one, least of all the Senate's Republican leaders, who had introduced it not because they thought the measure would pass but because they wanted their own position to defend.
The Democrats, meanwhile, rushed to adjust their plan, to protect it against challenge because it would increase the budget deficit, eliminating $3.5 billion in tax credits for middle-class parents.


Control Data Official To Be Chief at Quantum
The Quantum Corporation, a leading disk drive manufacturer, said yesterday that William J. Miller would join the company as chief executive.
Mr.
Miller joins Quantum after 11 years with the Control Data Corporation, where he was most recently executive vice president, as well as president of information services.
As chief executive, Mr.
Miller, who is 46, succeeds Stephen M. Berkley, 48, who will remain actively involved as chairman, the company said.
Quantum, based in Milpitas, Calif., does not have a president.


Korean 'Comfort Women' Not Prostitutes; New Caledonia, 1944
To the Editor:
Rita Nakashima Brock (letter, Feb. 23) states that prostitution "has a long history in every military society, including ours."


Autostock Inc.Qtr to Dec 31 1991 1990 reports earnings for Revenue


British Election Is Called April 9; Battle Seen as Tough but Less Ideological
After months of waiting in vain for the British economy and his Conservative Party's public opinion poll ratings to pull out of the doldrums, Prime Minister John Major bowed to the inevitable today and called a national election for April 9.
Mr.
Major, who became Prime Minister in November 1990 after a Tory rebellion against Margaret Thatcher's leadership, will battle for a mandate of his own in the middle of the longest British recession since the 1930's.
Neil Kinnock, leader of the resurgent opposition Labor Party, seeks to displace the Conservatives for the first time since 1979.


Jefferson Armstrong, Bronxville Lawyer, 95
Jefferson F. Armstrong, a former chairman of the Westchester County Board of Supervisors, died on March 3 at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 95 years old and died of natural causes, his family said.


Bruins Sign Donatelli
It may have been his mouth that got most of the attention in Albertville, France, but CLARK DONATELLI, the captain of the United States Olympic squad who blamed a Swedish referee for the team's loss in the medal round, also apparently had some eye-catching moves at wing.
Enough, anyway, to catch the eye of HARRY SINDEN, the general manager of the Boston Bruins.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; From Florida, a Cautionary Lesson on Perception
News reports leading up to the Florida Democratic primary on Tuesday described the race between Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts variously as "tight," "neck and neck" and "too close to call." Then, Floridians actually voted and the race, it turned out, wasn't close after all.
The story of what happened between the predictions and the voting booth is, in part, a simple tale of a fast-changing campaign: Having run a sloppy race and encountered a fierce opponent, Mr.
Tsongas was worse off the day of the primary than he had been a few days earlier.


Surprising Lafayette Takes A Trip to P.S.A.L. Semifinals
The Lafayette High School basketball team ventured into lower Manhattan last night, into enemy territory, and left feeling like the Kings of Brooklyn.
The Frenchies' improbable quest of a Public Schools Athletic League championship has now reached all the way into the semifinals.
When a wide-open 3-point attempt by Martin Luther King's Gerod Sampson bounced off the rim, Lafayette had rallied for a 59-57 victory and a Saturday date with Brandeis, which upset one of Lafayette's Brooklyn tormentors, Grady High School, 87-77, in the first game of a Manhattan-Brooklyn doubleheader at Manhattan Community College.


Scrawny Economy but Tables Are Lush
THIS year may be one of fiscal restraint, but not necessarily at the table.
Table settings are currently baroque, and excess of a sort is cherished.
"In the 80's, tables were simple and utilitarian and, after a while, the plain table got boring," said Peri Wolfman, co-author of "The Perfect Setting (Harry N. Abrams, 1986), which has just been reprinted. "Now people are setting more opulent, more abundant tables."


Acklands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Governor Clinton Misses the Point
In 1978, just before becoming Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton and his wife entered a real estate venture with a friend.
They maintained that business relationship for several years while the friend's failing savings and loan association remained subject to regulators appointed by the Governor.
Did the Clintons see no possible conflict of interest in continuing the relationship?
Well, maybe, the Governor says.
Perhaps he should have extricated himself.
"But frankly, at the time it never crossed my mind because we were losing money." That's no answer, only a disappointing digression.


Review/Music; An Introspective Pianist Willing to Break Rules
Before beginning his recital at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater on Tuesday night, the pianist Russell Sherman spoke to the audience (which was astonishingly small given Mr. Sherman's stature).
Mozart died before he could finish the Fantasie in C minor (K. 396), the pianist explained, but this work still has great "psychological intensity"; it is "volatile, mystical, metaphysical." And he then played the work so it became exactly that.
The opening proclamations began with almost cliched arpeggiations and exclamations, but they faded, under Mr.
Sherman's exquisitely calculated touch, into long sighs, as if the composer were gradually resigning himself to sorrow and introverted reflection.
There was not a moment of superfluous gesture here: the warm sound focused attention on each note's place in the composition.
That spirit of introspection characterized nearly the entire recital.
Debussy's remarkable second collection of Preludes, for example, was not an assemblage of impressionistic sound-paintings creating atmospheric images of leaves, moonlight and Moorish architecture.
Mr.
Sherman is not a colorist.
Instead, these works became finely etched meditations.
Mr.
Sherman revealed how, in the midst of swirls and cascades and exotic harmonies, Debussy is really a contrapuntalist, his figurations creating voices and interpenetrating lines.


Iacocca Heir? A New Name Is Dropped
The long-running drama over who will succeed Lee A. Iacocca at the Chrysler Corporation took a fresh turn today.
A top General Motors executive acknowledged that he had twice discussed with Mr.
Iacocca the possibility of joining Chrysler as a senior executive, a move that would presumably put him in the running to become chief executive when Mr.
Iacocca retires.
Although the G.M. executive, Robert J. Eaton, said today that he had not yet received a firm offer, another automotive executive with knowledge of the situation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said an offer might come within a week.
In a telephone interview from his office in Zurich, Mr.
Eaton, a longtime engineering executive who is currently president of G.M.'s European operations, declined to provide specific details about the talks.


Guns that Help Children Kill Children
Reports of students shooting students at a Brooklyn high school shocked New York and the nation.
Now a Times series gives even more shocking news about the roots of the teen-age gun menace: gun manufacturers, protected by Washington and the National Rifle Association, are competing to sell weapons that make it easier for children to kill children.
Urban teen-agers know better than anyone how guns have transformed adolescent life.
In a recent Times interview, Shawn Cameron remembered more innocent days when "you'd fight in the morning, but by afternoon, y'all laugh together, y'all best friends again." But now, his schoolmate Kareem Smith asserts, the dispute is settled with gunplay.
"You get some beef, just get a burner  [ gun ]  and do what you got to do," he explains.


Books of The Times; Trying to Apply Sweet Reason to the Abortion Issue
Life Itself Abortion in the American Mind By Roger Rosenblatt 194 pages.
Random House. $20.


U.S. and Russia Remain Stalled on Arms Cuts
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, met for more than four hours today but were unable to narrow differences on the timing or scope of new reductions in strategic weapons.
Mr.
Baker and his Russian counterpart, who told reporters after the meeting that they had reviewed the full range of issues between the two countries, had apparently hoped to reach some agreement on a formula for further arms reductions in time for an accord to be signed at a summit meeting in June between President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Allman Brothers Band  Beacon Theater 2124 Broadway (at 74th Street) Through March 22


Review/Fashion; The Furs Almost Have Fangs
This is not the best of times for fur designers and producers.
Opulence is out of favor.
Animal rights advocates are militant.
But Karl Lagerfeld and Fendi, who together have been responsible for the world's most prestigious fur collections for more than 20 years, are fighting back.
They presented a wildly inventive collection of furs that are so lightweight they can easily be worn one over another.
Whether the fur was weasel or sable, the same approach was used.
All edges were ragged.
All the furs were so supple they seemed to come off the animals' backs.
Some called it the cave-man look.


Schools Counting From 1 to Too Many
Fueled by a rising birth rate and a flood of immigrants, mostly from the Dominican Republic, the former Soviet Union and Jamaica, enrollment in the New York City public school system increased by almost 17,000 this year, reaching the highest level since 1978.
The 1.7 percent increase -- which narrowly trailed a rise of nearly 18,000 students last year -- bumped the total number of students in the city's schools to 973,263.
The figures were recorded in the annual school census on Oct. 31, 1991, and made public by the Board of Education yesterday.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Swamp Sunflower
Q.
I planted several swamp sunflowers last spring and would like any information you can give me on them. -- June Russell, Charlottesville, Va.
A.
A delightful member of the daisy family, the swamp sunflower (Helianthus angustifolius) grows wild in moist soils from Florida to southern New York, and west to Missouri and Texas.
The plant is a perennial, and one of some 150 species of a native American genus whose yellow blooms light up the landscape in late summer and early fall.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday about the benefits of vitamins misidentified a vitamin that can be toxic in doses above the recommended level.
Along with vitamin A, it is vitamin D, not vitamin B.


U.S. SET TO ACCEPT YUGOSLAV BREAKUP
The United States plans to recognize four newly independent Yugoslav republics, possibly as early as next month, following the lead of the European Community.
Administration officials said President Bush approved the plan last week after nearly two months of deliberation.


Reebok Fights to Be No. 1 Again
Most days, weather permitting, several Reebok executives spend their lunchtime playing pickup basketball on the asphalt court at the edge of the company's parking lot near Boston.
The game is friendly, but serious, as the men and women players join in for the exercise and to promote corporate camaraderie.
But most of all, it is a practical training ground in the competitive spirit driving the company these days: Reebok wants to be a winner again.


New York State Approves Caller-Identification Service
New York State regulators yesterday approved a request by the New York Telephone Company to introduce caller identification, a service that telephone companies have long marketed as a deterrent to obscene telephone calls but that consumer advocates fear will allow corporations to increase "junk mail" and "junk calls" by telemarketers.
Known as caller I.D., the service allows a subscriber to identify and record the telephone number of an incoming call, and therefore presumably to determine the caller's identity.
The service is available in 22 states, but some states allow callers to mask their identity to a subscriber if they are concerned about possible corporate manipulation of telephone numbers for commercial gain, such as the preparation of mailing lists.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Vidal Upsets Cepeda  Jose Vidal of the Bronx scored an upset last night at the Paramount when he knocked out a world-ranked featherweight, Ricardo Cepeda, at two minutes of the third round of a scheduled 10-round bout.
The end of the match came in the third round when Vidal staggered Cepeda badly enough for the refeee, Arthur Mercante Jr. to give Cepeda a standing eight count.
But as Mercante started his count, the badly beaten Cepeda fell to the canvas.
When Cepeda arose, Mercante waved an end to the bout.
Vidal had not fought since September 1990 when he was stopped by Bryant Paden in eight rounds.
With his victory, the unranked Vidal is now 32-7-1 with 20 knockouts.
Cepeda, who fought and lost to Marcos Villasana for the World Boxing Council featherweight title in 1991, dropped to 23-2-1 with 17 knockouts.
In an earlier bout, Tracy Harris Patterson knocked out Angel Levi-Mayor in 2 minutes 15 seconds of the first round of a scheduled 10-round bout.
With his victory, Patterson is now 44-2 with 33 knockouts.
Levi-Mayor has a 23-7-2 record, with 8 knockouts.
TRACK AND FIELD  Aouita Sets 3,000 Mark  Said Aouita of Morocco broke the world indoor mark in the 3,000 meters with a time of 7 minutes 36.66 seconds yesterday at the Athena '92 meet at Piraeus, Greece.
He bettered the 7:37.31 set by Moses Kiptanui of Kenya on Feb. 20 in Seville, Spain.
Another Moroccan, Mohammed Choumassi, finished second in 7:53.25 and Mogens Guldberg of Denmark was third in 7:54.27.
Aouita also holds the world outdoor record in the 3,000 with a time of 7:29.45, which he set in 1989. (AP) SOCCER  U.S.
Comes Up Dry  Aitor Beguiristain scored with seven minutes remaining in the first half and Fernando Hierro scored with 15 minutes to play in the game last night as Spain beat the United States, 2-0, in an exhibition soccer game at Valladolid, Spain.
It was the fourth consecutive game in which the United States (1-4-1 this year) has been shut out.
The United States has not scored in 385 minutes.
Beguiristain, who plays for Barcelona, scored after goalkeeper Tony Meola failed to control a rebound.
Hierro, who plays for first-place Real Madrid and is tied for the Spanish League scoring lead with 13 goals, scored when he slammed a free kick around a wall past Meola.
Spain was awarded the free kick after Meola was called for a delay-of-game foul. (AP)


Brother Charged In Plan to Sway D'Amato Votes
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's brother, Armand P. D'Amato, was indicted yesterday on mail fraud charges for billing a military contractor $120,500 from 1986 to 1988, money that the Government said was paid to influence the Senator.
The indictment, handed up by a Federal grand jury in Uniondale, L.I., comes in the midst of Senator D'Amato's re-election campaign and raises the possibility that the charges and the prospect of a trial could become targets for his Democratic opponents.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republican Voters; Fault Lines in Bush's Base of Support
Despite President Bush's decisive victory over Patrick J. Buchanan in Tuesday's primaries, surveys of voters in eight states reveal several potential problems that could work against him in the fall.
Interviews with voters leaving the polls indicated that Mr.
Bush's ratings were tied to the health of the economy; that his approval ratings fell in the states outside the South or with fewer voters born in the South, and that there was a continuing gulf in the voting choices of women and men.


Review/Music; Gerard Schwarz Steps In and Up for Sawallisch
The music business has a cruel way of creating opportunity out of the misfortunes of others.
It has not been a happy few weeks for either the Philadelphia Orchestra or its designated music director, Wolfgang Sawallisch.
The orchestra had planned its current series of subscription concerts, both in Philadelphia and in New York, as a showcase for its new conductor.
Mr.
Sawallisch's selection for the job had overridden questions about his age (he will be 70 when he formally assumes it).
Yet for all his years apparently free of health problems, a hernia condition made him cancel two sets of concerts this month.
It has been an embarrassment on all sides and sent orchestra officials to the telephones in search of quick replacements.


Bush Names Aerospace Executive To Lead NASA in New Direction
Signaling a new direction for the space agency, President Bush yesterday nominated as its administrator Daniel S. Goldin, an industry pioneer in making civil spacecraft and spy satellites.
Federal officials and private analysts said Mr.
Goldin's nomination, which goes to the Senate for confirmation, meant that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration might lose its monopoly over the nation's space program but be more open to ideas from outside the agency.


A.L. Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democratic Voters; Polling Shows Top Candidates Are Vulnerable
Both Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas have significant weaknesses among Democratic voters even in the states where they won primaries on Tuesday, according to surveys of voters leaving the polls.
About 20 percent of the voters surveyed, not only in the South but also in Massachusetts and Rhode Island, said they planned to vote for George Bush in the general election.


Canadian Turbo reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Who's Presidential?; No Candidate Is Better Than Bush
Presidential elections grant Americans a rare opportunity to examine issues and candidates.
The problem is that campaigns also open a season of political negativism that usually exaggerates America's difficulties and overlooks our successes.
This climate is victimizing George Bush.
His critics pound relentlessly on his perceived failures, especially his handling of the economy.
Yet, these critics largely ignore many remarkable successes of the past four years -- and the great promise of the next four years.


Record Orders For U.S. Chips
Orders for semiconductors in the United States set a record in February, the Semiconductor Industry Association reported today.
The data suggest that despite the recession, computer companies and other makers of electronic gear seem to be ordering components, perhaps in anticipation of greater sales.


Watch for Optimistic Speech and G.O.P. Surge
To the Editor:
"The Year No One Became President" (editorial, Feb. 22) cites two "laws" of Presidential campaigns that fall far short of the predictability power of three other laws, or patterns, you don't mention.


Tax-Exempt and Taxable Yields Slip a Bit
The yields on tax-exempt funds moved down a little more for the week ended Monday, while the taxables moved down slightly for the week ended Tuesday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"Despite the lower rates the assets of the tax-free funds remained close to recent highs," said Walter Frank, economist for Donoghue's.
The average tax-exempt yields, he pointed out, were competitive with taxable yields for the high-bracket taxpayer, which might explain the steadiness in the assets of the tax exempts.


Gandalf Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Trans-National Leasing Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Turk Warns of a Religious War in Azerbaijan
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel pledged today to resist pressures for Turkish military involvement in the conflict between neighboring Armenia and Azerbaijan and urged Western nations to avoid actions that could turn the fighting into a religious war between Christians and Muslims.
"We will help but we don't want the military involved," Mr.
Demirel said.
"We want a political solution." The fighting involves the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, an Armenian enclave inside Azerbaijan, and pits the Azerbaijanis, who are Muslims of Turkic descent, against the Christian Armenians, whose relations with the Turks have long been strained.


Officials Meet on Seattle
A representative of the Japanese-financed Seattle group trying to buy the Mariners met with a delegation led by Commissioner FAY VINCENT yesterday in Tampa, Fla., but they did not resolve the proposed $100 million purchase.
The two sides will meet again, possibly next week.
The meeting was held in the area that stands to get the Mariners if club owners do not approve the sale of the club to the group, whose financing includes a 60 percent share held by the founder of the Nintendo Company of Japan.


Winners All, Whether Floral or Furry; Best Cat? Every Fan Has One
FIN de siecle uncertainty seems to have spared at least one institution.
The complex but tame drama of the Eighth Annual International Cat Show, held at Madison Square Garden last weekend, unfolded smoothly for a mostly rhapsodic crowd.
There were long lines of people waiting to get in. (Last year, too many were let in at one time and firefighters came to control the crowd.) "New Yorkers are very cat-appreciative," said Peter Markstein of Austin, Tex., the show's producer.


3 G.O.P. Defectors Ousted as Assembly Leaders
Seeking to enforce loyalty in his ranks, the Republican leader of the State Assembly today stripped three colleagues of leadership positions -- and the lucrative stipends that go with them -- because they voted for a legislative redistricting plan.
The three members -- Assemblymen Frederick E. Parola, Philip B. Healey and Thomas F. Barraga, all of Long Island -- were among 11 Assembly Republicans who broke with the Assembly minority leader, Clarence D. Rappleyea, to vote for the redistricting plan on Monday.


Riley Is First to Say a Close Call Went the Right Way
No matter how many times he watched the videotape of Tuesday's game, Pat Riley saw the same things.
Xavier McDaniel's game-ending jumper was still a split-second too late.
Sedale Threatt still made incredible shot after incredible shot.
Sam Perkins of the Los Angeles Lakers still made a 25-foot game-winning 3-pointer with 2.3 seconds left.
And the Knicks still lost.
Some videotapes never get better, no matter how many times you watch them.


Growing
YOU know how thunderstorms start?
A hot air mass bumps up against a cooler one.
Like a big fat fantasy hitting reality.
"Hi, Mom. I'm sorry I didn't get down this weekend," I said on the phone last Sunday night.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
Interventional Technologies Inc., San Diego, filed for an initial public offering of two million shares to be sold through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. at $11 t0 $13 a share.
The company makes disposable microsurgical products mainly for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.


Diagnostic Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Recoton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Angeles Mortgage Investment reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


ALBANY REJECTS BUDGET REQUEST FOR SUBWAY AID
Legislative leaders dealt New York City a major setback today by proposing that the city, and not suburban railroads, provide much of the revenue to help close the Transit Authority's budget deficit and keep the fare at $1.25 this year.
The agreement reflected successful maneuvering by suburban Republican legislators, who had balked at efforts to transfer a $90 million surplus from the commuter railroads to the city's transit system.
While city legislators had supported such a shift, they accepted today's agreement after threats that the failure to reach an accord could force an election-year fare increase for transit riders.


Ohio State Is Taking Aim At One of Top Seedings
Jim Jackson scored 26 points as Ohio State, ranked No. 5 by The Associated Press and striving for a top seeding in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, beat Illinois, 82-70, tonight to take a half-game lead in the Big Ten.
Ohio State (22-5 over all, 14-3 in the league) moved ahead of second-place Indiana.


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses; CITING CHARACTER, TSONGAS STEPS UP ATTACK ON CLINTON
With his back against the wall after crushing losses to Gov.
Bill Clinton in most of the Super Tuesday contests, Paul E. Tsongas flew to the Midwest yesterday and began pummeling him on questions of character that refuse to subside.
If Mr.
Clinton wins next Tuesday's showdowns in Illinois and Michigan and goes on to take the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr.
Tsongas said, "we're going to put up our most vulnerable candidate, whom Republicans will have no hesitancy in investigating in great detail."


A Tour of the Wilder Shores of Shirts
IT'S hard to take E. Todd Williams completely seriously.
First of all, that's not his real name, and second of all, he's the author of "The First Men's Guide to Ironing" (St. Martin's Press; $9.95.), a pithy commentary on the human condition, the relationship between men and women and the history of modern society -- all seen through the prism of, er, ironing.


Hellmut E. Lehmann-Haupt, 88, Author and Bibliography Expert
Dr.
Hellmut E. Lehmann-Haupt, a widely published bibliography expert and author, died yesterday at his home in Columbia, Mo.
He was 88 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his son, Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, the senior daily book critic for The New York Times.


Asmara Journal; Singing a Song of Nationhood (Lento, Pianissimo)
Since rebel forces swept through this Italianate city atop the East African highlands last May and secured the birth of a new nation, a surge of symbolic and material changes have convinced the world that this place is no longer really Ethiopia.
But until a referendum is held, around May 1993, Eritrea officially remains neither a nation nor a province of Ethiopia.
Until the referendum, the Eritreans say, they are not asking for membership in the United Nations or formal recognition.


Breast Milk for the World's Babies
In countries like the United States, breast-feeding, though always desirable, doesn't mean the difference between good and poor nutrition -- or life and death.
But it does in developing countries, where for decades infant food manufacturers have disrupted breast-feeding by distributing free and low-cost samples of infant formulas to hospitals and birthing centers.
Once the samples, usually a few days' supply, are gone, desperately poor families are unable to buy more.
Neither, in many cases, can they sterilize bottles and nipples.
Meanwhile the mothers' breast milk has dried up.
So hungry infants swallow watered-down formula from bacteria-sullied bottles.
In all, the United Nations Children's Fund estimates, at least a million infants die every year because they aren't adequately breast-fed.


The Latest in Bottle-Cap Marquetry
It used to be called eccentricity, but these days recycling is the more apt term.
The activity in question is the making of furniture from the detritus of everyday life -- old bottles, caps, broken tiles and mirrors.
Examples are an display in two places in Manhattan.
ABC Carpet and Home, 888 Broadway, at 18th Street, is showing a collection of small rough-hewn mosaic tables (left, bottom), $1,195 to $1,895, by Josue Virgili, an Italian marble worker who lived in France until his death in 1988.


Working for the Labor Vote


Furniture and Rugs From a Great Architect
IT is certainly appropriate that the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard University, the only Le Corbusier building in the United States, should be the setting for "Le Corbusier Domestique: Furniture and Tapestries," a small but intense exhibition of the Swiss architect's furniture and rug designs.
It will be on view at 24 Quincy Street in Cambridge through April 5.


Has the Image Changed? (The Face Is Familiar)
At 79 years of age, his voice seems slightly gravelly now and the often caricatured face is seamed and thickened by age.
But more arresting is the sameness of Richard M. Nixon, the brooding figure who 18 years ago walked out of the White House, humiliated by political scandal.
All the famous hallmarks remain: the locked-elbow gestures, the jowly visage, the hunched, high-shouldered posture and the heavily cadenced speech engraved with the high-blown diplomatic language and sweeping insights into East-West relations.


Westwood Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Surgery for Montana
JOE MONTANA, who had surgery on his right elbow last fall, had an operation on his left knee this past weekend, but the 49ers said the procedure was trivial.
"It was something so minor, it could have been taken care of any time," the team president, CARMEN POLICY, told The Peninsula Times Tribune.


Haven in the Grim World of AIDS; Miracle house Helps Visitors Comfort Dying Relatives
When the telephone call woke Georgia Thweatt at 5:30 A.M. on a recent Saturday, she cried for 45 minutes.
Then she got up, took a taxicab from Miracle House on West 43d Street to New York Hospital and kissed her 31-year-old son Dwayne goodbye.
Two days later, as Ms.
Thweatt packed to return to her life in Richmond, Va., as nurse, Army Reserve lieutenant and mother now of only four, her face was smooth, her voice steady and her eyes filled not with grief but with a quiet fire.


METRO DIGEST
HOSPITAL, POLICE THYSELF
Last year, the beleaguered Kings County Hospital was racked by a dispute over the rewriting of critical internal analyses of patient care.
This battle is emblematic of the questions increasingly being raised in New York and across the country about the integrity of the hospital industry's primary system of self-policing, an elaborate network of checks and balances that forces hospitals to deal with their most uncomfortable medical problems, from impaired physicians to serious lapses in care.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  NEW BATTLE ON TRANSIT FARE
Over bitter objections from New York City officials, legislative leaders in Albany reached an agreement that would preserve funds for suburban railroads but would force the city to pay $25 million more than it had budgeted to keep the transit fare at $1.25.
A1. 'A NEW LEVEL OF TERROR'
When two masked gunmen shot and wounded Patricia Capozzalo, a mother of three children and no apparent connection to organized crime other than that her brother is a mob informant, they may have signaled that Mafia violence will grow wilder even as Mafia power wanes, law-enforcement officials and other organized-crime experts said.
News Analysis, B3.
A TOUGH DAY ON THE STAND
Salvatore Gravano's dramatic description of the murder of Paul Castellano was roundly ridiculed by John Gotti's lawyer on the fourth day of tenacious cross-examination.
B3.
RISING SCHOOL ENROLLMENT
Fueled by a rising birth rate and a flood of immigrants, mostly from the Dominican Republic, the former Soviet Union and Jamaica, enrollment in the New York City public school system increased by almost 17,000 this year, reaching the highest level since 1978.
B3.
For The News, a disappointing February.
B2.
Former editor of Spanish-language daily newspaper is shot to death in Queens.
B3.
REGION  ARMAND D'AMATO IS INDICTED
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's brother, the Long Island lawyer Armand P. D'Amato, was indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges that he billed a defense contractor $120,000 in 1986 and 1987 to influence the Senator.
A1.
NEW PLAN ON SCHOOL AID
Republican legislative leaders in New Jersey will announce a plan today to reduce spending on school aid in the next budget, with the main proposal to cut $125 million chiefly in urban districts.
B7.
ATLANTIC CITY NORTH?
In Hartford, an old city of insurance companies and banks, the buttoned-down culture seems as ingrained as the methods of actuarial accounting.
There are few showgirls, and neon is mostly considered an inert gas.
Now, Mirage Resorts wants to build a $350 million resort casino and convention center in the middle of all that.
B7.
Grand prix fever in Westchester.
White Plains Journal, B7.
Jersey City tries, again, to pick a mayor. B7.
Tenuous truce in Nassau budget feud. B6.
Albany Republicans punish 3 in redistricting fight. B9.


Unilens Optical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


National Health Plan Anticipated by Truman
To the Editor:
In "California's Medical Model" (editorial, Feb. 17), you cite the medical plan put forth by John Garamendi, California's Insurance Commissioner, and say that it offers a model for every state.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Clinton Victories Raise Prospect of Labor's Support and New Flow of Money
With a string of impressive Super Tuesday primary victories behind him, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas seems poised to collect substantial financial and political support from organized labor before important Democratic contests next week in Michigan and Illinois.
At the same time, several Democrats said, as the perception increases that Mr.
Clinton is becoming stronger, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts is likely to begin having trouble raising money at a competitive pace.


Optrotech Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shifting Mob Rules: Who's Safe?
When two masked gunmen on Tuesday morning shot and wounded Patricia Capozzalo, a mother of three children with no apparent connection to organized crime other than that her brother is a mob informer, they may have signaled that Mafia violence will grow wilder even as Mafia power wanes, law-enforcement officials and other organized-crime experts said yesterday.
"It is a new level of terror that these gangsters have introduced," said Robert J. Kelly, a professor of social science and criminal justice at Brooklyn College and the Graduate School of the City University of New York who has written extensively on organized crime.


Far From Frugal George
To the Editor:
The amusing March 3 Topic about the theft and return of George Washington's purse from the Old Barracks Museum in Trenton, N.J., calls our first President "frugal George."


When It Comes to Pitchers, Yanks Don't Reach Brim
Three weeks into training camp and six days into their exhibition schedule, the Yankees are no more settled or certain about their pitching than when they got here.
If there were doubts, they remain.
If they had questions, they are still unanswered.
If they had hoped the pitching would get better, it got worse.


Johnson Says He Can Do Job
In remarks that reflected his stubborn determination more than the manager's final decision, Howard Johnson said today he thought there was no turning back from the idea of his playing center field.
"It's not an experiment; it's done," said Johnson, the Mets former shortstop and third baseman who is playing center field for the first time this spring.
"I've already made up my mind. It's going to work."
The project continues to have the blessing of Manager Jeff Torborg, but he has issued no formal statement on Johnson's prospects for starting the season in center.
It would be hard to imagine, though, Torborg's deciding to compel Johnson to switch positions unless his play turns out to be an unqualified disaster.


Alfred J. Callahan, 81, Ex-Justice Of State Supreme Court in Bronx
Alfred J. Callahan, a former State Supreme Court justice in the Bronx, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in the Bronx.
Mr. Callahan had lung cancer and died of heart failure, his family said.


Owners Say Mild Limits Would Lead to Handgun Ban
"If the truth be known, I see no real harm in the concept" of a waiting period for handgun purchases, said William B. Ruger Sr., chairman of Sturm, Ruger and Company, one of the nation's largest gun makers.
"The trouble is, where does it end?"
Some gun owners oppose even mild restrictions because they think the gun controllers will never be satisfied with halfway measures.


Bridge
If an expert makes a brilliant play, there may an element of mystery.
The kibitzers marvel.
How did he know to do that?
Consider for example the diagramed deal, which won the Brilliancy Prize, $200, at the Virginia Slims All-Star Game in Boca Raton, Fla., on March 4.
Bob Wolff of Dallas, long one of the world's greatest players, found himself in six spades.


Special Covers for Special Books
A FEW years back, Elspeth Coleman read the complete works of Martin Cruz Smith with mercenary intent.
The author had ordered custom book boxes for his manuscripts of "Gorky Park" and "Polar Star" from Weitz, Weitz &amp; Coleman, bookbinders in Manhattan.
Ms.
Coleman, a partner in the firm, adorned the boxes with the appropriate images -- a fishnet and a red star, in leather.
You can tell a lot about a book by its cover when it is custom-crafted by a bookbinder.
Weitz, Weitz &amp; Coleman, in business since 1909, makes all sorts of leather book coverings.
Some are traditional, like a gilded elephant on a Kipling volume or pale rose leather, adorned with a camellia, for a copy of "Camille." A few are downright playful.
Herbert Weitz, a partner in the company, made a baseball-card box in navy and white pinstripes for a Yankee fan, then rubbed a little sand on it, "like a uniform after a game," he said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Ways to Make Noise? Well, That's Show Business
MUCH as Sol Hurok was an impresario for the 1950's and 1960's, bringing Soviet entertainers to American stages, Jay Coleman is an impresario for the 1990's, bringing the world's entertainers to American marketers.
Mr.
Coleman is a pioneer in a growing field known as entertainment marketing, whose practitioners seek to sell products in fresh, untraditional fashion by exploiting consumers' fascination with show business, celebrities and popular culture.
He is best known for matching Michael Jackson with Pepsi-Cola and the Rolling Stones with Jovan Musk.


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lawyer Ridicules Gravano Testimony
Salvatore Gravano's dramatic description of the murder of Paul Castellano was roundly ridiculed by John Gotti's lawyer yesterday on the fourth day of tenacious cross-examination.
The lawyer focused on Mr.
Gravano's testimony that he and Mr.
Gotti sat together in a car near the murder scene and then drove slowly past the bullet-riddled bodies of Mr.
Castellano and a close aide, Thomas Bilotti, in front of Sparks Steak House on East 46th Street on Dec. 16, 1985.


For Bo, Who Knows?
Will BO JACKSON's plan to have hip-replacement surgery cripple his commercial career?
Some professional talent brokers said yesterday they expected that it would, starting with sharply diminished chances for signing new endorsement deals.


Winners All, Whether Floral or Furry; Best Cat? Every Fan Has One
FIN de siecle uncertainty seems to have spared at least one institution.
The complex but tame drama of the Eighth Annual International Cat Show, held at Madison Square Garden last weekend, unfolded smoothly for a mostly rhapsodic crowd.
There were long lines of people waiting to get in. (Last year, too many were let in at one time and firefighters came to control the crowd.) "New Yorkers are very cat-appreciative," said Peter Markstein of Austin, Tex., the show's producer.


Irving Dimson, 81; Was High-Rise Builder
Irving Dimson, a real estate developer in New York City and the Northeast, died on March 5 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan and Tamarac, Fla.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE image a child sees in the mirror is often distorted and painful.
For a growing number of school-age children and adolescents, their concern is not just ears that stick out or a nose that looms large.
It is a dissatisfaction with the overall shape of their body, and a fear that they will not be seen as attractive unless they change themselves dramatically.
There's growing evidence that parents should pay close attention to their children's body image and dieting habits, even if those children are not starving themselves, or bingeing and purging.
While parents and physicians have grown more sensitive to these signs of anorexia or bulimia, they often overlook less dramatic, socially approved behaviors that can also lead to both physical and emotional trouble.


Highlands Proposal Came as No Surprise at All
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 22 report that plans for a huge preservation area in the New York-New Jersey Highlands, an area where the states border, have surprised and angered residents is highly misleading.
The New York-New Jersey Highlands regional study by the Forest Service is certainly no secret, and its recommendations are not intended to bar future economic development of the Highlands area.


Some Big Banks Seen Joining Troubled List
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation reported yesterday that while conditions in the banking industry in general were slowly improving, serious problems remained at many large banks, particularly in California.
A sharp increase in the assets of banks that regulators have labeled troubled, to $611.1 billion at the end of 1991 from $486.9 billion on Sept. 30, led many analysts to speculate about which large banks were added to the list.


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


White Plains Journal; Auto Racing's Tortoise Beats High-Speed Hare
WHILE bumptious New York City was spinning its wheels, this quiet city was making its way to the starting line.
A grand prix will be held on the streets of the business district here on Sept. 13, nine months before Manhattan has its own long-delayed grand prix on June 27, 1993.
"There's nothing like being a pacesetter," said Joan S. Gilbert, the co-chairwoman of the White Plains race.
"We beat them," added Luis Del Rosario Jr., the co-chairman.
"We expect this to be every bit as popular as the big grand prix."


Colonial Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Orderly Protest Rally in Belgrade Urges President of Serbia to Quit
Several thousand demonstrators blocked Belgrade's central square today in a student-led protest that centered on demands for the resignation of the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, and of the government of former Communists that he heads.
The protest began on Tuesday with an all-night vigil at Terazjie Square, then grew in numbers and headed into a second night with about 5,000 people gathered to hear a parade of opposition speakers interspersed between bursts of rock music.


A Great-Tasting Budget Bill
Tastes great / Less filling.
That false dichotomy sold a lot of beer.
Today, the House of Representatives will vote on a similar dichotomy:
Reduce the deficit / Increase domestic spending.
Logic argues for a "yes" vote.
Those goals may seem contradictory but in budgets as in beer, there's no reason the nation can't have both.
The vote will come on a bill sponsored by John Conyers, the Michigan Democrat, to remove firewalls in the 1990 budget law.
Those barriers forbid Congress to switch money from defense to domestic programs.
Once those barriers are down, Mr.
Conyers and the Democratic leadership propose splitting the peace dividend saved from declining military budgets between deficit reduction and public investment.


Issues Are Priced For Health Centers
Bond issues for two small health centers came to market yesterday, one for a hospital in Illinois and the other in Californna, through the same underwriter.
Ziegler Securities of Chicago said it had priced $50 million of Illinois Health Facility Authority revenue bonds with a coupon of 7 percent to yield 7.05 percent for the 2009 maturity.
Serial units were priced to yield 4.25 percent for the 1993 maturity to 6.70 percent for the 2002 maturity.
The issue for the South Suburban Hospital outside Chicago was rated A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Japan Is Told to Support U.N. in Cambodia
The head of the United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Cambodia told Japanese leaders here today that Japan was expected to pay for at least a third of the cost of stationing troops in the war-ravaged country, and to contribute civilian personnel even if could not send the Japanese military.
The statements were made by Yasushi Akashi, a Japanese who was recently selected to head the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
MCA Records, Universal City, Calif., named Geoff Bywater senior vice president, marketing development and Randy Miller senior vice president, marketing. *
News America FSI Inc., New York, a publisher of preprinted inserts that is a unit of News America Publishing Inc., named David G. Maples executive vice president, national sales manager.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.87
5.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.99
4.00
5.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.15
5.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.11
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
7.89
8.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.92
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.75
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Calendar: Creating A City Hall
Government Seat
New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.
Architectural drawings, manuscripts, prints and a model design of New York City Hall will be on exhibit through June 28.
The neoclassical building was completed in 1811 by the architects Joseph Francois Mangin and John McComb Jr.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Friday, and Sunday (open until 8 P.M. Thursdays).
Admission: $4.50; $3 for those 65 and older and students; $1 for children under 11.
Designer Centerpieces
356 West 56th Street; (212) 297-0652.
Grand Tour Design will hold a gala dinner to help the American Foundation for AIDS Research and WNET, Channel 13, on March 28, starting at 8 P.M.
Twenty-five centerpieces will be auctioned, including those designed by Thomas Britt, Roberth Metzger, R. Couri Hay, Mark Kostabi and Mary McFadden.
Tickets $200 each.
Registration required.
Irish Manhattan
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672; extension 206.
James P. Shenton, a history professor at Columbia University, will lead a walking tour in lower Manhattan on Sunday from 1 to 3 P.M., including Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral, St.
Peter's Church and Five Points, an area intersected by Baxter, Park and Worth Streets.
Fee, $15 ($10, members).
Reservations required.
Houses: Small Scale
Cathedral House, 50 Cathedral Avenue (Sixth Street), Garden City, L.I.; (516) 747-6450.
On Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., there will be a show and sale of doll houses and miniature furnishings.
Proceeds from admission will benefit the Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola.
Admission: $5; $4, 62 and older; $3, children ages 5 to 11.
Antiques in Connecticut
Wilton High School, 395 Danbury Road (Route 7), Wilton, Conn.; (203) 762-7257.
The Wilton Historical Society is holding an antiques show from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturday and 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission: $6.
An early buying session will be held from 8:30 A.M. to 10 A.M.
Saturday; admission, with breakfast, $25.


Questions of Ethics Confront Hospitals Facing Inspections
Only two miles from the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, which last year was racked with disputes over the rewriting of critical internal analyses of patient care, a battle was playing itself out over the very same issue in an even more hard-pressed medical setting -- sprawling and beleaguered Kings County Hospital.
Administrators at the huge Brooklyn hospital, scrambling to pass an important inspection, wanted to rewrite a host of inadequate records that were part of an important system of self-monitoring.
The executive director, Bernard Rose, said the rewriting was needed to better reflect conversations that took place but were poorly recorded.
Questions of Integrity


Casino Developer Tries One Hard Sell: Hartford
In this old city of insurance companies and banks, the buttoned-down culture seems as ingrained as the methods of actuarial accounting.
There are few showgirls, and neon is mostly considered an inert gas.
Want some time alone?
Go downtown at 9 P.M.
Mirage Resorts wants to build a $350 million resort casino and convention center in the middle of all that.


Review/Dance; Bringing The Music Into the Act
There was plenty of good music accompanying the dances in a program presented by Mark DeGarmo and Dancers on Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church.
Though some of the performers looked as if they hadn't had much stage experience, all were bright and ingratiating.
The problem was the dances themselves.
Mr.
DeGarmo had an interesting idea in "Travelers," one of three premieres on the program.
Set to a drum score composed and performed by Jan Hagiwara, the piece had Mr.
DeGarmo trudging slowly and then a little faster about the stage, sometimes followed and other times preceded by Ms.
Hagiwara as she scratched, stroked and gently beat a drum.
Looking like an exotic personification of fate, Ms.
Hagiwara was dressed in a flowing robe, her face painted into a ferocious mask, with a feathered golden bowl on her head.
In the end she left him, moving out of the dimming light as he stood, head back and arms raised, as if in prayer.
But it was never quite clear who this man was or, if he was a kind of Everyman, what his voyage represented.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  BUSH ANSWERS NIXON President Bush, responding to criticism by Richard M. Nixon that he has not done enough to support Russian democracy, said he does not have a blank check for aid programs.
He said the U.S. is considering financial support of a ruble-stabilization fund.
A1
Nixon at the lectern: A familiar figure again in transition.
A12  IRAQI PUTS OFF U.N.
COUNCIL
Iraq seemed to remain on a collision course with the U.N.
Security Council after Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz defended his Government's application of the Persian Gulf cease-fire.
A10
An Iraqi troop buildup is sighted along a Kurdish front.  A10
Turkey resists pressure to intervene in Armenia-Azerbaijan strife.  A11
Armenia's leader said militants would free 10 army officers.
A12  BRITISH ELECTION SCHEDULED
Prime Minister John Major of Britain called a national election for April 9.
The campaign is expected to be hard-fought, but not along the severe ideological divisions of Margaret Thatcher's time.
A3  U.S.
ACCEDES ON YUGOSLAVIA
The U.S. plans to recognize the independence of four Yugoslav republics as soon as next month, Administration officials said.
An effort is being made to present recognition as an action in keeping with that of the European Community.
A7
An orderly protest rally in Belgrade urges Serbian leader to resign.
A6  Asmara Journal: In symbol and style, Eritrea isn't Ethiopia.
A4 Chinese leaders back Deng on economic liberalization.
A5  A solution is reported near in the Honecker case.
A8  No food, jobs or spirit as Albanians prepare to vote.
A12  The House voted, 357 to 61, to override Bush's veto on China trade.
A8  U.S. and Russia unable to bridge differences over arms cuts.
A13  National A16-20, B10, D21-22  TSONGAS RAISES CHARACTER ISSUE
His back against the wall after his Super Tuesday losses, former Senator Tsongas said that if the Democrats nominated Governor Clinton for President, "we're going to put up our most vulnerable candidate, whom Republicans will have no hesitancy in investigating in great detail." A1
Opening his Illinois drive, Tsongas sought to broaden his base.  A20
Clinton was confronted with the rugged politics of Chicago.  A20
Clinton appears set to inherit substantial labor support.  A18
Polls point to weaknesses for both Clinton and Tsongas.  A19
What ever happened to the neck-and-neck race in Florida?  A19  BUSH CHANGES COURSE
Convinced that he had quelled the Buchanan insurgency, the President began to shift his energies away from it and toward the task of bolstering his standing among voters of all stripes.
A20
Still, polls show, the economy is dogging Bush.  A19
Buchanan struck a conciliatory note, then took it back.  A20
NEW CHIEF FOR NASA
Signaling a changed direction for the space agency, the President named as its new Administrator an industry pioneer, Daniel S. Goldin, an executive of TRW Inc.
A1  THE N.R.A.
HOLDS ITS GROUND
After a period of internal convulsion, a hard-line faction opposed to gun control has gained undisputed dominance of the National Rifle Association.
A1
Gun owners' fear: Just where does "control" end?  D21  RUNNING SCARED
Washington Memo: The growing House panic over what to do about lawmakers' bad checks is a result of political damage control gone astray.
A16
The House ethics committee issued its report on the overdrafts.
A16  FLOOD SWEEPS MONTPELIER
Ice floes acting like a dam altered the course of a river and sent much of it rushing through the downtown area of Vermont's capital.
A16  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE'S SHAKEUP
The Church of Christ, Scientist, reshuffled its leadership this week and announced that it would sell off a venture that had contributed to a bitter dispute over the church's direction.
But rank-and-file members are keeping their opinions about those moves to themselves.
D22  A program to bolster the peregrine falcon has succeeded.
D22  Metropolitan Digest, B1 D'AMATO'S BROTHER INDICTED
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's brother, Armand P. D'Amato, was indicted on fraud charges for billing a defense contractor $120,000 in 1986 and 1987 to influence the Senator, who is in the midst of a re-election campaign.
A1  CONCERN ON HOSPITAL SAFEGUARDS
Questions are being raised in New York and across the country about the integrity of the hospital industry's primary system of self-policing, an network of checks and balances that forces hospitals to deal with their most uncomfortable medical problems, from impaired physicians to serious lapses in care.
A1  AGREEMENT ON TRANSIT DEFICIT
Over bitter objections from New York City officials, legislative leaders in Albany reached an agreement that would preserve funds for suburban railroads but would force the city to pay $25 million more than it had budgeted in order to keep the transit fare at $1.25.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  Realities to fit a film's illusions.
C1  Where a cat can get a little respect: Madison Square Garden.
C1  Where to Find It C2  Sports B12-19  Basketball: Big East tournament starts tonight.
B13  Column: Anderson on Fordham basketball.
B13  Arts/Entertainment C13-24  Selling New York as a film capital.
C17  Music: American Symphony devises plan to attract new audiences.
C17 Schwarz and the Big Five.
C17  Word and Image: Children's cartoon cult.
C17  Obituaries D23  James Brooks, abstract expressionist  Hellmut E. Lehmann-Haupt, bibliography expert  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  A great-tasting budget bill.
Clinton misses the point.
Breast milk for all babies.
Helping children kill children.
Letters A22  William Safire: The New Despotism.
A23  Anthony Lewis: Where the buck stops?
A23  Stewart L. Udall: Who's Presidential?
A23  Thomas H. Kean: No candidate is better than Bush.
A23


You Can Pet Them, But They Won't Purr
JANE Townsend, a modern dancer and dance costume maker, embarked last summer on a new career: cat mummies.
Well, not real mummies.
She had seen an Egyptian cat mummy on a television documentary and another in a magazine, and decided to make her own (below).


Corrections
A brief theater review yesterday about a program of one-act plays at the Manhattan Class Company misidentified the actress who plays a lesbian in Patrick Breen's "St. Sta nislaus Outside the House." She is Portia Johnson, not Danielle DuClos.


Iraqi Envoy Unyielding in Security Council Speech
Iraq appeared to remain on a collision course with the United Nations Security Council today after a special Iraqi envoy addressed the Council and defended his Government's conduct in carrying out the cease-fire imposed at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
The United States, France and Britain all expressed disappointment with the speech by the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, saying it gave no indication that Baghdad is willing to carry out the Council's cease-fire resolutions, which were formally accepted by Iraq a year ago.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Emerson Radio Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thermo Electron Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Home Video
The 1963 classic "Tom Jones" is back in video stores after being away for years.
Tony Richardson's movie, starring Albert Finney and adapted from Henry Fielding's novel about the adventures of a young rake, is as entertaining as ever.
But some people still attach a qualifier to the new release from HBO because this "Tom Jones" isn't the old "Tom Jones."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Incumbent; Bush Turns to November, Feeling Buchanan's Challenge Has Been Defeated
Apparently convinced that he has quelled the renegade candidacy of Patrick J. Buchanan, President Bush today began to shift his political energy away from a revolt by his conservative supporters and toward the more formidable job of rebuilding his standing among voters of all stripes.
The President signaled what amounts to the beginning of his campaign for the November election at a White House news conference.
He declared that he has "responsibilities that no other candidate has for leading this country and for being the President," and that he will pare his political travel to tend to the nation's problems.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
DIRTY blinds and shades can make even a bright room appear drab; when broken, they can make everything seem truly rundown.
Shades and blinds get particularly dirty in winter, when low indoor humidity increases static electricity, causing dust to cling.
Setting the shades and blinds to rights is a worthwhile project for spring cleaning.
Brushes and tools for dusting Venetian blinds' slats are available at department stores and supermarkets.
You can also run your fingers over them while wearing a dampened cotton work glove, or wipe them with a dampened towel.
Thoroughly cleaning blinds and shades means washing, but wooden blinds should not be washed: The slats will absorb moisture and warp.
Rather, wipe each slat with furniture cleaner or mineral spirits and dry immediately with a soft, absorbent cloth.
To clean canvas shades or other nonwashable shades, rub them with wallpaper-cleaning dough, found at wall-covering stores.


Eastgroup Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stage II Apparel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No One's Safe in Big East Show
After completing one of the most competitive campaigns in conference history, the Big East tonight begins its 10th tournament at Madison Square Garden.
Since 1983, when it settled in New York City after three nomadic years in Providence, Syracuse and Hartford, the four-day event has become one of the most popular post-season basketball tournaments.


Bon-Ton Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Who's Presidential?; Party Leaders: Take Charge
I felt tremors of deja vu Tuesday night as I listened while TV's hype experts did their best to arrange the 50 "slalom gates" of the Democratic primary so that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas would appear poised for victory.
With its weakest crop of candidates in memory, was my party preparing to nominate another loser?
Were the elected leaders of my party going to stand aside again and watch a system that has produced losers four out of five times in the last two decades repeat its dreary performance?


BUSH CITES LIMITS ON AID TO RUSSIA
Responding to criticism by former President Richard M. Nixon that he has not done enough to support democratic reforms in the former Soviet Union, President Bush said today that his Administration does not have a "blank check" to finance extensive aid programs.
Mr.
Bush did say that his Administration was now considering contributing to a multibillion-dollar international fund to stabilize the ruble, a key ingredient for economic reform in Russia.
While other Administration officials have said United States support for such a fund was under consideration, this was the first time Mr.
Bush himself had expressed his interest.


Abroad at Home; Where the Buck Stops?
Gov.
Pete Wilson is what Californians used to call laid back, a politician whose manner seldom strays from the bland.
But these days there is a subject that arouses him: Patrick Buchanan.
"I've been shocked by the comments Pat has made," Mr.
Wilson said in an interview -- "saying that Hitler was a man of courage and great gifts, and a number of racist and distinctly anti-Semitic comments. . . . This is not someone who should be taken seriously as a spokesman for the Republican Party."


Wiltek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Damon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
Dr.
KYUNG-CHIK HAN, an 89-year-old minister who transformed a 27-member prayer group in Seoul into the largest Presbyterian congregation in the world, has been named the winner of the 1992 Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion.
He established the Young Nak ("Everlasting Joy") Church, which has 60,000 members.
And there are now about 500 other Young Nak Presbyterian churches worldwide, founded by members of the original congregation.


Korean Ship Unloads Big Containers in Iran
A North Korean cargo ship that apparently evaded United States naval forces and entered the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas on Monday has unloaded its cargo of large containers and departed.
United States intelligence agencies could not immediately determine the contents of the containers, which are suspected to be Scud-C ballistic missiles or related equipment destined for Syria's military arsenal.


Market Place; Miracle Saves The Toolworks
THE Software Toolworks Inc. used to be a struggling producer of games and educational programs, mired in losses and shareholder suits, abandoned by securities analysts.
Then came the Miracle.
The Miracle Piano Teaching System is an electronic keyboard with teach-yourself-to-play software that runs on the Nintendo game systems and I.B.M.-compatible, Apple Macintosh, or Amiga personal computers.
Pushed by $1 million a week in advertising, the Miracle sold about 40,000 units during the December quarter at prices from $379 to $479, suggested retail, and has sold slowly but steadily since then.


Warner Lures Away Disney TV Producers
After eight years under a production deal at the Walt Disney Company, making "The Golden Girls," "Empty Nest" and other television series, Paul Junger Witt, Tony Thomas and Susan Harris said yesterday that they had signed a new deal to make movies and television shows for Warner Brothers.
The departure of the trio, one of the most successful television production teams in the industry, is clearly a blow to Disney, where the three have been the backbone of the studio's efforts to become a major force in prime-time programming.
The team's current series, however, will continue to be produced at Disney as long as the shows remain on the air.


Review/Dance; 8 Solos by Contrasting Performers Coalesce as a Suite
"Eight Solos," presented on Saturday night at University Settlement, 184 Eldridge Street, on the Lower East Side, was as much an occasion as a witty and touching program of dance.
The event opened a dance series in the Arts at University Settlement program, which offers performances and classes in an inviting new dance center that makes inspired use of a luminous little second-floor studio-theater in the handsome 105-year-old settlement house.
The solos were created by Sara Rudner, an eloquent early Twyla Tharp dancer who now teaches, choreographs and very occasionally performs.
Each was inspired by the woman who danced it.
Throughout, in mostly continuous soft, looping motion, there was a sense of individual personality, movement quality and contrast among the women.
None of the solos would probably stand on their own, but as a quick-flowing suite of pieces, danced without musical accompaniment, they were a kind of exquisite gift, a chance to savor eight distinctive and very good performers.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday about an appointment at the Hartmarx Corporation included an erroneous new title supplied by the company for Daniel M. Davis.
He was named executive vice president and general merchandise manager.


Dow Falls 22.36 to a Nearly 2-Month Low
Stocks fell in choppy trading yesterday, as investors moved cautiously before today's release of February retail sales numbers and tomorrow's producer price data.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 22.36 points, to 3,208.63, its lowest level in nearly two months.
On Jan. 13, it was 3,185.60.
A weak bond market and losses in overseas stock markets also combined to put pressure on stocks and restrict buying.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was moderately heavy at 186.4 million shares, down from 203 million on Tuesday, with losing issues easily outpacing gaining ones by 1,168 to 516.


Rangers (Fight) Win (Fight) Easily (Fight) (Fight) (Fight)
A losing streak ended last night at the Garden, whistled dead in the first period on a phantom interference call.
When Referee Denis Morel called a marginal penalty on Chicago left wing Mike Peluso less than two minutes into the game, erasing a goal, he pulled the ice from under the weary Blackhawks.
Presented with such opportunity, the Rangers did not wait for a second knock, routing Chicago behind three goals by Mike Gartner, 7-1, to snap a three-game skid.


Kiddie Products Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Puppetry; Japanese 'Romeo and Juliet' In the Language of Puppets
Monzaemon Chikamatsu's drama "The Love Suicides at Sonezaki" has been called a Japanese "Romeo and Juliet." Written in the early 18th century and based on a true incident, it tells the story of a young courtesan named Ohatsu and her lover, Tokubei, a soy-sauce merchant, whose passion defies social convention.
The villain of this complicated tale is Kuheiji, an oil merchant and supposed friend of Tokubei who swindles him and then destroys his reputation with false charges of forgery and extortion.
His betrayal drives the lovers to suicide.
As performed at the City Center Theater by Bunraku, the National Puppet Theater of Japan, the tale is not difficult to follow, even though the production has arrived without supertitles or simultaneous translation.
In Bunraku puppetry, beautiful hand-sculptured figures of roughly two-thirds human dimension are manipulated by a corps of puppeteers (three each to a character) to simulate human body movements with an uncanny accuracy.


Goodby, Berlin Gets Norwegian Cruise
The ship has come in again for Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein.
The Norwegian Cruise Line announced yesterday that it had chosen to join its sibling company, the Royal Viking Line, at Goodby, Berlin in San Francisco, effective on April 1.
The Norwegian account, with billings in excess of $25 million, had been at McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C.


Con Edison Receives 3-Year Rise in Rates
New York State's Public Service Commission approved a 4.5 percent increase in electrical rates yesterday for the Consolidated Edison Company of New York, the first increase since 1983, and endorsed other changes that appear likely to raise rates up to 19 percent over the next three years.
The commission said the company's growing need to buy electricity required the increase.
The first year's increase, to be paid by about 2.9 million customers in New York City and Westchester County, is expected to be $220 million, an average of $75.86 a customer.


New York Has a Full-Time Fan Promoting It as a Film Capital
Sometimes, a paperweight can be a policy statement.
On the table in front of Jaynne C. Keyes, the director of the Mayor's Office of Film, Television and Broadcasting, sits a plastic square that encloses a view of Los Angeles and a mean little sign that reads "L.A. Bottled Smog." Pick it up, shake it and a swirl of brown grit descends over the entertainment capital of America.
That about sums up Ms.
Keyes's attitude toward New York's chief competitor as a filming location.
Last year was a lackluster one for the film industry.
It was a disaster for New York.
Determined to force down the union labor costs that make New York the nation's most expensive shooting location, the major Hollywood studios initiated a boycott of feature-film shooting in the city in November 1990.
It lasted until mid-May 1991, when a new contract was signed in which the unions granted concessions on overtime wages in return for enhanced health and pension benefits.
Not until September did something like normal shooting resume.


Quotation of the Day
"If I can help these families get to New York and survive it, then all these boys wouldn't have to die without their mothers." -- NITA PIPPINS, a volunteer who works with families of people with AIDS.  [ B6:6. ]


Long-Term Rates Move Upward
Comments by President Bush helped to push up long-term interest rates during slow trading in the credit markets yesterday.
At a news conference, Mr.
Bush told reporters he was more concerned about the health of the economy than in keeping long-term interest rates low.


Pop and Jazz in Review
A Great Night for the Irish  Radio City Music Hall


Review/Theater; Homecoming With an Air Of Nostalgia
Elaine Berman's "Peacetime" is so old-fashioned that it seems like an artifact of a different time and a vastly different style of theater, an era long before there was television and when Harold Lloyd was playing in an "eastern western" at the neighborhood theater.
Next to "Peacetime," television's "Brooklyn Bridge" might be seen as avant-garde.
In this play at the WPA Theater, a young veteran of World War I comes home to his immigrant family in Manhattan and finds that his future is fraught with obstacles.
His lungs have been impaired by poison gas, money is tight and hopes are withering with every second of dialogue.
In the background, "Dardanella" is playing on the phonograph.
Amid the kitchen-sink cliches, there are un answered questions.


BRIEFS
*
Ameribanc Savings Bank, Annandale, Va., said the Office of Thrift Supervision had accepted its capital plan for achieving a 4 percent core capital ratio by Sept. 30. *
Chevron Corp., San Francisco, bought a lubricating oil blending and packaging plant and an oil terminal in Charleston, S.C., from British Petroleum Co. for an undisclosed sum.


American Biltrite reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japanese Plead Guilty in Iran Arms Sales
Japan's largest military electronics manufacturer pleaded guilty on Wednesday to charges that it had illegally sold navigation equipment for fighter jets to Iran, and it agreed to pay a criminal fine of $10 million.
The company, Japan Aviation Electronics Industry, which is controlled by the NEC Corporation, one of Japan's largest electronics companies, filed its plea in Federal District Court in Washington.
In a statement, the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, Jay B. Stephens, said the penalty was the highest ever imposed for export violations.


Hurt in Gun-Control War, N.R.A. Rejects Retreat
As an epidemic of shootings and murders prompts new calls for gun control, the National Rifle Association, far from seeking compromise, has stiffened its spine.
If any Washington group has long had a reputation for being single-minded and inflexible it is the N.R.A., the centerpiece of the nation's gun lobby.
Yet in fact the organization has periodically been shaken by tumultuous internal debate over its identity.


Finding Realities to Fit a Film's Illusions
WHEN they wanted an elegant look for their 1972 film "Savages," the producer Ismail Merchant and the director James Ivory had ordinary tableware wrapped in tinfoil so it would gleam in the background.
Since then, obviously, a lot has changed.
For "Howards End," which opens tomorrow, the film makers borrowed so much antique silver that they required the services of a guard to make sure the props didn't wander.
It is fitting that "Howards End," which takes its title from the pastoral family retreat central to E. M. Forster's 1910 novel, should be the film that most spectacularly emphasizes the Merchant-Ivory team's attention to domestic detail.
In addition to that ubiquitous silver, the film also makes abundant use of antique china and crystal, potted palms, leather-bound volumes, lace antimacassars and elaborate period costumes for its interior shots, not to mention the vintage cars and trains, striking architecture, wicker furniture and luxuriant flower gardens that add color to its outdoor scenes.
From the abandoned castle on the grounds of one country estate to the apple charlotte brought by a servant to a student in his rooms at Oxford, the film's decorative touches serve as delicate, precise complements to its main events.


Church's Change at Top Leaves Members Silent
Although the Christian Science Church reshuffled its leadership this week and announced that it would sell off a cable television venture that has been part of a bitter dispute over the church's direction, rank-and-file members are keeping their opinions on these important moves to themselves.
The tight-lipped response, some church members explained, reflect both the anxieties stemming from criticism of the church in its earliest days and the central beliefs of this distinctively American religious movement, which is estimated to have 150,000 members.


Daily News's February Loss Is Twice Projection
Because of a shortfall in advertising and circulation revenues, The Daily News lost about $1.5 million in February, which was roughly twice the $755,000 million deficit that the paper's management had projected.
The unexpectedly large loss comes at a critical moment in the paper's search for a buyer after declaring bankruptcy after the death of Robert Maxwell, the owner.


CHRONICLE
When JACK GOTTLIEB turned 53 in 1983, Leonard Bernstein, to whom he was an assistant, wrote him a birthday song, "Mayn Yiddish Assistant." Never performed publicly, it is to have its premiere on Sunday at a tribute to Bernstein at the Metropolitan Synagogue, 40 East 35th Street.
"It was a loving tribute," Mr.
Gottlieb said yesterday, noting that Bernstein often wrote songs or piano compositions to mark events, happy and sad, in the lives of relatives, friends and colleagues.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; Buchanan Hits the Brake, Then the Gas
Losing does things to Presidential candidates.
Often it makes them belligerent.
Sometimes it makes them conciliatory.
Today, it made Patrick J. Buchanan both.
At 7:30 this morning, on the day after he lost eight Republican primaries, Mr.
Buchanan acknowledged to reporters in Dearborn, Mich., that wresting the nomination from President Bush was an elusive dream.
And the pugnacious challenger said that if the President had sewn up the nomination by the time the California primary on June 2 nears, he would not run negative commercials that might provide fodder for Democrats in the fall.


Washington Memo; It's Bank Panic, Congressional Style, As House Faces Up to Bad Checks
The growing panic in the House of Representatives over what to do about bad checks written by dozens of members is the result of political damage control gone astray.
A five-month investigation by the House ethics committee dealt carefully with who wrote checks for more money than they had on deposit on the House Bank.
But it pointedly refused to look into "motivation or intent," even for the one member who wrote 996 bad checks in 39 months.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Hans Zeisel, a professor of law and sociology at the University of Chicago, omitted a survivor.
She is his sister, Ilse Zeisel of Manhattan.


Walker Stevenson, 78, An Investment Banker
Walker Woods Stevenson, a retired investment banker and Wall Street broker, died on March 2 at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 78 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J., and Nantucket, Mass.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Nelson Is Fined $3,000
Do many National Basketball Association referees really have it in for Warriors guard SARUNAS MARCIULIONIS because he is Lithuanian?
Golden State Coach DON NELSON said so last week, describing the discrimination as blatant but not naming any of the offenders.


Corrections
Charts with the political campaign coverage on Friday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday misstated the number of Republican National Convention delegates for Mississippi.
There are 33, not 32.
Because of that error, the chart on Tuesday also misstated other Republican delegate figures.
A total of 421 delegates, not 420, were chosen on Tuesday in eight states, and 1,557, not 1,558. are still to be chosen.


Court Halts Projects Planned for Pine Barrens
A divided State Appellate Court has ordered a sweeping environmental review of the last large tracts of undeveloped pine forest on Long Island, overturning hundreds of zoning decisions by local governments.
In the decision, the State Appellate Division in Brooklyn barred any development in the environmentally sensitive Pine Barrens, an area of almost 200 square miles, until a study has examined the cumulative effects of hundreds of developments planned there.


New York Threatens Penalties Against Bond Underwriter
New York City officials said yesterday that they plan to withhold $250,000 of $1 million to $2 million in fees from the city's main underwriter of bonds, the First Boston Corporation, as a penalty for the investment bank's failure to disclose its purchase of city bonds that could have yielded a profit at the city's expense.
First Boston, which is currently underwriting more than $1 billion in city debt, will also pay for the city's investigation into the matter, which is being conducted by the city's counsel on bond disclosure, Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Hertz Eases Surcharges In New York
Responding to public anger, the Hertz Corporation announced yesterday that New York City residents who want to avoid surcharges can pay a $25 one-time fee for the company to check their driving and employment records to determine whether they are what Hertz is calling "responsible renters."
But Hertz said that it would keep its surcharges -- $56 a day for residents of the Bronx, $34 for Brooklyn residents, $15 for those who live in Queens and $3 for Manhattan -- because they appear to be achieving their purpose, scaring off renters who cause a disproportionate number of accidents and later suits against Hertz by people who are injured.


Adding Up the Casualties of the House Bank Affair
The House ethics committee today made public a report that details how scores of Congressmen wrote hundreds of bad checks.
But it labored to define what moral qualities divided the 24 members it wants to rebuke from dozens of others whose abuses seem no less egregious.
The list of 24 members whom the committee wants the House to identify excludes those who wrote bad checks valued at more than $150,000 over a three-year period.
The criteria for choosing the 24 did not include the number of checks overdrawn, nor the total face amounts of the checks -- only the number of months a member's overdrafts surpassed the next month's salary.


Quest for '91 Grand Slam Left Faldo Out in the Cold
A year ago, Nick Faldo was indisputably the No. 1 golfer in the world. With a bullet.
He had won two of the four major championships of 1990, taking his second straight Masters and climaxing the year with a bravura performance at the British Open at St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Afterward, there was talk of greater worlds to conquer, to the point of suggesting -- out loud -- that just maybe the modern Grand Slam was within reach.


Review/Television; Twisted Humor of Children's Cartoon Gains a Cult
"The Ren and Stimpy Show" on Sunday mornings at 11 on Nickelodeon isn't just for children.
In fact, its twisted sense of humor, complex characterizations and sophisticated satire of the television age seem particularly oriented toward adults.
Since the cartoon's debut last fall, Ren and Stimpy have become cult favorites among college students and postgrads; recently Nickelodeon's sister channel, MTV, has also been broadcasting the series, on Sunday nights at 11:30.
As it was with the early days of "The Simpsons," the show's popularity got ahead of its production schedule.
So far there are only six half-hour shows and a pilot, and they are in continuous reruns.
Twenty more shows have been ordered for late summer or fall.
"The Ren and Stimpy Show," created by John Kricfalusi, may be the most original thing to happen to children's television since "Pee-wee's Playhouse." Here are 10 reasons.


Regulation Of B.C.C.I. Is Faulted
A parliamentary committee sharply criticized the Bank of England and banking regulators of other countries today for their handling of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
In the report, Price Waterhouse, the bank's sole auditor since 1987, emerged virtually unscathed.


Dinkins Is on the Mend, Doctors Say


Accounts
*
Optus Communications, Sydney, a new Australian telecommunications company, to George Patterson Advertising, Sydney, as its first agency of record.
Billings total $26 million.


Events: 3 Craft Shows And 2 Symposiums
Uptown Crafts
Ferris Booth Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 115th Street; (212) 866-2239.
The American Arts and Crafts Alliance is sponsoring a show of 130 exhibitors tomorrow through Sunday and March 20-22.
Hours: 2 to 8 P.M.
Friday; 11 A.M. to 6 P.M Saturday and Sunday.
Admission: $5; $4, 60 and older; free, children under 12.
A ticket is good for all days.
Modern Crafts
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
A symposium, "Craft in the Machine Age -- European and American Modernism: 1920-45" will run from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. on March 20.
Topics include architecture, ceramics and textiles.
Fee, $75; $65, members; $35, students.
Reservations required.
Selling Jewelry
Fashion Instititute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street; (212) 760-7826.
A symposium on entrepreneurship and jewelry design will be held from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on Saturday.
Topics will include market trends and art versus commercial jewelry.
There will also be workshops and demonstrations.
Fee, $25 ($15, students).
Decorated Surfaces
Silo Gallery, 44 Upland Road (off Route 202), New Milford, Conn.; (203) 775-4526.
The gallery and the Brookfield Craft Center are sponsoring an exhibition of ceramics, furniture and textiles with decorated finishes, from Sunday through April 16.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.
Free.
Colorful Clothes
National Museum of the American Indian, Broadway at 155th Street; (212) 283-2420.
A display of Ixil Indian woven clothing by Juana Cavanaugh, of Guatemala, featuring human figures, animals and geometric patterns, opens Wednesday and runs through July 12.
Museum hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday to Saturday; 1 to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission is $3; $2 for students and those 65 and older; free, members and children age 7 and younger.


Corrections
An entry in the Finance Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified an underwriter of sinking fund debentures for the Carpenter Technology Corporation.
It was the J. P. Morgan Securities Corporation.


G.O.P. in Trenton Seeks Big Cut In Florio's Budget on School Aid
Republican legislative leaders plan to announce a proposal on Thursday to revise the state's figures on school aid in the next budget, and a leading idea is to cut $125 million chiefly from aid to urban districts.
Under their plan, a large chunk of the $341 million in new school aid announced in January by Gov.
Jim Florio's administration would be deferred until 1993-94.


Watch for Optimistic Speech and G.O.P. Surge; All Fairness Gone
To the Editor:
As Christopher Lasch points out in "How Television Deflates Politics" (Op-Ed, Feb. 24), televised political debates are not between candidates, but between the candidates and television.
They star the commentators.
Professor Lasch also points out that television stresses the sensational stories, rather than the real issues.


Goldman's Pitch for Deals in Russia
William Crowley, a corporate finance specialist for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in London, is scouring the globe on behalf of a big client with vast resources, new management and an uncertain future: the Russian Government.
Since Moscow hired Goldman, Sachs on Feb. 17, Mr.
Crowley has been coordinating the effort of dozens of Goldman's bankers to contact blue-chip corporations and to expedite Western investments in Russia.
He has fielded hundreds of phone calls and faxes from Chicago to Frankfurt to Sydney.


A Budget Truce in Nassau Calls for No Tax Increases
Nassau County officials, heralding what appears to be a tenuous truce in their long budget feud, said today that they planned to restore some county services that had been cut earlier this year to avoid raising taxes.
Appearing shoulder to shoulder, the officials announced that they had come up with the money by backing out of a pledge of $1.5 million in funding for the Metropolitan Suburban Bus Authority.


Winners All, Whether Floral or Furry; The Olympics Of Garden Competition
Walt Fisher's bulbs were running neck and neck with Pamela Lammot du Pont Copeland's, and she has a gardener.
It's doubtful that she stays up at night adjusting the lights over the old Ping-Pong table in the basement.
But it must be said: Mrs.
Lammot du Pont Copeland's "Blue Blaze" hyacinths were the bluest of all.
She won the blue ribbon for Class 210.


Watch for Optimistic Speech and G.O.P. Surge; Write Them In
To the Editor:
One of the devices used by politicians to assure that the party candidate will win is to belittle the power of the legally valid write-in vote.
We hear voters decrying the desirability of all the registered candidates for office, and then saying, "I guess: I have to vote for So-and-So; he's the least terrible."


We Can Help Revive Baltic Drug Industry
To the Editor:
In "Life or Death for Russian Children" (Op-Ed, Feb. 25), Arthur Hartman, United States Ambasasador to Moscow in the 1980's, writes of the tragic state of medical affairs in the former Soviet Union.
Emergency medical assistance in the form of vaccines and pharmaceuticals is sorely needed by all the countries once under Soviet rule.
Direct donations of medical equipment and medicine are essential to save lives; however, Western donors should also consider a long-term solution readily available: investment in the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry.


Mysterious Word In an Ad for Fortune
For readers of The New York Times who did double takes yesterday over articles about a President of the United States named "Chitud" and a New York Yankees manager named "Walpu Kangot," there was an explanation.
The articles appeared in a reproduction of The Times's front page from Oct. 20, 1987 -- reporting the previous day's stock market crash -- that ran as an advertisement for Fortune magazine.
The ad, by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, reproduced that front page to illustrate how "management has always relied on Fortune. Especially during difficult times."


Jersey City Council Fails To Name Interim Mayor
The City Council made a final, futile attempt this evening to name an interim mayor to fill the vacancy created when former Mayor Gerald McCann was removed from office after his conviction on Federal fraud charges.
Because of the inability of five of the eight council members to agree on someone to serve until a special election in November, Marilyn Roman, the city council president, will will continue to be acting mayor.
She will serve until the election, or until the council reorganizes in July, when another council member may be elected president and become acting mayor.


Sports of The Times; When Just The Trip Is Everything
EVERY few seconds outside the Fordham University gymnasium yesterday, the words flashed across the athletic department message board:
"Congratulations to the Patriot League champion Fordham Rams. We're on our way to The Show!! Tickets available on Monday 3/16."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Tsongas, Seeking Broader Base, Reaches Out to Blacks in Chicago
Eager to shed his image as the candidate for high-brow and high-income voters, Paul E. Tsongas today plunged into one of this city's toughest neighborhoods to open his campaign in the industrial Midwest.
Stung by his overwhelming defeats in the South and by his failure to draw significant support from minorities and working-class voters in his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr.
Tsongas picked the all-black William R. Harper Senior High School in the crime-torn neighborhood of West Englewood to talk about inclusion and economic hope.


Essay; The New Despotism
All the political munchkins had persuaded their principals that, in a recession, foreign policy was a no-no.
Foreign aid?
Kiss of death.
Along came Richard Nixon this week to give all the candidates and their lockstep pollsters a swift kick in the teeth.


I.B.M. Plan For Selling PC 'Clones'
I.B.M. executives said yesterday that the computer maker would set up an independent subsidiary to sell an inexpensive clone of its computers in Europe.
I.B.M. has not disclosed the details of the arrangement.
But industry officials said they expected the machines to be made by a Singapore company, Hong Leong, with which I.B.M. established a joint venture in January 1991.
The venture, International Application Solutions, in October began selling an inexpensive clone in Southeast Asia, priced around $1,600.


For Two Rams, Joy Is Tempered by Tragedy
When the Fordham University Rams step onto a basketball court next Thursday or Friday somewhere between Worcester, Mass., and Tempe, Ariz., they will make the school's first National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearance in 21 years.
They will affirm the effort of a senior class that could have fallen one game short of the tournament in its final three seasons.
And they will take one more step from the night that became a nightmare.


Long-Term Rates Move Upward
Comments by President Bush helped to push up long-term interest rates during slow trading in the credit markets yesterday.
At a news conference, Mr.
Bush told reporters he was more concerned about the health of the economy than in keeping long-term interest rates low.


Spartan Motors Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eaton Vance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Toys 'R' Us Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 1


Tick, Tick, Tick Goes N.H.L.'s Clock
There is a common wisecrack about pro basketball: you don't need to watch the whole game because anything really important happens in the last two minutes.
Like most glib wisdom, it is simplistic and inaccurate.
But the spirit of this insight lives on in the National Hockey League's labor crisis.
With the Stanley Cup playoffs still four weeks away, management and union representatives are continuing their preliminary posturing, bluffing and saber-rattling, en route to either a new collective-bargaining agreement or a strike.
What it all means won't be clear until crunch time, if a strike is scheduled, when they get down to the equivalent of intentional fouls and free throws under pressure.


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Tokyo Stocks Off a Bit
Stock prices closed just slightly weaker today in Tokyo, after recovering from a morning plunge.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended at 20,561.88, down 30.26 points, or less than two-tenths of 1 percent.
The index fell 262.45 points on Wednesday.


No Food or Jobs or Spirit: Albania Prepares to Vote
As Albania, once the most rigidly ruled Communist nation in Europe, approaches its second free parliamentary elections within a one year, members of all parties agree that their country is in desperate straits.
"Anarchy," "chaos" and "catastrophe" recur regularly in discussions of the March 22 elections with official spokesmen and opposition leaders, foreign ambassadors and ordinary citizens.


From East to West, Time to Think Derby
It was early in the morning on Super Tuesday, and Leroy Jolley was standing in a little tower alongside the picture-postcard race track in the countryside watching the candidates gallop past.
The clock was ticking: four days to the Florida Derby, seven weeks to the Kentucky Derby.
For 3- year-old horses, this was the countdown to the campaign of a lifetime.
The countdown will take a couple of important ticks this weekend, a continent apart.
On Saturday, a dozen contenders will meet at Gulfstream Park in the Florida Derby, the landmark race for those taking the Eastern route to Kentucky.
On Sunday, those taking the Western route will meet in the San Felipe Stakes at Santa Anita.
They include Bertrando, who is making his 1992 debut but who is already a horse of distinction because he ran second to Arazi last November in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.


It Has Been All Uphill for Snowboarding
Snowboarding, which began as a curio of skateboarding, surfing and sailboarding, has evolved in recent years into a booming winter alternative to skiing.
And with its adoption of competition events, either using Alpine skiing's racing formats or freestyle skiing's acrobatics, snowboarding has attracted an estimated 1.8 million participants in 1990, according to Transworld Snowboarding magazine.
"There were only about a thousand snowboards in 1983," said Fran Richards, marketing manager for Transworld Snowboarding.
"Last year, about 135,000 boards were sold, plus another 80,000 smaller toy boards for children. Ten years ago, with luck, you might get down a hill without spinning out. Now, snowboarding is as sophisticated as Alpine skiing."


Mays (J.W.) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


General Mills Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Feb 23


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Super Tuesday's Warm Glow Fails Clinton in Cold Chicago
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas should have been euphoric this morning on what his advisers were convinced was the first day of the general election campaign.
But four of the first questions at his news conference with Chicago's Mayor, Richard M. Daley, went something like this:
Do you think your marital problems will stop you from winning the white Catholic vote in Illinois?


INSIDE
British Election Is Called on April 9
Prime Minister John Major of Britain called an election on April 9.
The battle is likely to be hard fought, but not the severe ideological conflict from the days of Mr.
Major's predecessor, Margaret Thatcher.
Page A3.
Pines Development Barred
An Appeals court barred development of the environmentally sensitive Pine Barrens woodland on Long Island pending a review.
Page B1.
Hertz Eases Surcharge
Hertz said New York City residents who want to avoid car-rental surcharges can pay $25 to have driving and job records checked.
Page B1.
Politics (as Usual) to Bank On
The panic over who should be identified as a deadbeat at the House bank offers a glimpse of politics run amok.
Washington Memo, page A16.
Former El Diario Editor Slain
A prominent Hispanic journalist, Manuel Unanue Dedios, was shot to death as he sat in a restaurant in Jackson Heights, Queens.
Page B3.


Banister Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bush Ally Takes Cabinet Post
Andrew Card, a loyal political ally of President Bush, was sworn in as Secretary of Transportation today.
Mr.
Card took the oath of office from Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court in a ceremony at the Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution.
He replaces Samuel K. Skinner, who resigned to become White House chief of staff.


Valley Forge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Symphony Revamps, Hoping to Lure Young Audiences
At a time when orchestras all over the country are fighting a two-front war against subsidy cuts and audience attrition, the American Symphony Orchestra has adopted a strategy meant to shatter its image as a modest freelance ensemble devoted to staid, mainstream repertory.
The plan involves a reconsideration of everything from programming to ticket pricing, and is an attempt to lure younger listeners -- particularly classical-music neophytes -- to the concert hall.
But it also risks alienating concertgoers who expect to find Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven on their symphony programs.
Leon Botstein, who is to succeed Catherine Comet as the orchestra's music director in the fall, has constructed a season of thematically organized concept programs that avoid the standard repertory in favor of rarely heard 19th- and 20th-century works.
The programs relate the music to trends in the visual arts or to broader historical currents, and some of the concerts are to be presented in conjunction with exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the New York Public Library.


Heidi Vosseler Is Dead; Ex-Ballet Dancer, 74
Heidi Draper, who as Heidi Vosseler was a member of George Balanchine's first American ballet company, died on Monday at her home in Woodstock, N.Y.
She was 74 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said her daughter, Pamela.


In-Store Advertising Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tracing the Twisted Trail Of Cascade International
As a bankruptcy examiner, James S. Feltman has untangled the finances of many troubled companies.
But he said his current charge, Cascade International, was unique for the breadth of deception that drove the publicly held cosmetics and clothing company into bankruptcy last year.
Mr.
Feltman said he had been dumbfounded that every safeguard intended to protect shareholders failed or was skirted by Victor G. Incendy, the company's chairman, who dropped out of sight last November.
Mr.
Incendy controlled key operations of the company, even opening the mail himself.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about President Bush's meeting with his campaign leaders at the White House reversed the positions of the campaign chairman and the campaign manager and identified the manager incorrectly.
Robert M. Teeter, the chairman, was at the right; the manager is Frederic V. Malek, and he was at the center.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Adelaide Hall  Weill Recital Hall


Iraq Defends Its Conduct in Carrying Out the Gulf War Cease-Fire


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eddie Burks Chicago Blues  73 Eighth Avenue  (At 13th Street)  Manhattan  Through Thursday


Washington Post Deal
The Washington Post Company said today that it had bought an 80 percent interest in the Gaithersburg Gazette Inc., which owns the Gazette Newspapers.
Terms were not disclosed.
The Gaithersburg Gazette publishes 11 weekly newspapers in Montgomery, Frederick and Carroll Counties in Maryland.
Total circulation is more than 180,000.
Davis Kennedy will remain president, publisher and editor of the Gazette Newspapers.
No changes in the company's operations are planned.
The Gazettes are published on Wednesdays.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Citing the handling of B.C.C.I., a British Parliamentary committee sharply criticized the Bank of England and banking regulators of other countries.  [ D1. ]


James Brooks, an Artist, Is Dead; Abstract Expressionist Was 85
James Brooks, one of the last of the original generation of Abstract Expressionist painters, died on Monday at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital in Brookhaven, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in Springs, L.I.
He had Alzheimer's disease since 1985, said his wife, Charlotte Park Brooks.


Switches That Blend Into the Tilework
JUDIE and Bennett Weinstock's light switches give a new meaning to the phrase "attention to detail."
When the Philadelphia-based interior decorators renovated their new New York apartment, they asked Margaret Shay, a Philadelphia artist, to take care of one their pet decorating peeves: light switches that stick out, especially in tiled walls.


Valvano Set to Sign New Deal With ESPN
JIM VALVANO is expected to reject an offer today from Wichita State University to become its basketball coach and will sign a long-term extension of his ESPN contract, according to a source close to Valvano.


Sounds Around Town
Felicia Sanders Tribute
Judy Kreston and David Lahm, "Remembering Felicia Sanders," Judy's, 49 West 44th Street, Manhattan (764-8930).
The singer Judy Kreston and the pianist David Lahm, a husband-and-wife team, are bringing something special to Cabaret Month with their remembrance of Felicia Sanders, one of the great cabaret performers in the 1950's and 60's.
Ms.
Sanders introduced many of Edith Piaf's songs to American audiences as well as one of the most memorable American songs of that period, Bart Howard's "Fly Me to the Moon." Irving Joseph, who was Ms.
Sanders's husband and accompanist, has helped Ms.
Kreston and Mr.
Lahm give the musical memory an insider's point of view.
Performances are at 9 and 11 P.M. tomorrow with a $15 music charge and a $10 minimum.
A Musical Reunion
Gail Wynters and Herman Foster, the Village Gate Terrace, 160 Bleecker Street, Manhattan (475-5120).
The singer Gail Wynters and the pianist Herman Foster, who formed one of the most delightfully swinging duos of the 1980's, are together this weekend for the first time in five years.
Mr.
Foster has come in from one of his many world tours with the saxophonist Lou Donaldson, while Ms.
Wynters has returned from the Moscow (Idaho) Jazz Festival, where she shared top billing with Lionel Hampton and Gerry Mulligan.
She arrived in New York just in time to finish a record album on which she is joined by Dr.
John, Roger Kellaway, Jay Leonhart and the saxophonists Arnie Lawrence and Bob Kindred.
At the Terrace, she will share with Mr.
Foster several of the songs she recorded, including her own "Boogie on Our Way to Heaven," "Crazy He Called Me" and "My Foolish Heart," along with Harold Arlen's "Moanin' in the Mornin,' " which she sang on the record with Dr.
John.
Shows start at 10 P.M. today, tomorrow and Sunday and continue until 3 tonight and tomorrow (until 2 A.M. on Sunday).
There's a $6.50 minimum but no cover charge.
All Four Fun
All Four Fun, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street (244-3005).
This vocal quartet debut at the Ballroom in December was so successful that they have been brought back in less than three months for an encore.
Their high-voltage act, which includes choreography by the Tony Award-winner George Faison, is highlighted by a tribute to such great songwriters and performers as Nat (King) Cole, Duke Ellington, Eubie Blake and Fats Waller.
The quartet (A. Curtis Farrow, Ron Lucas, Bambi Jones and Inger Burton) is accompanied by a sextet led by Ron Drotos.
Shows are at 9 and 11:15 P.M. today and tomorrow.
Tickets are $15 to $25 and there is a two-drink minimum.
Week's Jazz Album
Scott Hamilton: "Race Point" (Concord Jazz).
Although the saxophonist Scott Hamilton has consistently performed with groups that mix age (Roy Eldridge, Benny Goodman) and youth (Warren Vache or the members of his group who came to New York with him in the mid-1970's), that formula has never been as rewarding for him as it is in this collection.
Age is represented by the pianist Gerry Wiggins and the bassist Andy Simpkins, youth by the drummer Jeff Hamilton (no relation) and the guitarist Howard Alden.
In four unaccompanied duets with Mr.
Alden, Mr.
Hamilton accepts the bare-bones challenge of Mr.
Alden's guitar to show his skills in a context that is quite different from his customary full-bodied style.
And in that style, playing with the full quintet, he is prodded and lifted by Mr.
Wiggins to produce long-lined, driving solos that soar with joy.
The early influences that can usually be spotted in his work (Coleman Hawkins, Ben Webster, Illinois Jacquet) are now completely absorbed in Mr.
Hamilton's own confident and sensitive approach.


TakeCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Goldwyn (Samuel) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sounds Around Town
A Dark Side
Helen Schneider, Rainbow and Stars, 65th floor, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
Helen Schneider, a singer who has specialized in delving into the darker psychological corners of music by Kurt Weill and Stephen Sondheim, applies the same treatment to the songs of Harold Arlen in her debut engagement at Rainbow and Stars.
Among the standards that she renders as meticulously dramatized interior monologues are "Come Rain or Come Shine," "The Man That Got Away" and "When the Sun Comes Out." Her approach is iconoclastic and interesting, though somewhat cold.
Shows today and tomorrow are at 9 and 11:15 P.M.
There is a $35 cover chage and no mimimum, although dinner is required for early shows.
Eartha Kitt's Act
Eartha Kitt, Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, (212) 570-7189.
Two decades ago, Eartha Kitt invented the prototype of the kind of gold-digging femme fatale that other nightclub performers have emulated but none have topped.
If the substance of Ms.
Kitt's act hasn't changed much in recent years (it still includes her early hits "C'est Si Bon" and "Uska Dara"), it has grown progressively campier.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 10:30.
There is a $35 cover charge, and a $10 minimum.
George Shearing, Suavely
George Shearing, Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
The master of a suave pianistic elegance that sometimes borders on the bland, Mr.
Shearing has technical resources that he usually unleashes just when things are beginning to seem too sedate.
Formerly a regular at the Cafe Carlyle, he is appearing for the first time in the Russian Tea Room's popular Sunday-evening series, with shows at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
There is a $20 music charge, and a two-drink minimum.


Intermetco reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Gilead Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beverly Hills Fan Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Kinnock Alters Course, Raising Question: Where's He Now?
Neil Kinnock, the leader of Britain's opposition Labor Party, had his last joust in the House of Commons today before the April 9 elections.
Why, Mr.
Kinnock, looking very prime ministerial in a dark blue suit, wanted to know, wouldn't Prime Minister John Major join him and the Liberal Democratic leader, Paddy Ashdown, in a televised campaign debate?


Sturm Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Free Appraisals Offered For Stamp Collections
Members of the American Stamp Dealers Association are offering to appraise stamp collections this weekend at Interpex, one of the largest exhibitions of stamps and postal history in the United States.
Eighty dealers will be available at the Sheraton Centre Hotel, Seventh Avenue at 53d Street in Manhattan.
The dealers will sell both rare and inexpensive common stamps, and representatives from about 20 postal administrations will sell new stamps from their countries.


Ford to Expand Offer Of One Price for Escorts
The Ford Motor Company said yesterday that it was expanding nationwide a marketing program for its Escort LX that has won over many reluctant shoppers: one price, no haggling.
The pricing strategy has increased sales during a five-month test among dealers in the Northeast, Southeast and West.
Dealers say consumers appreciate the simplicity of the one-price program, in which the 1992 LX models -- including four-door sedans, two hatchback models and station wagons -- are sold for $9,999.
The models are equipped with many options, including air-conditioning, but an automatic transmission costs $732 extra.


Heidi Vosseler Is Dead; Ex-Ballet Dancer, 74
Heidi Draper, who as Heidi Vosseler was a member of George Balanchine's first American ballet company, died on Monday at her home in Woodstock, N.Y.
She was 74 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said her daughter, Pamela.


Tejas Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alfin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Innovo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Group Seeks to Curb Advertisers' Power
Asserting that advertisers wield a corrupting power of censorship over the news media that run their ads, a public-interest organization is urging curbs on that power.
The Center for the Study of Commercialism has released a report called "Dictating Content: How Advertising Pressure Can Corrupt a Free Press." The report cited examples of what the center called a type of censorship "far more subtle" than government control of the media.
Among the examples previously reported by the media were instances of unhappy auto dealers forcing local newspapers and television stations to retract articles they deemed critical of their businesses.


Don't Hold Your Breath for Paramount Deal, Fans
So, Engulf and Devour (the friendly old epithet for Paramount Communications' acquisitive forerunner, Gulf and Western), is ready to gobble up the New York Yankees and make George Steinbrenner a bad memory?
Well, not yet, even if there is an inherent logic to the entertainment company's owning the very team whose games appear on Paramount's very own Madison Square Garden Network.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Sonesta International Hotels Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Nixon's Tricky Crusade
In a memo circulated privately to his worshipers but meant to bludgeon President Bush publicly, Richard Nixon lays down this warning: If the U.S. doesn't get its act together to save Boris Yeltsin, the question of "Who lost Russia?" will be even more politically devastating in the 90's than "Who lost China?" was in the 50's.
I've got three quarrels with the Old Trickster's latest endeavor to help humankind:


G. M. Brumbaugh, Patent Lawyer, 90, In Manhattan Firm
Granville M. Brumbaugh, who practiced patent, trademark and copyright law for 64 years, died on Monday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 90 years old.
He died in a fall at home, his family said.


CHRONICLE
It was not the standard upbeat tour of New York City, the one that shows visitors the Statue of Liberty, the Empire State Building and Lincoln Center.
Rather, the 50 people who went on what was billed as "a toxic tour" of Harlem on Tuesday saw a sewage treatment plant that processes 170 million gallons of raw sewage a day, a marine transfer station where hundreds of trucks converge to dump garbage onto barges, and the site of a proposed biotechnology research laboratory that is being built, opponents say, with no environmental impact study.
Tomorrow a tour of the Greenpoint-Williamsburg section of Brooklyn will include such landmarks as the Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator, a radioactive waste containment center and a neighborhood where millions of gallons of oil have seeped beneath the streets from nearby tanks.
Both tours were sponsored by the People's Alliance for the Earth Summit, a coalition of 100 organizations.
The tourists are members of nongovernmental organizations as well as government agencies who are in New York for a meeting to prepare for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development that will be held in Rio de Janeiro in June.
"The tours are an effort to bring people from other parts of the world into communities that are suffering from environmental degradation and underdevelopment in the United States, to underscore that there are poor living here in conditions akin to those of the third world," said VERNICE MILLER, a founder of West Harlem Environmental Action, who led Tuesday's tour.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Ecoscience Corp., Worcester, Mass., a developer of pest control products, named L. Jeanie Faulkner chief financial officer. *
Go Silk, New York, an apparel unit of L'Zinger, named John Badum vice president of international sales and Harlan Bratcher to the new position of vice president of sales.


CHRONICLE
TAMMY FAYE BAKKER said yesterday that she was getting a divorce from the imprisoned television evangelist JIM BAKKER.
"For years I have been pretending that everything is all right," although "in fact I hurt all the time," Mrs.
Bakker said in a letter to supporters mailed from her home in Orlando, Fla.
"I cannot pretend anymore," the letter said.
"I have been suffering with high blood pressure, anemia, asthma, hyperventilation," all a result of stress.
In Hendersonville, N.C., Mr.
Bakker's lawyer, James Toms, said: "Jim Bakker wants the people to know he is very sad about the divorce and loves Tammy very, very much. He wants only the best for her."
Mr.
Bakker is serving an 18-year Federal prison sentence for defrauding his followers out of million of dollars.
Throughout his trial and afterward, his wife tearfully proclaimed his innocence. (Reuters)


Voter Turnout: 15 Primaries So Far


In Hard Times, Just Plain Bars Are Timeless
IN the New York metropolitan region, there are Bars and there are bars.
In the former, beers go for $4, the bartender wears a vest and a substantial pub-style menu is displayed on a chalkboard.
In the latter, beers go for as little as $1.50, the bartender wears a faded New York Giants T-shirt and asks if you want a glass with your brew, and no matter what's on the menu, it's wise to stick to hamburgers.
The earthier bars are never referred to as taverns, pubs, lounges or, heaven forbid, night spots.
In fact, they are rarely referred to at all except perhaps in the context of a news story. ("The car ran onto the sidewalk in front of the Suds Cafe.") Yet these unvarnished watering holes play a crucial role in the tragicomedy of big-city life.
They serve as inexpensive sources of recreation, as anodynes to frazzled urban nerves and, in some cases, as democratic forums where people from different walks of life converge.


Milton Reder, Doctor, Dies at 92; Treated Pain With Aid of Cocaine
Dr.
Milton Reder, an eye, ear, nose and throat specialist whose medical practice in Manhattan spanned nearly 70 years, died on Sunday at his home on the Upper East Side.
Dr.
Reder, who became known as a doctor for celebrities and for banishing pain with legally bought cocaine, was 92 years old.
Ill for some time, he died of natural causes but was at his Park Avenue practice as recently as Saturday, said his son, Milton A. Reder of Brookline, Mass.


Cuomo Faults Bush on Greenhouse Gases
Speaking to a United Nations conference today, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo painted an ominous portrait of a looming environmental catastrophe and criticized the Bush Administration for not adopting European standards for controlling emissions of gases that warm the atmosphere.
"It is absurd for this powerful nation to say that we cannot afford to curb the flow of greenhouse gases when they're building up like a blanket in the atmosphere, threatening eventually to melt the icecaps, to flood our coastal regions, to turn the world's breadbaskets into deserts, and convert the planet into a cosmic hothouse," Mr.
Cuomo told the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
The New York Governor said the United States should reduce carbon-dioxide emissions by the year 2000 to the levels of 1990.
That standard has been set by many European nations in response to findings that the earth's ozone layer is deteriorating faster than was expected.


Topics of The Times; The Blade Is Always Keener
Americans are suckers for items imported from abroad.
Though the import may be no better than the domestic version, it seems so for having been sent from far places.
A young New York woman who visited Switzerland recently discovered that import chic is not limited to Americans.
She went to a department store in Basel thinking it would be the ideal place to do a favor for an American friend -- to buy a Swiss Army knife at a favorable price.
She got two surprises.


Silicon Graphics to Buy MIPS for $406.1 Million
Silicon Graphics Inc., the leading maker of the computer work stations that engineers, architects and movie artists use to fashion three-dimensional images, said today that it was buying MIPS Computer Systems Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $406.1 million.
The merger will unite two of Silicon Valley's leading electronics companies to create an enterprise with revenues approaching $1 billion.


Sizzler International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Priestly Silence on Pedophilia
A series of accusations of sexual abuse against minors has battered the American priesthood, yet the National Federation of Priest's Councils, the unofficial priests' union, has failed to assume responsibility.
Never hesitant about offering advice to both church and state on national and international problems, the federation is silent on the scandal.
This seeming indifference is typical of the head-in-the-sand reaction of most priests to the pedophile problem.
The priesthood may be the only profession in this country that makes no attempt to police itself against unprofessional behavior.
Moreover, when a sexual abuse case arises, priests usually distance themselves from it.
They claim it's the bishop's problem, maybe, but not theirs.
In Chicago, where Joseph Cardinal Bernardin is attempting major reforms and re-examing decades of accusations, there is little enthusiasm among priests for what he has done and much sullen mumbling and complaint.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Floyd Tied for Lead  Raymond Floyd continued his surge of torrid play yesterday, shooting a six-under-par 66 and tying for the first-round lead of the Honda Classic in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The 49-year-old Floyd, who won his first tournament since 1986 on Sunday at the Doral Ryder Open, had five birdies in a row over the Weston Hills Country Club.
His score was matched by Keith Clearwater, who finished tied for second at Doral, and Mike Donald.
Fulton Allem, Lance Ten Broeck, Greg Kraft and Greg Hickman were a stroke behind with 67's.
Six Birdies Lift Bradley: Pat Bradley, last year's scoring leader and the newest of 12 members of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame, got her sixth birdie on the last hole yesterday to take a one-shot lead in the first round of the $400,000 Ping-Welch's Championship in Tucson, Ariz.
Bradley's five-under-par 67 was one shot ahead of Dottie Mochrie.
Dale Eggeling, playing with Mochrie, was the first to reach five under, but she bogeyed two holes late in the round and settled into a three-way deadlock with Hollis Stacy and Anne-Marie Palli at 69. (AP) BOXING  Vidal Upsets Cepeda  Jose Vidal of the Bronx scored an upset Wednesday night at the Paramount when he knocked out a world-ranked featherweight, Ricardo Cepeda, at two minutes of the third round of a scheduled 10-round bout.
The end of the match came in the third round when Vidal staggered Cepeda badly enough for the refeee, Arthur Mercante Jr., to give Cepeda a standing eight count.
But as Mercante started his count, the badly beaten Cepeda fell to the canvas.
When Cepeda arose, Mercante waved an end to the bout.
Vidal had not fought since September 1990 when he was stopped by Bryant Paden in eight rounds.
With his victory, the unranked Vidal is 32-7-1 with 20 knockouts.
Cepeda dropped to 23-2-1 with 17 knockouts.
In an earlier bout, Tracy Harris Patterson knocked out Angel Levi-Mayor in 2 minutes 15 seconds of the first round of a scheduled 10-round bout.
With his victory, Patterson is 44-2 with 33 knockouts.
Levi-Mayor has a 23-7-2 record with 8 knockouts.
HORSE RACING  Good News, Bad News  Adrian Maguire rode Cool Shot, a 25-1 shot, to victory in the Gold Cup hurdles race yesterday in Cheltenham, England, then was suspended for four days for overusing his whip.
In one of the closest finishes in the 68-year history of the race, Cool Ground edged The Fellow and Docklands Express.
About 90 minutes after his biggest victory, Maguire was told he would be suspended for excessive use of the whip.
The stewards' action had no effect on the result. (AP)


Stocks Fall in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 105.82 points, or about one-half percent from Thursday's close, to 20,456.06.
The index declined 30.26 points on Thursday.


Uni-Select Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


F.B.I. Pursues Leak of Documents In Science Misconduct Inquiries
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is trying to determine whether employees of the National Institutes of Health have leaked documents that wound up in the hands of Congress and the press.
The inquiry, requested by the institutes' director, is also trying to find out whether employees shredded important documents in investigations of scientific misconduct.
The F.B.I. inquiry is focusing on the Office of Scientific Integrity, which investigates research fraud and misconduct by scientists for the institutes.
It also continues a bitter dispute between the institutes' director, Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy, and Representative John Dingell, Democrat of Michigan.


Emisphere Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Film; The Star and the Story: Special Effects
Eric Steven Stahl's film "Final Approach" is a cinematic maze, a high-technology head trip in which the roles of director, film editor, computer animator and sound designer have blurred.
In the spectacular opening sequences, Col.
Jason Halsey (James B.  Sikking), a test pilot flying close to the ground over the Southwestern desert, crashes after his plane is struck by lightning.
On waking, he finds himself in the spare, futuristic office of a psychiatrist (Hector Elizondo) who pelts him with questions he cannot answer since he has forgotten everything, including his own name.
But slowly, through word-association games and Rorschach-style tests, his past begins to reveal itself in sudden, explosive flashes.


19 Inches of Snow and a Skidding Plane Slow Air Traffic at Rochester Airport


Keep the U.N. on a Roll
For more than four decades, the cold war marginalized the United Nations.
In the last few years, however, it has moved rapidly to center stage, having been called on to deal with trouble spots from the Persian Gulf to El Salvador and issues from drugs to ozone depletion.
Now, expectations are rising about what it can accomplish.
Yet weaknesses must be addressed so as not to dash these expectations.
Otherwise, the organization will sink into irrelevance, disappointing those who feel it is on the verge of assuming a central role in world affairs.


Neither Winter nor Spring -- a Classic March Day


U.S. and Jordan, Allies Again, Share Views on Iraq
King Hussein of Jordan, visiting Washington for the first time since the Persian Gulf war, met with President Bush today and later agreed to press for "full Iraqi compliance" with United Nations resolutions against Baghdad, the White House said.
Thus the King and the President appear to have begun mending ties.
The relations, formerly close, ruptured last year when the Jordanians refused to join the forces ranged against Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Slaying of a Hispanic Journalist Silences Crusader Against Drugs
In his years as editor in chief of El Diario-La Prensa, Manuel de Dios Unanue had become the subject of a kind of running joke among his colleagues about the many threats he had received from anti-Castro Cuban groups, drug dealers and others he had angered with crusading articles he splashed across the front page of the city's leading Spanish-language daily.
Mr. de Dios was on the front page again yesterday, in a bold red headline that said "Sangre de Periodista," "A Journalist's Blood."


Slaying Said to Reflect Colombian Tactics
The bold slaying of a crusading journalist, who was a specialist on the world of illegal drugs, in a Queens restaurant Wednesday night followed the lethal pattern that Colombian cocaine traffickers have repeatedly used to silence critics in South America, the New York City police and Latin American journalists said yesterday.
The police said it was not immediately clear whether the hooded gunman who fired two bullets into the back of the head of the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, was working for one of the two main Colombia drug cartels.


Case for Decriminalizing Drugs Dies in Zurich; 'Nigerian Connection'
To the Editor:
Your front-page article on the "Nigerian Connection" and how it is flooding United States airports with Asian heroin (Feb. 15) is unfair to the Nigerian people and Government.
Your claim, quoting official sources, that the Nigerian Government is not serious about ending drug trafficking is simply not true.


12 Union Heads Decide as Group Not to Endorse Any Candidate Yet
The leaders of most of the unions that had supported the candidacy of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa conferred here today about where to throw their support and decided not to endorse any candidate as a group for the time being.
Owen F. Bieber, the president of the United Auto Workers, led the meeting of the leaders of 12 of the 14 unions that had endorsed Senator Harkin, who withdrew from the race on Monday.
After the meeting in his Washington office, he said there was a consensus that the unions would not move quickly toward any other candidate.


New York Region Concludes: Don't Expand Transit; Fix It
The $1.46 billion highway and mass transit rebuilding program announced in New Jersey last week is part of a regional attack on congestion and delays, which officials believe are undermining the economic future of the metropolitan area.
The theme of this effort is that the region's network of roads, railroads, bridges and tunnels is essentially complete.
The challenge to transportation planners in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut is no longer what it has been for the last 200 years, building new routes across an ever-expanding megalopolis.
Now, officials in Albany, Trenton and Hartford say, the task is to build more efficiency into what already exists.


F.C.C. Loosens Restrictions On Owning Radio Stations
The Federal Communications Commission today more than doubled the number of radio stations that a single company may own and also allowed a single owner to have as many as three AM and three FM stations in a single city.
The action, approved 4 to 0 with one abstention, comes as the industry is enduring its worst recession in decades.
The F.C.C.'s chairman, Alfred C. Sikes, has argued that allowing greater consolidation will allow broadcasters to cut costs.


Associated Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Courting Labor; Tsongas Tells Auto Workers Of 'Problem With Democrats'
Paul E. Tsongas ventured into labor territory today wearing an automobile union windbreaker, but his message at an auto parts plant here was one that workers are not used to hearing.
Only during questioning from workers did the former Massachusetts Senator acknowledge his opposition to legislation championed by labor that would bar employers from permanently replacing striking workers.
He also told them he supports the free trade agreement with Mexico that most unions oppose.





Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Richard Brooks, 79, Screenwriter And Director of Dramas, Is Dead
Richard Brooks, a director, producer and screenwriter whose films included "The Blackboard Jungle," "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" and "Looking for Mr. Goodbar," died on Wednesday at his home in Beverly Hills.
He was 79 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his physician, Dr. Leonard Schwartzman.


Name Change For DCA
At a time when "Japan bashing" is in vogue, Dentsu, Japan's largest agency, will change the name of its American subsidiary to reflect its Japanese roots.
As of April 1, DCA Advertising Inc. in New York and Los Angeles will become the Dentsu Corporation of America, or Dentsu America informally.
"Though we're in the midst of some anti-Japanese feeling, we felt it would be more beneficial for us as a company to emphasize our heritage," C. Ray Freeman, chief operating officer in New York, said yesterday.


AOI Coal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Patrick's Week Events
St.
Patrick's Day will be celebrated on Tuesday.
Here are some related events this weekend and next week in New York City.
Today
IRISH NEW YORK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of historic Irish sites like St.
Peter's Church, Five Points, St.
James Roman Catholic Church and Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Led by James P. Shenton, a history professor at Columbia University.
Sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Registration and meeting place: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.


Corrections
An article on March 2 about Senator Brock Adams's announcement that he would not seek re-election referred incorrectly to two Senate elections in Washington State.
Mr.
Adams defeated Senator Slade Gorton in 1986, not in the special election that followed the death of Senator Henry M. Jackson in 1983.
Mr.
Gorton returned to the Senate after defeating Representative Mike Lowry in 1988.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  U.N. REJECTS IRAQ'S CLAIMS
The United Nations Security Council rejected Iraq's assertion that it is cooperating with the terms of the Persian Gulf war cease-fire and told its Deputy Prime Minister to comply fully with orders to dismantle weapons programs.
But Iraq seems to have won a brief respite.
A1  TURNING POINT FOR AFGHANS
After 13 years of civil war, Afghanistan stands uneasily on the edge of peace.
A United Nations plan to begin charting the country's future has elicited grumbling but some tentative interest from some rebel groups and the Government.
A1  UKRAINE ENDS ARMS TRANSFER
The President of Ukraine declared that he was suspending the transfer of tactical nuclear arms to Russia because he had no guarantee that they were being destroyed.
A3  REDEFINING SOVIET FORCES
The fierce fighting between Armenians and Azerbaijanis is challenging former Soviet republics to define themselves and the role of the old Soviet forces.
Many combatants see the army as a source of arms and an instrument of Russia.
A3  U.S.
SUSPICIONS ABOUT ISRAEL
The Bush Administration is concerned that Israel may have shared American-made Patriot missile technology with China in violation of agreements, officials said.
Israel has denied that a sale occurred.
A12  SYRIAN LEADER ASSAILS U.S.
The Syrian President accused Washington of trying to strip the Arabs of their military strength to force them to yield to Israel's demands in the Mideast peace talks.
A10  PARADOX FOR BRITISH VOTERS
For the first time in more than a decade, Britain's Labor Party is believed to have a chance of winning a general election.
But many voters have doubts about the party's standard-bearer, Neil Kinnock.
A6  Threat of epidemic of smoking-related disease in Latin America.
A5  Villa Victoria Journal: It's hard to win the hearts of coca growers.
A4  National A14-19  FULL DISCLOSURE ON BAD CHECKS
Relenting to Republican pressure, Speaker Foley agreed to public disclosure of all 355 lawmakers who overdrew their accounts at the House bank.
Only hours later, the fallout from the affair widened when the House sergeant-at-arms, Jack Russ, who had run the bank, suddenly quit.
A1
House members leap forward to confess. A19
Man in the News: Jack Russ, former House sergeant-at-arms.
A19  SOME OPTIMISM AMONG BUSINESSES
A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that many American executives were starting to see signs that the economy was at last turning the corner.
A1  BROWN'S NEW CONSTITUENCY
With Senator Harkin out of the Democratic Presidential race, the choice of many blue-collar workers in Michigan is former Governor Brown.
Yes, it's true: the candidate of California chic, the environment and meditation is finding a home with the pizza-and-beer set.
A1
Unions that had backed Harkin delayed any new endorsement.  A16
Tsongas ventured into Detroit, the heart of labor territory.  A17
Clinton, in Michigan, embraced "old Democratic values." A17
In Illinois, Clinton started early and Tsongas very late.  A17
The campaign as seen by Chicago television viewers.  A18
The Bush camp found a new fault in Buchanan: his car.  A18  WARNING ON HEART VALVE
The F.D.A. said a heart valve implanted through open heart surgery in more than 20,000 Americans had a much higher rate of sudden, deadly failure than previously believed.
The agency said recipents ought to talk to their doctors about whether to have the valves removed.
A1  ECHO OF THE NEW DEAL
The creation of a new Works Progress Administration has long been a favorite idea of a few policy analysts and unsuccessful candidates.
Yesterday it reached a kind of political milestone as a group of Congressional Democrats announced an effort to make it a reality.
A14  REVERSAL IN CASTRATION CASE
Relatives of a man who agreed last week to surgical castration in lieu of a prison sentence for a sex offense said that he had changed his mind and now wanted to stand trial instead.
The new development makes it virtually certain that the operation will not be performed.
A14  A gain was reported in research on an AIDS-related cancer.
A15  A fugitive has been holed up for 14 months atop a mountain.
A14  Law Page B16  These days, the C. in D.C.
Circuit doesn't stand for "collegial."  Bringing a First Amendment lesson to life.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 SLAYING SILENCES CRUSADER
Colleagues of a former editor in chief of the city's leading Spanish-language daily gathered to mourn his execution-style death and to wonder if his crusade against drug dealers had prompted Colombian drug cartels to bring their bloody tactics to the streets of New York.
A1  A SHIFT IN TRANSIT POLICY
The highway and mass-transit rebuilding program announced for New Jersey is part of a regional assault on congestion and delays, which officials believe are undermining the economic future of the metropolitan region.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-32  Just plain bars thriving.
C1  Filling in human history.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: At the Movies C6  "Howard's End." C1  "My Cousin Vinny." C6  Restaurants C24  Sports B7-14  Baseball: Franco gets rich deal from Mets.
B7  Paramount, Steinbrenner talk.
B7  Bowling: Sharing the wealth in P.B.A.
B14  Basketball: Miami sends the panthers packing.
B7  Obituaries B6  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Who speaks for Republicans?
A stopgap transit deal.
Fresh air for NASA.
Topics: The blade is keener.
Letters A30  A. M. Rosenthal: Politicians of silence.
A31  Leslie H. Gelb: Nixon's tricky crusade.
A31  Simon Johnson and Santiago Eder: Russia's managerial revolution.
A31  Andrew M. Greeley: Priestly silence on pedophilia.
A31  Ronald I. Spiers: Keep the U.N. on a roll.
A31


Additional United Nations Troops Arrive in Yugoslavia


Lawmakers Rush to Admit Check Problems
As soon as it became clear today that the House of Representatives would soon make public the names of all 355 current and former members who wrote bad checks, members began leaping forward to confess -- and to put the best face on it.
Some called news conferences, others made themselves available to reporters and news agencies and still others called home to local television and radio stations hoping to blunt any potential political damage by stating their case directly to constituents.


Ukraine Halting A-Arms Shift to Russia
President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine declared today that he was suspending the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to Russia because he had no guarantee that they were being destroyed.
Mr.
Kravchuk made the unexpected announcement at a news conference in Kiev marking his first 100 days in office, and a week before leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States are to gather for a meeting in the Ukrainian capital.


Our Society Just Doesn't Value Teachers
To the Editor:
In "Cut Off From the New Reality" (Op-Ed, Feb. 23), David Gelernter, an associate professor of computer science at Yale, states that most Americans do not know the first thing about computers.
He calls for more American students to become interested in technology.
Perhaps he needs to see better the barriers to that interest.
At the large university where I teach, professors of science and technology present their subjects in large halls.
They stand and lecture to hundreds of students whom they know only by Social Security numbers.


Review/Film; A Flashy New Lawyer in an Unflashy Town
It's easy to recommend "My Cousin Vinny" from the moment, early on, when Mona Lisa Vito (Marisa Tomei), a vivid young woman from Brooklyn with a fondness for overstated clothes, gets out of the car of her longtime fiance, Vinny Gambini (Joe Pesci), in Wahzoo, Ala.
Her first remark, uttered as a kind of informed hunch: "I bet the Chinese food in this town is terrible."
It's even easier when Vinny, a New York lawyer who passed his bar examination six weeks earlier (after six tries), starts to prepare his case, which is to defend his nephew and his nephew's pal, who have been charged with a capital offense.
It is not only Vinny's first time in Alabama, but also his first time inside a courtroom as a lawyer.


At the Movies
Life After 'Bugsy'
Barry Levinson says he is feeling good about those 10 Oscar nominations, including the ones for best picture and best director, for "Bugsy."
"We're really excited about it," he said of the outpouring of accolades the nominations represent.
But Mr.
Levinson, who co-produced and directed the film about the gangster Bugsy Siegel, isn't resting on his laurels.


Thermo Cardiosystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Surgeon General Warns of Smoking in Latin Lands
Latin America and the Caribbean are on the verge of an epidemic of smoking-related disease like the one that has plagued the United States and Canada unless governments work to stem the popularity of cigarettes, the United States Surgeon General said today.
Issuing the annual Federal report on the health effects of smoking, the Surgeon General, Dr.
Antonia C. Novello, said the threat required coordinated action among all countries.


On My Mind; Politicians Of Silence
I hope it will not annoy the Presidential candidates and other seekers of political office if I bring up a subject that they hardly mention as they dash around campaigning.
Drugs.
You remember -- drugs, as in drug addiction, drug crime, drug disease, drug homeless, drug madness, drug guns, drug blood and drug babies.
And as in The War Against Drugs, declared by Washington, way back, about three years ago.


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Long-Term Bond Yields Top 8%
Evidence that consumers emerged from a fourth-quarter funk and spent money at a healthy clip in January and February pushed yields on long-term Treasury bonds above 8 percent yesterday for the first time since early November.
The big gains most likely mean that recovery is under way, analysts said, although not at the rapid pace the sharp rise in retail sales suggests.


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Blue-Box Toys Inc., New York, to Frierson Mee &amp; Herman Inc., New York, for a new Headsmart line of toys featuring "Sesame Street" characters.
Billings were not disclosed.


Santa Anita Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; New World Conscience
Cynics scoff at the notion that a club of governments like the United Nations can effectively monitor human rights.
After all, some member governments are the worst violators.
But at its recent annual meeting in Geneva, the U.N.
Human Rights Commission showed welcome courage.
The commission criticized 22 governments, a record.
Despite the recent election of an Iranian diplomat as vice president, the commission voted to extend its monitoring in Iran, along with Iraq, El Salvador and Afghanistan.
Stricter supervision was imposed on Myanmar, Cuba, Equatorial Guinea, Haiti, Indonesia and the Sudan.


Senate Panel Urges Action Against Phony Health Plans
In the face of growing insurance fraud, a Senate subcommittee urged criminal sanctions today for promoters of phony group health schemes and recommended changes in the law to untangle legal loopholes that have allowed such plans to flourish.
In a report, the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations called for, among other things, state licensing of certain types of group health plans that have frequently proved to be fertile ground for con artists.


CHRONICLE
No more the legendary bachelor: WARREN BEATTY married ANNETTE BENING, the mother of his 2-month-old daughter, in a supersecret ceremony, it was announced in Los Angeles yesterday.
"I can confirm they were married not too long ago, but no further details will be forthcoming," said Nancy Seltzer, Ms.
Bening's publicity agent.
"They are both private people and would like to keep details of their wedding private." She added, "They sound very happy."


Massachusetts Governor Includes Death Penalty in a New Crime Package


National Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Mayor of Jersey City Is 'Acting' No More
In a city where campaigns for Mayor often resemble wars, Marilyn Roman has won the job without firing a shot.
Mrs.
Roman, the City Council president, became the first woman to be Mayor of New Jersey's second-largest city on Wednesday evening when the eight-member council, after 30 days of bickering, gave up in its attempt to appoint an Interim Mayor.
Now her task will be to convince her council colleagues that their inability to agree on someone else was a blessing in disguise.


Valvano to Stay on TV
JIM VALVANO has decided that his future rests in television and yesterday pulled out of consideration to be Wichita State University's basketball coach.
Supposedly, the former coach of the North Carolina State team received a lucrative offer from Wichita State to revive its program, although Wichita State yesterday denied offering a contract to anyone.
In any event, Valvano opted for a long-term extension of his existing three-year deal with ESPN and ABC.


The Battle Continues: New Jersey Republicans Offer Their School Aid Revisions
Assembly Republicans unveiled another in a bewildering series of school-aid revisions today, this one cutting $127 million from the $4 billion proposed by the Florio administration in January.
Such urban districts as Camden, Trenton and Atlantic City would be hardest hit by the changes, although Newark would not be hurt and 192 small suburban districts would benefit.
In unveiling the new aid figures today, Republican leaders emphasized that every one of the state's 590 school districts would get more money in the 1992-1993 school year than they get now.
But they conceded that the increase under their plan would be less than that proposed by Gov.
Jim Florio in January.


Review/Fashion; Letting Leather Steal the Show
Gianni Versace ended the fall and winter showings here with a thunderclap.
The last fashion show of the week was a theatrical event filled with breathtakingly beautiful clothes.
It knocked down some fashion shibboleths and established some guides for the future.
But the shimmering surface only lightly veiled a disturbing undertone, referred to in the program as "Miss S and M."
Linda, Christie, Claudia, Naomi, Marpessa, Nadege, Karen and other world famous models who have been appearing regularly in other shows during the week, seemed unconcerned.
Their hair bouncing over their shoulders, their smiles radiant, they looked more ravishing than they had at any other collection.


Pop/Jazz; Sounds of Earlier Days Draw 2 Longtime Musicians
When Joe Henderson arrived on the New York jazz scene three decades ago, the dominant sound was a muscular, highly charged extension of be-bop, mixed with elements of modal and free jazz.
It was a music that emphasized the soloist rather than the ensemble, a music intended to be played by small groups.
The conventional wisdom at the time was that big bands were a thing of the past.
Mr.
Henderson, one of the outstanding tenor saxophonists of his generation, quickly emerged as a leading light in this small-group milieu.
But he was also drawn to the big-band format, which to him represented a challenge rather than an anachronism.
By 1967 he had begun working on ways to translate some of his musical ideas to the format, and that year he and the trumpeter Kenny Dorham formed their own big band.
The band stayed together for about five years (Dorham left after a year and died in 1972), but hardly anyone besides its own members ever heard it.
It performed in public a few times and came close to recording an album, but it was primarily a rehearsal band, an ensemble whose main purpose was simply to get together and work on music for the sheer joy of getting together and working on music.
"After a while I started to get more busy with my quartet, quintet or sextet, whatever the gig called for at the time, and I put the big-band activity on the shelf," Mr.
Henderson said in a recent interview.
"I have some tapes of those rehearsals, and maybe every five or six years I listen to a few minutes of them and sort of wallow in nostalgia for a while, saying, 'What a great band that was.' " Original Arrangements
Listeners will have a rare opportunity to judge for themselves tomorrow night at 8 at Alice Tully Hall when Mr.
Henderson and a 17-piece ensemble, including many former members of his rehearsal band, resurrect his original arrangements.
He will be joined by Freddie Hubbard, a fellow master of the small-group idiom and one of the most influential trumpeters in jazz, who will perform new arrangements of some of his best-known compositions.
And on Monday Mr.
Henderson, with Mr.
Hubbard as his special guest, will take the big band into the studio to record an album for the Verve label.
"This situation is a chance to complete the thought, so to speak," Mr.
Henderson said.
"It's the first chance I've had to really get back to that band in a good 20 years. I didn't want to get the charts and rewrite them to fit today's concept; this is the way the music was then, and it didn't really get the proper exposure at the time."
Mr.
Hubbard admitted that unlike Mr.
Henderson, he "never used to be interested in writing for a big band." But he has taken the plunge, writing an arrangement of his composition "Thermo." (Other arrangers, notably Slide Hampton, have contributed to his segment of the program.) He said he saw tomorrow night's concert as a chance to "let people hear what Joe's tunes and my tunes sound like with the different harmonies enlarged."
"I am excited myself about hearing my compositions done like this," he added.
The 53-year-old trumpeter also described the concert as a way for "some of the legendary jazz artists who are still alive and kicking" to "give a message to these young kids about how this music was and how it should be," a not-so-subtle reference to the new generation of jazz musicians who derive much of their inspiration from the music he, Mr.
Henderson and others have been making for 30 years.
"It makes me feel funny to hear them playing ideas that I was playing in the 60's," Mr.
Hubbard said.
"At the time, we were creating it; it was an experimental thing. The way they're playing it and phrasing it now, it's very clean, but it doesn't have the same spirit."
"It would be good for some of them to come to the concert," he added, "and hear what it's supposed to sound like." Creators, Not Clones
Mr.
Henderson, who is 54, is considerably more soft-spoken than his colleague, but he expressed similar sentiments.
"It's always nice to have somebody accept your music and try to create styles of arranging, composing and playing based on yours," he said.
"What could be a greater compliment? But when my contemporaries and I arrived on the scene, we did a lot in terms of expanding the art form and coming out with something that was uniquely our own on the various instruments that we played.
"A lot of the youngsters seem to be kind of satisfied with just being clones of people like Freddie and myself, Herbie Hancock and Ron Carter. I certainly hope they grow beyond that. They have to keep going on and seek their own voices. I'm not so sure that they won't do this, but right now it seems they're kind of satisfied to do what we did 20 years ago. I want them to want to seek their own individual styles, their own fingerprints. They have a responsibility to the art form to expand it."
Mr.
Henderson himself appears eager to keep growing.
"Having the chance to hear this music again has done so much for me," he said.
"It's got me inspired again to do more writing. I want to explore some of the ideas that have grown in my head over the past 20 years that require a big-band format. I'm kind of back at letter A again."
Tickets for tomorrow night's concert are $25 and $30.
They are available at the Alice Tully Hall box office or through Centercharge, (212) 721-6500.


Dayton's Net Fell by 18.3% In Quarter
The Dayton Hudson Corporation, which operates several department store chains and the Target discount chain, reported sharply lower earnings yesterday for the fourth quarter that ended Feb. 1.
The company said the results reflected weak Christmas sales, continued stiff competition that has put pressure on its profit margins and a recessionary economy in California, where it does about 35 percent of its business.


Hammond Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dayton Hudson reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Books of The Times; A Novel That Reads Like an Opera
The Uncle From Rome  By Joseph Caldwell 288 pages. Viking. $22.
With all its tarnished splendor and secretive ways, Naples plays the leading role in Joseph Caldwell's operatic novel "The Uncle From Rome." The story is about as believable as the usual Italian libretto, but the settings are splendid and the characters larger than life.
After all, we don't go to the opera to discover the nature of the basso's villainy or the tenor's courage -- "Coraggio!" -- but to listen to the familiar arias and compare the leading singers to themselves and the great voices of the past.


A Top Officer at Aetna To Join Liberty Mutual
After 18 years with the Aetna Life and Casualty Company, Edmund F. Kelly is leaving to take on more reponsibility at a smaller insurer, the Liberty Mutual Insurance Group.
Liberty Mutual, based in Boston, named Mr.
Kelly president and chief operating officer yesterday, filling roles most recently held by the company's chairman and chief executive, Gary L. Countryman.


Advance Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


International Specialty Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G-III Apparel Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Film; Idealism Meets Iodine and Illogic in a Veterans Hospital
"Article 99" unfolds in that medical never-never land where rookies are brash and drive sports cars, the most irreverent doctors turn out to be the most talented, and on every gurney or behind every surgical mask there lurks a stock character with a familiar face.
As directed with irrepressible pep by Howard Deutch ("Pretty in Pink," "Some Kind of Wonderful"), it has a television-series jauntiness even when addressing itself to the serious business of veterans' medical care.
The film, with a screenplay by Ron Cutler, takes place at a Veterans Administration hospital and takes its title from a fictitious regulation that might as well have been labeled Catch-22.
This regulation promises veterans "full medical benefits," adding that "as the diagnosed condition cannot be specifically related to military service, treatment is not available at this time."


Man in the News: Jack Russ; Nimble Ladder Climber
Jack Russ, who resigned tonight as sergeant-at-arms of the House of Representatives, found himself uncomfortably entangled in the furor over bad checks written by members of the House.
Wise in the ways of Washington, Mr.
Russ worked his way up the patronage ladder for members of the House staff.
Now 46 years old, Mr.
Russ devoted 25 years of his life to the legislative institution, as doorman, chief page and sergeant-at-arms.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL WORKING GROUP OF EXPERTS ON ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Art in Review
Claude Cahun  Zabriskie Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street) Through April 11
This small show brings together a selection of photographs and photomontages by the little-known Surrealist Claude Cahun.
Cahun, whose real name was Lucy Schwob, was active in leftist politics and avant-garde art circles in Paris in the 1930's.
In her photos, many of which were made as book illustrations, Cahun deployed a familiar range of Surrealist subjects and techniques.
Too often the symbolism in the pictures is overly self-conscious.
In one print here, a pair of paper cut-out lips hangs from a cageful of flowers, while in another a tree branch with pen points covering it like leaves is surrounded by a pile of white feathers.


U.S. Retail Sales Jump In Month
Retail sales surged in February, and were far higher in January than first estimated, the Commerce Department said today in a report that analysts called the strongest evidence of economic recovery so far.
Sales soared 1.3 percent last month, after climbing 2.1 percent in January.


Florida Derby: 12 Horses, 1 Hammer
Hammer was back home in California regrouping from a trip to Japan, making some videos and preparing to fly east to join the big family rooting for the big horse in the big show.
Dance Floor, the big horse, was back in Barn 4 at Gulfstream Park, newly installed as the 7-5 favorite in the big show, the $500,000 Florida Derby on Saturday.


Crystal Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Suburbs; Clinton Pursues Disaffected Democrats
Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton set out to woo disaffected Democrats in suburban Macomb County today, appearing at an organized question-and-answer session where he tried to blend "old Democratic values" with a call for greater individual responsibility.
The Bush Administration, he said, has no strategy to preserve the automobile industry, reform health insurance or decrease crime.


Nixon's Vietnam Vow
To the Editor:
In "Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit" (letter, March 4), Harold Fowler writes that "Lyndon B. Johnson was elected President in 1968 on his promise to end the war."
It was Richard M. Nixon, not Johnson, who was elected on that promise in 1968.
Johnson got beat in the New Hampshire primary, panicked and dropped out of the race.
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, despite being tied to Johnson's Vietnam policies, came up with a late surge, and many said that if the campaign had lasted two more weeks, Humphrey would have won.
CARL FAITH Princeton, N.J., March 4, 1992


Franco's Record-Setting Deal Comes as Relief to Mets
The Mets, continuing to spend exorbitantly and talk confidently, today signed closer John Franco to a two-year contract extension worth $8 million.
The deal, which will pay Franco a $1 million signing bonus and a salary of $3.5 million in 1993 and 1994, makes the left-hander the highest-paid reliever in baseball on an annual basis.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Phillips Perera, a business executive, omitted a survivor.
He is a son, Alexander L. Perera of Manhattan.


Art in Review
Gregory Gillespie  Forum Gallery 745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street) Through March 21
Gregory Gillespie has been painting self-portraits for more than 20 years, and this mini-retrospective brings together more than a dozen examples.
It is work of peculiar intensity.
The artist often depicts himself bare-chested, and since he paints in a highly detailed, realistic style, every freckle, blemish and pore is minutely rendered, as if the painter could not get close enough -- or bring the viewer close enough -- to the physical reality of his subject.


Smith, a Former Celtic, Gets a Split Verdict
The former Boston Celtics guard CHARLES SMITH was convicted yesterday of vehicular homicide and leaving the scene of a crime in the hit-and-run deaths of two Boston University students.
He was acquitted of the more serious charge of manslaughter.
Smith, 24 years old, who was a standout player at Georgetown, had been charged in the deaths of Michelle Dartley, 20, of Ridgewood, N.J., and An Trinh, 21, of Placentia, Calif.
They were struck on Commonwealth Avenue, a busy street near the university, on the night of March 22, 1991.


INSIDE
2d Thoughts on Castration
A man who agreed to surgical castration in lieu of a prison sentence for a sex offense has changed his mind and wants to stand trial.
He has also hired a new lawyer.
Page A14.
Ukraine Halts Arms Transfer
Saying he had no guarantee that arms are being destroyed, Ukraine's leader declared that he was suspending the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to Russia.
Page A3.
W.P.A.
Idea Is Dusted Off


Unexpected Notoriety From Parade Dispute
At 4 P.M. on Jan. 24, the fax machine whirred into action in an obscure law office in Staten Island and life for the two lawyers inside became impossible and terrific at the same time.
It will remain so until March 18, when, as one of the weary men, Kevin P. McKernan, said longingly in a recent interview: "We've got an 11 o'clock tee time and a 5 o'clock appointment on the 19th hole."
March 18 will be the day after the St.
Patrick's Day parade, provided that the parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, don't cancel it because of the ruckus over whether a gay contingent is allowed to march.
Jan. 24 was the day after New York City brought a discrimination complaint against the Hibernians, and the day that the Hibernians' lawyers -- among them Mr.
McKernan and his partner, Patrick C. Gatins -- found out about it, via fax.


If Eye Contact's Overrated, We'd Have Testimony by Telephone
To the Editor:
No matter how qualified Richard C. Casey, recommended by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for Federal judge in the Southern District of New York, I disagree with James A. Cohen (letter, Feb. 18) that Mr.
Casey's blindness should not disqualify him.
Professor Cohen argues that eye contact is overrated in the task of trial judging.
If eye contact were irrelevant in determining a witness's credibility, we might as well have testimony by telephone.
That the legal system does not allow such testimony indicates society's acceptance of the old-fashioned notion that, sophisticated polygraph and modulation tests notwithstanding, gazing into a speaker's eyes remains one of the most effective ways to detect lies.


David Carroll Is Dead; A Broadway Actor, 41
David Carroll, an actor in Broadway musicals, died on Wednesday at the BMG/RCA Recording Studio in Manhattan.
He had been recording the cast album of "Grand Hotel" when he collapsed.
He was 41 years old.
He died of a pulmonary embolism, said his companion, Robert Homma.


Sports of The Times; End Foreign Ownership Of the Yanks
THE guard had his orders.
Nobody without a pass was allowed to stand around at courtside of the Miami Arena before a game between the Heat and the Knicks.
The guard went around checking every scruffy reporter, every official, every ball boy.
No pass, no loitering.
The mild-mannered gent in the suit did not have a pass.
Didn't even pretend.
Just shrugged and held out his empty hands.


Opening Postponed
"Conversations With My Father," a play by Herb Gardner, has postponed its opening to March 29 from March 22 because of a cast change.
David Margulies has replaced Richard Libertini, who left because of artistic differences, said Jeffrey Richards, the press representative for the show.
The play is to continue in previews at the Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street, Manhattan.


The Art Market
A Gift by Saatchi
In the 1980's, when the English collector Charles Saatchi bought or sold, the art world talked.
His choice of purchases, which were often considered eccentric by other collectors, and his habit of buying many works by one artist and then rapidly selling them off, has been a subject of great interest among gallery owners and artists, auction-house experts and collectors.


State Auto Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers Vow Solidarity On and Off Ice
If the Ranger players go on strike, they will go on strike as a team.
They will continue to talk together, to meet together, and to work out together.
That is the contingency plan, anyway.
At several players-only meetings, team members have mapped out provisions for what they now feel is a probable strike.
The same togetherness they showed on the ice against the Blackhawks on Wednesday night at the Garden, when several Rangers took turns pelting Chicago forward Mike Peluso with their fists, must be transformed into a different sort of labor solidarity.


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Milan Snapshots: From Belts to Pelts
Bondage or bandage?
That was the question after Gianni Versace's sexy runway show Wednesday evening.
The clothes had so many belts and crisscrosses of fabric and leather that anything short of a straitjacket seemed strapless.
It seemed a fitting finale to the Milan fall collections.
But as they say, it ain't over until the fat lady sings, or in this case, a thin one.
At a smoke-filled disco called City Square, the model Naomi Campbell took the stage to sing as part of a "Rapvolution" party in honor of Mr.
Versace.


P.B.A. Tour Competitors Are Sharing the Wealth
Don't expect to see many of the legendary names from the past make the final five for the televised finals of the $150,000 Johnny Petraglia Open on Saturday at the Carolier Lanes, especially if things go to recent form.
This is the 10th stop on Professional Bowlers' Association tour and so far there have been nine different champions.
In the first six weeks of the season, 30 different bowlers appeared on television.
Dave Ferraro of Kingston, N.Y., was the first repeater in week No. 7 and Harry Sullins of Detroit is the money leader with $54,325.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Executives are seeing signs that the sluggish economy is at last turning the corner.
Nearly half of 490 business executives surveyed in a poll see some inklings of improvement.
This guarded optimism appears to be a recent sentiment.  [ Page A1. ]


BRIEFS
*
Banque National de Paris, Paris, and Neuberger &amp; Berman, New York, an investment management concern, announced a preliminary agreement to form a joint venture. *
Boeing Co., Seattle, completed the purchase of 4,200 acres of the former Glasgow Air Force Base in Montana from Valley County, Mont.


U.N. AGAIN WARNS IRAQ ON CEASE-FIRE
The United Nations Security Council today rejected Iraq's assertion that it is cooperating with the terms of the Persian Gulf cease-fire, telling Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz he must comply "fully and unconditionally" with its orders.
Nevertheless, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq appeared to have won a brief postponement of the major new confrontation looming between Baghdad and the Security Council.


Defendant Is Said to Change Mind on Castration
Relatives of a man who agreed last week to surgical castration in lieu of prison for a sex offense said today that he had changed his mind and now wants to stand trial.
The new development makes it virtually certain that the operation will not be carried out.
The relatives said the defendant, Steven Butler, had been coerced into agreeing to the operation, and that they have hired a new lawyer.
A doctor who evaluated the 28-year-old defendant about five weeks ago questioned Mr.
Butler's mental capacity to understand the full implications of the procedure, and today the defendant's relatives echoed that concern.


Quotation of the Day
"It's nice to see plus signs in front of the numbers for a change." -- W. JOHN DEVINE, chairman of Child World Inc., reporting rising sales.  [ A1:2 ]


Marshall Sklare, 70, an Authority On Sociology of American Jewry
Marshall Sklare, a leading authority on the sociology of American Jewry, died on March 1 at Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Newton, Mass.
He was 70 years old and lived in Newton Centre, Mass.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


FCS Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Business Executives in a Survey Start to See Signs of Turnaround
Eyeing their cash registers, showrooms and shop floors, many American business executives are starting to see signs that the nation's sluggish economy is at last turning the corner.
Nearly half of 490 business executives surveyed in a New York Times/ CBS News Poll, see some inkling of improvement.
Forty-seven percent of the executives, representing a randomly selected cross section of American industry from multibillion-dollar corporations to small family firms, said they were convinced that the economy was getting better.
Forty-four percent said it was staying the same, while only 9 percent described it as getting worse.


Clothes Make the Candidate


Dispute Over St. Patrick's Day Parade Puts Lawyers in the Spotlight


Omega Health Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Case for Decriminalizing Drugs Dies in Zurich
To the Editor:
The case against decriminalizing drugs was dealt a mortal blow by "Amid Growing Crime, Zurich Closes a Park It Reserved for Drug Addicts" (news article, Feb. 11).
As an enlightened and wealthy European nation, Switzerland sought to bring about the benefits claimed for decriminalization: a reduction in crime when the profit motive was eliminated; treatment and health care for addicts who wanted it; a decrease in AIDS by supplying clean syringes, and because the decriminalization would be limited to a nonresidential area, insulation of the public from the problem.
The five-year experiment in Zurich has proved all of these assumptions about decriminalization to be false.
Crime has increased as addicts and drug dealers from all over Europe have moved in; drug-related deaths doubled from 1990 to 1991.
The health care system in Zurich has been overwhelmed, with an average of 12 people resuscitated every day.


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Sanifill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Intel-VLSI Move
The Intel Corporation and VLSI Technology Inc. said they had signed a letter regarding discussions on a technology-sharing agreement.
Intel, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said it would acquire a minority stake in VLSI as part of the proposed deal, but neither company would provide further details until an agreement was reached.
Based in San Jose, VLSI produces application-specific integrated circuits, a type of custom chip.


Bel Fuse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Charting the Generations Of East Los Angeles Gangs
Edward James Olmos's "American Me" begins with a warning that the events it describes are brutal, and indeed they are.
The film's views of gang violence in East Los Angeles, and of the forces that conspire to perpetuate that violence from generation to generation, are blunt enough to give it a documentary air.
But Mr.
Olmos's direction, from a screenplay by Floyd Mutrux and Desmond Nakano, is dark, slow and solemn, so much so that it diverts energy from the film's fundamental frankness.
Violent as it is, "American Me" is seldom dramatic enough to bring its material to life.


Special Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Novo Nordisk reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Autostock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Unreal' Politics Meets Cheesecake


Case for Decriminalizing Drugs Dies in Zurich; Heroin Treatment
To the Editor:
As "The New Heroin Bargain" (editorial, Feb. 10) describes, many addicted individuals are excluded from treatment programs because of insufficient funds for all those who need treatment.
Lack of treatment has a high cost, and we agree with the plea for more Federal support.
You mention two pharmacologic agents, methadone and naltrexone, among treatments "that effectively block heroin craving and permit addicts to live normal lives." Although both have helped many addicts, each has limitations.
They are very different and work for different subgroups of patients.
Buprenorphine is another product of the legitimate drug industry, pharmacologically intermediate between methadone and naltrexone.
It seems to benefit yet another subgroup of heroin addicts.


Critic's Choice; Dance Radiant With Religion
Demetrius A. Klein's dancers are a good mix of rough diamonds and polished jewels.
His highly individualistic pieces mix high-energy calisthenics and acrobatics with formal modern dance and a bit of ballet.
And Mr.
Klein, a modern-dance choreographer based in Lake Worth, Fla., sets his dances to compelling music.
But what makes them stand out is his interest in religion, not the most popular topic in dance these days.
His radiant "Foreigner," for instance, takes a look at a church community in dance that has something of the concern for architectural pattern and emotional symmetry of Doris Humphrey's "Shakers" and "Day on Earth."
Mr.
Klein will present "Foreigner" this weekend, on his company's annual trip to New York City, along with "Patenteux (The Time Before the Fall)," a dance about falling, and also falling in love, and "Some Rose Windows," a new abstract work set to music by Bach.


Vincent Seeks Dismissal Of Kleinman's Lawsuit
Did the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, and his special counsel, John Dowd, engage in a fraudulent subterfuge to force George Steinbrenner to give up active control of the Yankees in August 1990, and then to prevent his friend, Leonard Kleinman, from taking his place as managing general partner?
That was the central question aired in Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday, as Judge Leonard Sand heard oral arguments on Vincent's application for summary dismissal of a $22 million damage suit brought by Kleinman.


On Stage, and Off
A 'Waltz' That Lacks Uplift?
"The Baltimore Waltz," Paula Vogel's play about a brother and sister's fantasy trip to Europe while the brother is really dying of AIDS in a Baltimore hospital, finishes a seven-week run at the Circle Repertory Company this weekend.
It had been scheduled to open later this month at the Capital Repertory Company in Albany, but the theater's artistic director, Bruce Bouchard, abruptly canceled the production, calling the play "a very tough and challenging work that asks an audience to work for 90 minutes." So?
What's the problem?
"My audience believes that I'm obsessed with death," Mr.
Bouchard says.
Might it be that the audience has a problem with a play about AIDS?
"Oh, it's not the subject matter," Mr.
Bouchard says.
"The play is a terribly moving catharsis. I wept until I thought I'd have a seizure."


Intervisual Books Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BRIEFS
Common  *
Capital ReCorp., Stamford, Conn., a holding company for Capital Reinsurance Co., filed for an initial public offering of 5.5 million shares to be offered through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. and Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.


Whisper of Hope Is Echoing In War-Scarred Afghan Hills
Exhausted by more than a decade of war that now seems all but forgotten, this country stands precariously on the edge of peace.
Although less visible than the high-level United Nations peace efforts in Yugoslavia and Cambodia, the United Nations has been hard at work here and along the Pakistan border -- wooing, cajoling and gently bullying Afghanistan's fractious rebel groups and the Government of President Najibullah to end the bloodshed and to begin charting the country's future.


Police Say Rape Complaint Names 3 Mets
The Port St.
Lucie Police Department today announced it was investigating a rape complaint that, according to a public information officer with the department, involved three members of the New York Mets.
"We are pursuing an investigation and taking it seriously," said Lieut.
Dwight Hart, the information officer.
"We still have to determine probable cause, at which point we'll be prepared to file formal charges." Tense Situation for Mets
Hart said a woman, a New York state resident in her late 20's, reported her complaint on March 3.
The complaint, according to Hart, centered on an incident that she said occurred on March 30, 1991, between 12:30 A.M. and 3:30 A.M.


Art in Review
William Christenberry and Victor Schrager  Pace/MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through March 28
In his photographs and sculptures, William Christenberry continues to evoke the rural South of his Alabama childhood.
Featured here are a selection of Mr.
Christenberry's color photographs of decrepit shacks and barns and several of the detailed, doll-house-size re-creations he makes of those same buildings.


New Hampshire to Face Maine in Tourney's Final
Maine and New Hampshire won semifinal games tonight at the Hockey East tournament in Boston Garden and will play for the league championship here on Saturday.
The Maine team, ranked No. 1 in the nation, scored and scored against Boston College after falling behind in the second period and won, 7-3.
New Hampshire (22-11-2), the second-place team in regular-season play, defeated Providence College, 5-3, in a tense contest that had one exciting save after another by the two goalies, Jeff Levy for the Wildcats and Brad Mullahy for the Friars (21-13-2).


Keltic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Using Make-Believe to Make a Point
In a crowded courtroom, before an imposing panel of judges, Kristine M. Adams stood and mounted an eloquent defense of free speech.
She asked the jurists to find unconstitutional a Lakerville, Calif., ordinance that was used to prosecute her client, Jan Stover.
Ms.
Stover, a white supremacist, had been convicted of disorderly conduct for wearing a swastika.
But Ms.
Adams argued that Ms.
Stover was guilty only of engaging in "a peaceful expression of political beliefs."


Divorce Lawyers Criticized By Consumer Affairs Chief
Describing horror stories that make Arnie Becker, the sleazy divorce lawyer on television's "L.A. Law" look like a nice guy, the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs yesterday judged the state's divorce system guilty of being "an expensive and costly failure."
Mark Green, the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs, said the system often works against people whom it is supposed to protect, particularly women, because their husbands often control family finances.
A result, Mr.
Green said, is that the "divorce lawyer system either impoverishes women clients or prices them out of a divorce."


Heart Valve Called So Risky Its Removal Must Be Considered
A heart valve that has been implanted through open-heart surgery in more than 20,000 Americans has such a high rate of sudden deadly failure that recipients should talk to their doctors about having the device replaced, the Food and Drug Administration said yesterday.
The device, the Bjork Shiley Concavo-Convex heart valve, is made by Shiley Inc. of Irvine, Calif., a subsidiary of Pfizer Inc.
Shiley said in a statement that the data cited by the Government were from a single study and that it was surprised that the F.D.A. would publicize them before meeting with the company.
The company also said it was unclear what the risks of valve replacement were.


J. M. Schottenstein, Who Headed Chain Of Stores, Dies at 66
Jerome M. Schottenstein, who expanded his father's family business into a privately held retail empire with annual sales of nearly $1.5 billion, died on Tuesday at his home in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 66 years old and died of cancer, his family said.


New York Life Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BellSouth, Dow Jones Plan Service
In an unusual pairing, Dow Jones &amp; Company, the parent of The Wall Street Journal, and the BellSouth Corporation, the nation's largest regional Bell telephone company, said yesterday that they planned to test-market an information service.
Such services have been the focal point of an increasingly contentious feud between newspaper publishers and telephone companies.
But the American Newspaper Publishers Association, one of the telephone companies' harshest critics, said yesterday that it had no objection to the proposed service, called Personal Info Clips, which will be offered to cellular telephone subscribers.


Trizec Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Edison Brothers Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Leucadia National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gibson Is Eager To Prove His Worth
Hal McRae and Kirk Gibson are kindred spirits, but Gibson says they didn't get the same vibrations when they assessed Gibson's ability and his value to McRae's team.
McRae is the manager of the Kansas City Royals.
In his 18-year playing career, he played aggressively, taking out infielders with football-like blocks if necessary to break up double plays.
Gibson was a star college football player who has played with a football-like aggressiveness in his 12-year major league baseball career.
But when Gibson arrived in the Royals spring camp two weeks ago, he learned that McRae had virtually discarded him.


A Schumann Day
"Wall to Wall Schumann," a 13-hour marathon devoted to the music of Robert and Clara Schumann, is to begin tomorrow at 10 A.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan.
Among the participants in the event, which includes performances and discussions, are the Orion String Quartet, the Manhattan Chamber Orchestra, the Mannes Trio, and the pianists Ruth Laredo, Jerome Lowenthal and Claude Frank.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 864-1414.


PHLCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Ad Says Buchanan's Car Shows He's for America Last
The Bush campaign has tried accusing Patrick J. Buchanan of racism.
It has questioned his patriotism.
It has called him a sexist.
Now, it's his car.
In a new advertisement that began running on Michigan television stations tonight, President Bush's re-election campaign is showing a photograph of Mr.
Bush's conservative tormentor as the hood of a Mercedes-Benz, with its distinctive logo, looms up beside him.


Islanders Fall Back In Race for Playoffs
The chances to make the playoffs took a severe turn for the worse tonight for the Islanders, who lost a crucial game to the Penguins, the team they have been chasing in the Patrick Division.
Although Coach Al Arbour still expressed hope after the 6-4 loss put the Penguins 6 points ahead in the standing, the Islanders viewed this game as their most significant since the playoffs two years ago, when they were eliminated by the Rangers in five games in the first round.


Franklin Mint Is Going Public
The Franklin Mint Corporation, which sells collectors' items, is going public for the second time since starting business in 1964.
The company, based in Franklin Center, Pa., will offer up to 11 million common shares at $15 to $17 each, it said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
The Franklin Mint will sell up to 6.2 million shares, while Stewart and Lynda Resnick, the chairman and vice chairman, respectively, will sell up to 4.7 million shares.


TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Unfair, Stopgap Transit Deal
New York's legislators had a chance to stabilize the state's mass transit system, and rid it of gross inequities that favor suburban commuters at the expense of city riders.
Instead, they punted.
The new transit deal avoids hard decisions and simply stitches together a makeshift plan to get through the year.
It maintains New York City's $1.25 bus and subway fare only through 1992, finances a
one
-year capital plan in place of five, and relies on risky fiscal maneuvers.
In the words of Deputy Mayor Barbara Fife, "It's all Scarlett O'Hara: we'll worry about it tomorrow."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Illinois; Clinton Hopes Groundwork of 1991 Will Keep Him Rolling in the North
Gov.
Bill Clinton was keenly aware of the Super Tuesday trap that his fellow Southerner, Senator Albert Gore, fell into four years ago when he rolled out of the South with a string of primary victories -- and skidded to a halt in the North.
That explains why the Arkansas Governor began establishing a northern beachhead in Illinois last year.
Now, with an array of endorsements and a foundation of political support cultivated for months, Mr.
Clinton is hoping for a decisive victory here on Tuesday to cap his Super Tuesday sweep and push him substantially closer to the Democratic nomination.
And former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who opened a campaign office in Illinois only a few weeks ago, is trying to make a virtue out of necessity.


A Top Sicilian Politician Is Slain; Pre-Election Mafia Warning Seen
Three weeks before Italy's national election, gunmen killed Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti's party boss in Sicily today.
The dead Christian Democratic official, Salvo Lima, 64 years old, was regarded as Mr.
Andreotti's main vote-raiser in Sicily.


Who Speaks for the Republicans?
There is a struggle going on for the soul of the Republican Party, not just now but for 1996 and beyond.
It's a one-sided struggle.
Patrick Buchanan may be losing badly to George Bush in the race for the 1992 nomination, but he's winning the larger battle almost unopposed.
The people who ought to care most -- centrist Republicans, principled conservatives and the President -- have let him get away with it.
Mr.
Buchanan complains about federally sponsored pornography, and the President -- what other word is there? -- wimpishly fires the head of the National Endowment for the Arts.
Mr.
Buchanan contends that the President has
betrayed
the country on taxes, and Mr.
Bush grovels.
Mr.
Buchanan preaches isolationism and ethnic division, and Republicans, privately horrified, stand publicly mute.


Surgery for Pagliarulo
Minnesota Twins third baseman MIKE PAGLIARULO will undergo surgery next week to repair a perforated eardrum and will miss two more weeks of spring training, the club announced today in Fort Myers, Fla.
Pagliarulo was hit in the head during batting practice March 6 and has been seeing various doctors since.
He flew to Minneapolis Wednesday, and doctors there recommended surgery.


A Rape Victim Who Went Public
Once it gets past a sex-and-violence teaser that does not have much to do with what follows, "Taking Back My Life," at 9 P.M. on Sunday on CBS, avoids the sensationalist temptations in stories about rape.
And it benefits greatly from performances by Patricia Wettig and Stephen Lang, whose scenes together give solidity to a sometimes shaky two hours.
Ms.
Wettig plays Nancy Ziegenmeyer, the woman from Grinnell, Iowa, who became an instant talk-show personality after permitting The Des Moines Register to use her name in a Pulitzer Prize-winning 1988 series about her own rape.
By the movie's account (Ms. Ziegenmeyer receives credit as "creative consultant," which sounds as though she helped the scriptwriter improve on the facts), the mother of three had a reputation in town for playing around.
When she goes public, Nancy can't help but be aware of the she-asked-for-it assumptions that readers are likely to draw.


Cities Ruled Not Exempt From Costs of Toxic Waste Cleanup
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that 20 Connecticut cities and towns are not automatically exempt from sharing in the $48 million cost of removing toxic waste from two huge landfills.
The landfills, in Beacon Falls and Naugatuck, have been designated by the Federal Government as having significant levels of toxic waste and hazardous materials.


'End of Case'
No charges will be filed against EDWARD J. DeBARTOLO JR., the owner of the San Francisco 49ers, who was accused by a female acquaintance of sexual assault.
"End of case," said JIM FOX, the San Mateo County District Attorney at a news conference in Redwood City, Calif.
Although investigators had come up with physical evidence supporting the allegation -- the woman's pantyhose and underwear had been ripped -- Fox said the woman's statements were inconsistent and investigators did not find enough evidence to win a conviction.


William Condron Jr., Restaurant Owner, 81
William A. Condron Jr., who for more than 40 years owned and operated Billy's, an East Side restaurant founded by his grandfather 122 years ago, died on March 4 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old. He died of natural causes, his family said.


S.&amp; P.'s Ratings On 2 Japan Banks
The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan's senior long-term obligations were downgraded by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to A+ from AA- and removed from S.&amp; P.'s creditwatch, where they were placed on Feb. 27.
About $6.8 billion of obligations were involved, including commercial paper of a subsidiary, which was lowered from A-1 to A-2.
S.&amp; P. noted that the bank's exposure to problem loans had increased significantly.


Diner's Journal
Serious Newcomer in SoHo
At first glance, Zoe could be just another rakish SoHo newcomer with its reverberant post-modern decor, spacious open kitchen and wood-burning ovens.
But in a very short time one realizes that there is focused intelligence at work here.


Dow Ends Day Unchanged, But Broader Market Is Off
Blue-chip stocks held steady yesterday, but prices slipped on the broader market, as falling bond prices and rising yields exerted pressure on stocks.
Stronger-than-expected February retail sales data left the market confused, dragging many indexes down, but the Dow Jones industrial average ended precisely where it began: 3,208.63.
The retail sales report sent the bond market reeling, dashing investor hopes once more of a further cut in interest rates.
As yields backed up, the Treasury's long bond broke above 8 percent and became attractive enough for some investors to remove cash from stocks and move to bonds.
Other investors however, were encouraged by the data, since it pointed to an improving economy that will eventually translate into higher corporate profits.


Input/Output reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Market Place; Electronic Bond Trade Plan Is Revived by Chicago Board
Electronic trading in the giant Government-securities market was an idea that seemed obvious -- but it bombed.
Now the Chicago Board of Trade, which used to be hostile to electronic trading, is trying to revive the idea.
The board announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy EJV Brokerage, a system owned by several big brokerages that was begun last spring to provide the first electronic trading among primary dealers in Government securities.
There are six other brokerage firms in that market, all of which execute trades the old-fashioned way, with people talking to one another over telephone lines.


Hertz Fees Are Barred By Council
The New York City Council asserted last night that car-rental companies may not discriminate against residents based on where they live in the city.
After a three-hour debate, the Council barred the Hertz Corporation from imposing surcharges on car renters who live in areas that have high rates of accidents and suits against Hertz by people who are injured.


Asaf Messerer, Russian Teacher, Choreographer and Dancer, 88
Asaf Messerer, a Russian teacher, ballet master and dancer, died on Saturday at his home in Moscow.
He was 88 years old.
He had been ill for several weeks with bronchitis, said a friend, Robert Weiss.


In Stunning Upset, Miami Sends the Panthers Packing
The one reliable shred of logic to this wacky Big East season -- that Miami's frustrating initiation would end with only one league victory -- was thrown into the trash can tonight.
In the biggest victory of Miami's new basketball era, the Hurricanes beat Pittsburgh, 83-71, at Madison Square Garden.
As the Hurricanes stepped toward a quarterfinal game against Georgetown tonight, they even managed to create a happy reason for a taunting foul.


For Children
New York Botanical Garden  Southern Boulevard and 200th Street Bedford Park the Bronx (212) 220-8777 Recommended for all ages
An excursion to the tropics under the Crystal Palace-like dome of the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory can mean lessons in the virtues of birds of paradise as well as recognizing a jack-in-the-pulpit when you see one.
In this dewy hothouse, children can soak up the balmy rain forest (though touching the plants is not allowed), a metaphysical jump from the real thing below the Equator.
They can look a banana tree, with real bananas growing on it, square in the eye; see an epiphyte (a plant that grows on trees) in situ; admire the aggressiveness of Spanish moss as it quietly clambers its way to the top; sniff for a cacao tree, and pay respect to all the ferns, plants that once hobnobbed with the mighty T. rex.


McCaffrey Gets Official From Burnett
SCRAMBLING to recover from the loss of its flagship account, McCaffrey &amp; McCall Advertising will complete an overhaul of top management by importing to New York a president and chief operating officer from Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago.
Effective on April 1, Dan Reid, who has worked at Burnett all but three of his 24 years in advertising, will join McCaffrey, a midsize shop with a reputation for elegantly understated work for clients like Tiffany and the Arts and Entertainment cable network.
His arrival follows the bitterly disappointing blow suffered last month, when Mercedes-Benz of North America announced it would shift its account, with an estimated $90 million to $100 million in billings, to Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown Draws Some Blue-Collar Support and a Campus Crowd
Edmund G. Brown Jr., the former Governor of California whose insurgent campaign has been reeling around the nation in search of supporters, appeared to have found some fertile ground in this state among union members and college students, particularly in economically distressed cities like this one.
Mr.
Brown picked up endorsements today from Arthur B. Blackwell 2d, chairman of the Wayne County Commission, and from two of 15 other commission members.


Caucasus War: Any Role for Moscow?
With the release overnight of 10 officers of the former Soviet army, held hostage for four days by Armenian irregulars in an effort to obtain arms, the immediate risk that the army would be drawn more deeply into the territorial war between Armenia and Azerbaijan diminished today.
But as the Russian Vice President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, called for the withdrawal of regular troops from the region, the fighting between Armenians and Azerbaijanis continued, with reports of rocket and artillery attacks today on Agdam, an Azerbaijani town near the border of the disputed mountainous enclave called Nagorno-Karabakh.


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 591 money market mutual funds increased by $4.92 billion, to $504.09 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 215 institutional funds increased by $5.97 billion, to $174.67 billion.
The assets of the 285 general-purpose funds were down by $270.1 million, to $180.30 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $786.8 million, to $149.12 billion, the institute said.


Flower Show Time! Can Spring Be Far Behind?
Two men hauled a 14-foot, 250-pound dracaena into the 12-foot elevator, using a little geometry to take advantage of the diagonal, and headed up to the exhibition hall on Pier 92 at the Hudson River.
The Colonial Dames were pondering the placement of 8,500 pink, orange and yellow tulips, hyacinths and muscari in the Dutch garden of a Van Cortlandt house made of plastic fieldstone.
"We may not use them all," said Adele Mitchell, who designed the display.


Carrington Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Golden Knight Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


N.H.L. Labor Talks Move North
A small group of National Hockey League executives will meet with representatives of the N.H.L.
Players Association today in Toronto to resume negotiations toward a new collective-bargaining agreement.
The announcement of what are billed as informal talks was made in Chicago last night after an emergency meeting of the league's Board of Governors.


Old Dominion Freight Line reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Equipment &amp; Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Frenchtex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


National Security Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Said to Suspect Israelis Gave China American Arms
The Bush Administration is concerned that Israel may have shared American-made Patriot missile technology with China, in violation of United States-Israeli agreements banning diversion of such technology to a third country, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials said the White House ordered an investigation into the matter several days ago after President Bush was informed of an American intelligence report indicating that the transfer might have occurred.


The Hood as Moral Avenger; Is the Gravano Testimony as Truthful as It Is Compelling?
Salvatore Gravano began his testimony yesterday, his 47th birthday, in the same way he has since he first took the stand: he turned his expressionless face to the 16 jurors and offered a polite nod.
Despite his courtesy, the jurors may find it impossible to like a man who has admitted 19 murders.
But they may also find it hard not to believe him.
In eight days on the stand, Mr.
Gravano has been a canny, if somewhat elusive, witness in the murder-racketeering trial of his former boss, John Gotti, reputed to be the head of the Gambino crime family.
Prosecutors clearly seem pleased with Mr.
Gravano, a mob underboss turned Government witness, as defense lawyers ended their cross-examination yesterday without any clear blow to Mr.
Gravano's credibility or his basically consistent stories.


METRO DIGEST
THE TRANSPORTATION CHALLENGE
The $1.46 billion highway and mass transit rebuilding program announced in New Jersey last week is part of a regional attack on congestion and delays, which officials believe are undermining the economic future of the metropolitan area.
The theme of this effort is that the region's network of roads, railroads, bridges and tunnels is essentially complete.
Now the challenge for planners is to build more efficiency into this vast transportation system.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE DEATH OF AN EDITOR
In his years as editor of El Diario, Manuel de Dios Unanue had become the subject of a kind of running joke among his colleagues about the many threats he had received from anti-Castro Cuban groups, drug dealers and others he had angered.
Mr. de Dios was on the front page again yesterday -- in a bold red headline that said "Sangre de Periodista," "A Journalist's Blood." His slaying Wednesday night followed the lethal pattern that Colombian cocaine traffickers have repeatedly used to silence critics in South America, the New York City police and Latin American journalists said.
A1 and B2. 'A GOOD, LOYAL SOLDIER'
Salvatore Gravano insisted under cross-examination yesterday that he had been "a good, loyal soldier" for John Gotti and followed orders when it came to killing people.
In eight days on the stand, Mr.
Gravano has been a canny, if somewhat elusive, witness for the prosecution in the racketeering case against Mr.
Gotti.
B3.
THE VERDICT ON DIVORCE COURT
Describing horror stories that make Arnie Becker, the sleazy divorce lawyer on television's "L.A. Law," look like a nice guy, the city's Department of Consumer Affairs found the state's divorce system guilty of being "an expensive and costly failure." B3.
COUNCIL MOVES AGAINST HERTZ
Asserting that businesses cannot discriminate against New York City residents based on where they live, the City Council has barred Hertz from imposing surcharges on car renters who live in areas that have a high rate of accidents.
B3.
The fledgling law firm at the center of the Irish parade dispute. B2.
OTB chief defends her agency. B3. REGION
THE LATEST PLAN ON SCHOOL AID
New Jersey Assembly Republicans unveiled another in a bewildering series of school-aid revisions, this one cutting $127 million from the figures proposed by the Florio administration in January.
Such urban districts as Camden, Trenton and Atlantic City would be hardest hit by the changes, although Newark would not be hurt and 192 small suburban districts would benefit.
B4.
ADULT TRIAL SOUGHT IN CLIFTON CASE
Prosecutors in Clifton, N.J., say they plan to seek an adult criminal trial against a 17-year-old youth accused of strangling his close friend, Robert A. Solimine, last month as they recited the Hail Mary in the victim's car.
B4.
SHARING THE COST OF TOXIC WASTE
A Federal appeals court ruled that 20 Connecticut cities and towns are not automatically exempt from sharing in the $48 million cost of removing toxic waste from two huge landfills, in Beacon Falls and Naugatuck.
B4.
Our Towns B4


OTB Officials Take On Critics At a Hearing
The top executives of New York City's legal off-track gambling parlors clashed with state and city officials yesterday over whether the system was on the verge of losing money and should be sold to a private company.
A City Council committee asserted in a report that while profits declined in the last two years executives of the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation authorized $267,000 for travel, meal and lodging; $40,000 for dining out and entertaining legislators; $428,000 to maintain a fleet of cars; $20,000 for an executive bathroom; $8,000 for employees to take a course in women's studies at Cornell University and $1,050 in political contributions.


Gensia reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.75
5.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.01
3.99
5.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.14
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.19
7.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.03
7.95
8.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.99
8.95
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.76
7.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American Educational Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Spoken Word
ARTIST'S TALK, Whitney Museum of American Art, Madison Avenue at 75th Street.
The abstract artist Terry Winters discusses the paintings and drawings in the exhibition of his work at the museum, with the show's curator, Lisa Phillips.
Sunday at noon.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
"WHY ALTRUISM?," the Princeton Club, 15 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Stephen Hicks, a philosophy instructor at Trenton State College, lectures on altruism in society.
Sponsored by the Institute for Objectivist Studies.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Information: (914) 471-6100.


Lands' End reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


FOLEY, IN DEFEAT, AGREES TO NAMING OF CHECK ABUSERS
Facing a rebellion within his own party, Speaker Thomas S. Foley Thursday abandoned his efforts to limit the disclosure of members who abused their House Bank checking accounts.
He yielded to Republican pressure to release the names of all members who overdrew their accounts and the number of bad checks they wrote.
After a day of wrenching debate, in which representatives mixed their words with sentiments of saddness and resentment, the House voted in the wee hours today 426 to 0 for a disclosure that is likely to destroy several political careers.


Hillsborough Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
BUNRAKU, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
National Puppet Theater of Japan.
Final performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; For New Ideas, It's a Week That Isn't
As sanctimonious as ever, the Democratic Presidential candidates are all on television here, attacking traditional politicians and promising radical reforms.
But viewers may be wondering what exactly makes these enlightened rebels so different.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who likes to calls himself an "agent of change" against the "brain-dead politics" of the past, arrived here to pose for the cameras and effusively praise Chicago's Mayor, Richard M. Daley, the heir and namesake of America's most famous machine politician.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Clinton's television advertising is lambasting one of his opponents in next Tuesday's primaries in Illinois and Michigan, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, for daring to even mention some new ideas.


A Sad Farewell, to Jobs and to a Friend Who Died; Nassau County Social Service Workers Find They Need the Safety Net Themselves
As morning yawned into afternoon for the poor waiting to see caseworkers at the county Department of Social Services, some 215 workers cleaned out their desks, their departure likely to increase an already burdensome backlog.
For the workers, about one fifth of the total, many of them veteran employees, the goodbyes were doubly bleak: the night before, a co-worker in the Child Support Unit, who was to be laid off today, was found dead at her home in Freeport, in what the police described as a suicide.


Ultimate Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Gravano Insists He Was Loyal Soldier
Salvatore Gravano insisted under cross-examination yesterday that he had been "a good, loyal soldier" for John Gotti and followed orders when it came to killing people.
"John barked and I bit," Mr.
Gravano said, testifying about his role in carrying out the murder of an associate in the Gambino crime family.


At the Bar; What Price Ethics? $41 Million Settlement Has Lawyers Asking a Lot More Questions.
Most weeks, Jonathan Lerner fields 15 or 20 ethics inquiries from his colleagues at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the nation's third largest law firm, on a number of nettlesome issues.
Would accepting some new business raise questions of a conflict of interest for the firm, which has a thousand lawyers in 15 cities around the world?
What should lawyers do when they think a witness is lying?
When should the firm move to have opposing counsel disqualified?
How can Skadden, Arps tout itself in its promotional literature?


Baker (J.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Goldfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; Weak Economy Pins Bush Down
PRESIDENT BUSH is struggling to get out of a crossfire coming, on one side, from former President Richard M. Nixon, who has criticized Mr.
Bush for not doing enough to sustain democratic reforms in the former Soviet Union, and, on the other side, from his Republican challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan, for not putting America's interests first.
Mr.
Bush is pinned down in his efforts to move by the nation's weak economy and the huge budget deficit, which this year will exceed $400 billion.
Mr.
Nixon warned Mr.
Bush that if he does not act more boldly to keep economic and political freedom alive in the former Soviet Union, he will face the accusation, "Who lost Russia?" Mr.
Bush said he would like to do more but he just doesn't have the resources.
"There isn't a lot of money around," he said.
"We are spending too much as it already is. So to do the things I would really like to do, I don't have a blank check for all that."


Lehman Fills Position In Private Client Group
Lehman Brothers, a division of Shearson Lehman Inc., announced yesterday that it had hired S. Alexander Haverstick 2d from Prudential Securities to be director of private client group marketing in the firm's worldwide equities division.
Mr.
Haverstick replaced Mitchell Meisler, a 10-year veteran of Lehman and one of two executive vice presidents who were effectively, but not formally, suspended two months ago because of what the firm called poor work performance.


Evelyn Smithson, 68, Archeologist of Athens
Evelyn Lord Smithson, a professor of classics and a noted archeologist who studied Greece in the Homeric age, died on Monday at her home in Amherst, N.Y.
She was 68 years old.
She died of cancer, according to the State University of New York at Buffalo, where she was on the faculty.


Doskocil Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Devjo Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Anti-Pornography Prosecutor Is Charged With Sex Offense
The chief state prosecutor for the city of St.
Louis, who has spent most of his 15 years in office crusading against obscenity, pornography and prostitution, was charged today with a misdemeanor offense of patronizing a prostitute.
After initially denying a report on the matter in today's St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, the prosecutor, George Peach, acknowledged today that he tried to solicit sex from an undercover police officer Tuesday night at a motel.


Review/Recital; Young Russian's Debut Shows Wide Contrasts
The New York debut of Aleksandr Shtarkman at the 92d Street Y on Wednesday night was one of the most puzzling concerts I have heard in some time.
Here was a pianist who played with almost no sense of long-range structure and gave a reading of a Schubert piano sonata with nary a sign of nuance or texture.
Yet the very same pianist proved to be a full-scale virtuoso with a liquid use of rubato, enviable athletic equipment and control and an intriguing unpredictability.
It sometimes felt as if switches were being turned on and off onstage.
I squirmed during the unfinished Schubert Sonata in C (D. 840) but wondered at the often demonic sweep of some of Brahms's Variations on a Theme of Paganini (Op. 35).
Mr.
Shtarkman, who was born in Moscow in 1967 and studied with Sergei Dorensky at the Moscow Conservatory, often became so focused on particular phrases that it hardly mattered what preceded or followed them.
The Schubert was preciously wan, an already fragmented composition played as if each phrase were a grain of sand that had to be studiously contemplated.
There was no body to the sound or direction to the phrases.
Mr.
Shtarkman seemed absorbed in private matters that had little to do with music or with pianism.


Art in Review
Robert Moskowitz  Blum Hellman Gallery 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through March 21
The paintings in this show are characteristic of much of the work Robert Moskowitz has produced in recent years.
He continues to give familiar subjects, often taken from pop culture, an iconic presence by cropping and magnifying them against monochromatic grounds.
His technique is closely worked, with an admirable grasp of the material properties of both oil and pastel.
The way the artist applies, scrapes away and reapplies pigment becomes an integral part of the physical and expressive weight of the images themselves.
These images work best, however, when they are left ambiguous.


Effort to Gut Tax Bill Fails In the Senate
The Senate struggled tonight to clear obstacles to passing its election-year tax bill after confronting unexpected difficulty in killing a bipartisan attempt to strip the heart of the measure, a $300 tax credit for children.
Senators agreed to try to complete action on the bill on Friday.
Two Democrats, Carl M. Levin of Michigan and Bob Graham of Florida, proposed eliminating the tax credits and spending the $28 billion designated for the credits on deficit reduction and public works instead.


Corrections
A headline in some copies yesterday about a report on a shortfall in advertising and circulation revenues at The Daily News misstated the month affected.
It was February.


Review/Film; A World Of Clowns And Alcohol
As Shakes the Clown, Bobcat Goldthwait is first seen being urinated on by a small boy, after which Shakes vomits, belches, moans about his terrible hangover and prepares to face yet another day.
It is difficult to imagine how the rest of Shakes's exploits could be of interest to anyone other than Mr.
Goldthwait's close friends and relatives.
Even they may wind up realizing that 83 minutes can be a very long time.
The best to be said about "Shakes the Clown" is that it must have sounded better on paper.
As written by Mr.
Goldthwait (who also directed), it takes place in an all-clown universe where the local bar is called the Twisted Balloon and where one denizen complains that another "can't even throw a pie straight." The film's nonscatological humor pretty much begins and ends with that line.


Review/Film; Four Friends With Anxiety in Common
A flaw at the heart of many rites-of-passage movies about groups of friends is the improbability of such cross sections of humanity ever cohering in real life.
What social or psychological glue, for instance, could have united Barry (Arye Gross), Sully (Gale Hansen), Michael (Doug Savant) and Duke (Steven Wilde), the four friends in Duane Clark's earnest little film, "Shaking the Tree"?
All they have in common are age (late 20's), location (Chicago) and anxiety about the future.


77 Years of Going Fishing and Lying
THE blooming of the snowbells right around now is the signal.
As soon as Ed Zern sees those dainty white flowers in his front yard over on Walworth Avenue, he heads upstairs to the den.
He begins passionately cleaning and oiling an immense array of reels and checking two dozen-odd poles in their metal tubes, as if that had something to do with catching fish.
He envisions the perfect cast, alone in that burbling stream somewhere, and actually seeing that beautiful rainbow surge up from the watery darkness to seize a fly Ed tied himself.
Then comes the dramatic struggle, the reeling, the capture of the fish, the official photograph, followed by the slippery creature's release to swim some more, perhaps wiser.


Lindros on Vacation
ERIC LINDROS is putting his hockey future on hold after a 60-minute finale in the Ontario Hockey League.
Lindros and the Oshawa Generals held a joint news conference yesterday, announcing that the 19-year-old player would play one more game for his junior club before calling it quits for the remainder of the season.


An Ideological Flap Ruffles a Court's Two Wings
For those who think life on a high-level Federal appeals court involves collegial and rarefied discussions about nuances of law, the recent activity at the District of Columbia Circuit court might provide a different picture.
The demeanor of the court, regarded by many lawyers as second in importance only to the Supreme Court, has reverted to something approaching a state of nature.
Some of the judges are feuding openly -- even having news releases handed out to reporters in the halls -- and publicly questioning each other's integrity.


Review/Film: Howards End; A Drawing-Room War With Edwardian Grace
IT'S time for legislation decreeing that no one be allowed to make a screen adaptation of a novel of any quality whatsoever if Ismail Merchant, James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala are available, and if they elect to do the job.
Trespassers should be prosecuted, possibly condemned, sentenced to watch "Adam Bede" on "Masterpiece Theater" for five to seven years.
In case you've been living inside a pinball machine for the last several decades, Mr.
Merchant, the producer; Mr.
Ivory, the director, and Mrs.
Jhabvala, the writer, are the team responsible for, among other films, the screen adaptations of Henry James's "Bostonians," E. M. Forster's "Room With a View" and Evan S. Connell's "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge."


Latest Plan to Cure Welfare Troubles Borrows W.P.A. Blueprints of 1930's
In this season of welfare discontent, one of the oldest ideas in social policy is getting talked up as the newest solution: the Works Progress Administration, Franklin D. Roosevelt's sweeping public jobs program.
The creation of a new W.P.A. has long been a favorite idea of few policy hounds and unsuccessful candidates.
But today it reached a kind of political maturation when a group of Congressional Democrats announced a legislative plan to make it a reality.


Sun Link Is Sought By I.B.M.
I.B.M. has quietly invited the world's leading maker of computer work stations, Sun Microsystems Inc., to join an alliance that aims to set the course of the desktop computer industry.
The International Business Machines Corporation, the world's largest computer maker, asked Sun in February to join Taligent, the joint venture it formed last year with Apple Computer Inc., the second-largest maker of personal computers.


Art in Review
Ellsworth Kelly 'At Right Angles, 1964-1966'  Paula Cooper Gallery 155 Wooster Street Manhattan Through March 28
From 1964 to 1966, Ellsworth Kelly created four L-shaped works that straddle the line between painting and sculpture.
They are being exhibited together for the first time in this show.
Each has two perpendicular panels, one of which sits on the floor.
In the two early examples the panels are oil-on-canvas paintings; in the later two, they are painted aluminum.


Syms Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Review/Art; With Faith in Technology and Nature
In the 1930's Theodore Roszak produced a remarkable group of works, including paintings, sculpture, photograms and drawings, which exuberantly express the period's faith in abstraction and technology.
As "Theodore Roszak: Constructivist Works, 1931-1947," at Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries, demonstrates, the artist practiced a sort of home-grown Constructivism, the product of a critical yearlong tour of Europe in 1930.
During his trip he came in contact with the latest trends in European modernism, encompassing Cubism, Surrealism, Constructivism and the Bauhaus's emphasis on the connection between art and industrial design.
On his return to the United States, he settled into a studio on Staten Island and began to produce works in which elements taken from those sources were blended in varying proportions.


Maryland Holds Off Clemson To Advance
Artistry took a back seat to survival in the opening round of the 39th annual Atlantic Coast Conference tournament, as No. 8-seeded Maryland outlasted No. 9 Clemson, 81-75.
The Terrapins advanced to play No. 1-seeded Duke at 2 P.M.
Friday.
Led by 38 points from Walt Williams, a senior, Maryland evened its record at 14-14.
The Terrapins won despite shooting 29.6 percent for the game, fecklessness offset by Clemson's 24 turnovers and 50 percent accuracy on 32 free throws.
The Tigers fell to 14-14.


Albany Plan Would Ease Prisoner Rise
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached a tentative agreement today on budget cuts and prison-sentencing changes that would resolve the financial trouble in the state's criminal-justice system, but leave its prisons crowded beyond capacity.
The prison system is currently at 118 percent of its designed capacity, and corrections officials predicted in January that there would be 6,000 more prisoners than beds by the spring of 1993.
That left negotiators with two options: build more 750-inmate prisons at about $65 million apiece, or agree to major changes in the state's mandatory sentencing laws that would send thousands fewer people into the state prison system.


Villa Victoria Journal; In the Drug War, U.S. Sows Dollars, Reaps Hate
The woman, who would identify herself only as Gabriela, sat sullenly in the loft of a rickety hut with her tiny children.
She had become the latest target in Bolivia's halting war on cocaine.
An hour earlier, an elite Bolivian anti-narcotics squad had barreled down a dirt road in a pickup truck and stopped at her house.
A quick search behind the house revealed a path that led across streams and through swamps to a crude jungle laboratory for making cocaine base.


Adult Criminal Trial Sought For Young Murder Suspect
Prosecutors here say they plan to seek an adult criminal trial against a 17-year-old youth accused of strangling his close friend, Robert A. Solimine, last month as they recited the Hail Mary in the victim's car.
The youth is a varsity football player, a catechism teacher at his parish here, a cadet in a Navy youth corps and, according to statements detectives took from three friends also charged in the strangling, a murderous schemer eager to kill Mr.
Solimine because the 18-year-old ringleader of their group considered him a snitch and a pest.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Hurt and Angry Car Workers Say Brown Speaks for Them
Day by day, week by week, the turn of events eats away at the working men and women of this blue-collar city.
They're losing their livelihood, the giant General Motors plant here.
They've already lost half their jobs at the two neighboring Ford plants.
Now they've even lost their Presidential candidate, with the withdrawal this week of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa.


Beezer Speaks Mind And Minds His Net
The old Ranger goalie is more confrontational than the young Ranger goalie, less tractable.
He speaks his mind and his starchy pride has been interpreted as arrogance.
He is also not as quick on the ice as the young goalie, whose game is a science of precise body angles at which to meet the puck.
The old goalie plays a bold, risky game that is easier to criticize.
"I've learned from his technique," said the old goalie of the young goalie, his voice typically intense, thoughtful, edgy.
"He's the best in the league at that robotic style."
The conversation had begun after practice on Tuesday.
The old goalie, John Vanbiesbrouck, was among the last to leave.
He had been icing the sore back that had benched him for five games.
And he was waiting to ask the coach whether he or the young goalie would start the next game.
It would be a symbolic choice: The Rangers had lost three in a row and the blue-line Cassandras were predicting the team's traditional collapse.


A Diversity of Events About Women, for All
March is Women's History Month. Here are some events by and about
women, this weekend and throughout the month.
For other events, the Women's History Month Calendar is available free from the New York City Commission on the Status of Women, 52 Chambers Street,
Suite 207, New York, N.Y. 10007. Information: (212) 788-2738. Today
"CHAIN" and "LATE BUS TO MECCA." Two plays by Pearl Cleage.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.; next Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.
At the Judith Anderson Theater, 422 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Through March 22.
Tickets: $25 ($15 for students and the elderly. Information: (212) 873-3040.


Athey Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paramount Wants to Buy, and Yankees Listen
Paramount Communications executives have held discussions with George Steinbrenner about buying the Yankees outright, after having initially pursued the acquisition of all the minority shares in the team.
While there has apparently been no price established for the purchase of baseball's richest team, talks are serious to the point that Stanley Jaffe, the president and chief operating officer of Paramount, informed Commissioner Fay Vincent of Paramount's interest during a visit to the commissioner's office.


An Evening Prayer as Muslims Celebrate Ramadan


Restaurants
If there were a gastronomic logo for the early 90's, it might be a wood-fired pizza against a background of radicchio.
The trattoria boom surges unchecked, fueled by moderate prices, casual settings and colorful, salubrious fare.
All of which makes the enduring success of Primavera, a traditional (and expensive) Upper East Side restaurant, all the more impressive.
Primavera has the soft upholstered trappings of a private club, which suits the patrician crowd here well.
It is a carpeted, wood-lined chamber with marbled columns, tulip sconces, unobtrusive oil paintings and a coffered ceiling.
Tables may be considered too close for some.
On one visit, we were not told whether we were in the smoking or nonsmoking section.
Ten minutes later an asthmatic friend left no doubt about our placement.


MEI Diversified reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Dollar General reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haas Family Donation
The Haas family of San Francisco, which controls Levi Strauss &amp; Company, has donated an additional $8.75 million to the business school at the University of California at Berkeley.
The new donation, which the university is scheduled to announce Friday, brings the family's total gift to the business school to $23.75 million, the largest donation in Berkeley's history.
The money will be used to construct a new building to house what is now called the Haas School of Business.
The school is named after Walter A. Haas Sr., president of Levi Strauss from 1928 to 1955.


If Eye Contact's Overrated, We'd Have Testimony by Telephone; Justice Is Blind
To the Editor:
By way of postscript to "A Blind Justice Serves Even Now in New York" (letter, March 1) by Allen M. Fischer: As the blind Justice of the New York State Supreme Court Mr.
Fischer mentions in his reply to "A Blind Judge?" (editorial, Feb. 6), may I refer you to your own Nov. 4, 1989, endorsement of my candidacy for a new 14-year term?
There are those who will not see that which they are not prepared to believe.
GILBERT RAMIREZ Brooklyn, March 3, 1992


Greyhound Seeks To Revise Offering
Greyhound Lines Inc. filed an amended registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday for a proposed issue of $90 million of convertible subordinated debentures due on March 31, 2007.
The securities will be offered through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The filing replaces one on Jan. 22, 1992, that proposed an issue of $60 million of convertible exchangeable preferred stock.


Maximum Health Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fresh Air for the Space Agency
The Bush Administration has chosen a little-known aerospace executive to head the National Aeronautics and Space Administration -- to the surprise and alarm of old space hands and many Congressmen.
But from the evidence at hand, Daniel Goldin, general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group, appears a reasonable choice to lead the beleaguered space agency at this critical juncture.
Mr.
Goldin, who must be confirmed by the Senate, would succeed Adm.
Richard Truly, who was forced to retire because of friction between the agency and the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle.


No Progress in N.H.L. Talks
Talks between National Hockey League owners and the Players Association resumed in Toronto yesterday, then adjourned for the weekend about four hours later after a presentation of economic projections by the players and a discussion of finances by both sides.
Bob Goodenow, executive director of the Players Association, said that no positions had changed.
No new date for discussions was scheduled as both groups try to avoid a strike and agree on a collective bargaining agreement to replace the one that expired on Sept. 15.
The union, which has strike authorization from the membership, has not set a walkout date.
But the playoffs are scheduled to begin on April 8, and it is generally agreed that it could be the point of a showdown.


Tentative Accord Reached With Nassau County Union
After months of budgetary wrangling that brought the layoffs of 2,500 civil service employees and threats of joblessness to thousands more, Nassau County officials and the union representing public employees reached an agreement today that would avert further layoffs through 1995.
Under the accord, the Civil Service Employees Association agreed to defer any claims for overtime pay until 1995, and the county pledged no further cuts among its 10,500 employees for the next three years.


U.S. Premiere of Opera
The Mannes Opera Ensemble is to present the American premiere of Donizetti's one-act opera "The Methods of Madness" ("I Pazzi per Progetto"), today and Monday at 8 P.M. at the Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street, Manhattan.
Amy Kaiser, who conducted the first modern revival of the work in Italy in 1977, is the music director.
The stage director is Philip Burton.
Admission is free by advance reservation.
Information: (212) 496-8524.


Police Identify House in Rape Investigation
The Port St.
Lucie Police Department has identified the house where a woman says she was raped by three members of the Mets last March, and it is a house the owner says she rented to pitcher Dwight Gooden last spring.
Police officers, who neither confirmed nor denied that the house was rented by Gooden last March, said today that they were "obligated" to make public the address to comply with Florida's statutory regulations concerning news-media access to information involved in a criminal complaint.
The police department announced Thursday that it was investigating a rape complaint filed March 3 by a woman in her late 20's who is a New York State resident.


Forte Gets Probation
CHET FORTE, the Emmy-winning television sports director whose compulsive gambling led to his conviction for fraud and tax evasion, was given the judicial benefit of the doubt yesterday.
He was sentenced to five years of probation and 400 hours of community service and ordered to pay back the $850,000 he stole from a savings and loan company and a former neighbor.


H. Ledig-Rowohlt, 83, Publisher With Storybook History, Is Dead
Heinrich Maria Ledig-Rowohlt, an illegitimate child who grew up to learn that his father was a prominent German publisher and who eventually took over the company, died on Feb. 27 at the East-West Clinic in New Delhi.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Ledwig-Rowohlt died of pneumonia, a family spokeswoman said.
He lived in Reinbek-bei-Hamburg, Germany, and Lavigny, Switzerland, and was in India for the International Publishers Association Congress.


Review/Cabaret; A Dark Side Of Conflict In Songs Of Arlen
Helen Schneider has made her reputation as a cabaret singer by interpreting the songs of Kurt Weill and Stephen Sondheim in ways that bring out their darker psychological tensions.
And in her debut engagement at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), which extends through March 28, the singer takes a similar approach to the songs of Harold Arlen.
Since many of Arlen's best-known standards are open-hearted bluesy laments, her way of treating songs as internal monologues fraught with conflict proved downright iconoclastic at her opening-night performance on March 3.
Interpretation for Ms.
Schneider doesn't mean simply following through on a single stylistic or dramatic approach.
Each song is treated as an acting exercise in which conflicting emotions are illustrated through carefully stylized body language and shifts in musical dynamics.


Classical Music in Review
'Golem' La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street Manhattan Through March 22


Modest Inflation Report No Help for Bonds
A report that showed only a small increase in inflation was ultimately ignored by credit market participants yesterday, as traders sold Treasury securities and interest rates moved higher.
Prices of notes and bonds rose sharply immediately after the Government announced that its Producer Price Index rose by a modest two-tenths of a percent last month, and only one-tenth of a percent when volatile energy and food prices were excluded.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the revival of 30-day advance-purchase airline fares referred incorrectly to Trans World Airlines routes purchased by American Airlines.
American bought some of T.W.A.'s routes between the United States and London; it did not purchase all of T.W.A.'s European routes.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about bridal magazines misidentified the issue of Bride's and Your New Home that had more pages than any other magazine ever published.
It was the February-March issue this year, with 1,046 pages.


Chairman of Opel Unit Is Promoted by G.M.
The General Motors Corporation announced yesterday that Louis R. Hughes, chairman and managing director of its Adam Opel A.G. subsidiary in Europe, had been named one of 35 corporate vice presidents.
G.M. said in a statement that the auto maker was rewarding Mr.
Hughes, 43 years old, for the success of the Opel organization.
Opel's sales in Europe rose 26 percent in 1991 from 1990, to 719,000 vehicles, a gain attributed in part to the unification of East and West Germany.
Strong sales in Europe helped the car company offset record losses in the United States last year.


News Summary
International 2-5 U.N. SEEKS CAUCASUS PEACE
The United Nations asked Cyrus Vance, who brokered a truce in Yugoslavia, to undertake a new peace mission in the Caucasus region of the former Soviet Union.
A dispute over an enclave in the mountainous region has pushed Armenia and Azerbaijan to the brink of war.  1


INSIDE
Senate Proposal on Israel Aid
A Senate compromise would give Israel $1 billion in loan guarantees and leave $9 billion subject to restrictions on settlement-building.
Page 3.
Shooting Stirs Chicago Race
The race between Representative Gus Savage and Melvin J. Reynolds took an odd turn when Mr.
Reynolds was hurt in a shooting.
Page 6.


Not the Kind of Bank Most People Go To
In the long and celebrated history of Congress, no tradition is more firmly established than scandal at the House Bank.
In 1889, a cashier at the bank absconded to Canada with his mistress and a suitcase containing the House payroll, never to be heard from again.
In 1947, the sergeant-at-arms was imprisoned after trying to cover up a series of embezzlements from members' accounts going back 20 years.
Some of the proceeds had been used by a Florida Congressman to finance his campaigns and speculate in losing real estate ventures.


If Yank Shares Are Sold, Partners Get First Crack
A partnership agreement among owners of the Yankees could pose an insurmountable roadblock for Paramount Communications in its attempt to buy any or all of the team.
The agreement has a provision giving the partners first crack at the shares any of the partners might want to sell.


Observer; Usuality as Usual
What was interesting about Tsongas was how uninteresting he was.
This raised a happy possibility.
For years Presidential politics had been a closed science, which is to say, everything that could be learned about it had been learned long, long ago.
It was a finished system whose mechanics were so thoroughly understood that it was left basically in the hands of engineers.
The engineers, usually professionals without political philosophy, created and operated the painted talking dummies which, as had been scientifically demonstrated, made the only plausible or, to use the professional jargon, "electable" candidates.


2 S.&amp;. L.'s and a Bank Are Closed
Two savings institutions and one bank in the New York area were closed yesterday, and their depositors face losses if their account balances surpass the $100,000 insurance limit set by the Federal Government.
All three institutions -- Central Federal Savings Bank of Mineola, L.I.; the Broadway Bank and Trust Company of Paterson, N.J., and the Danbury Federal Savings and Loan Association in Connecticut -- were victims of the sharp decline in real estate prices, which led to defaults on loans by developers and other customers.


Review/Rock; Soothing The Young And Sad
The James band knows who its constituents are: "Those who feel the breath of sadness," "those who find they're touched by madness" and "those who find themselves ridiculous." Those are some of the categories itemized in "Sit Down," which became a major hit in England in 1991 and had fans singing along, "Sit down next to me," on Tuesday night at the Ritz. (In decorous England, fans sit down; at the Ritz, people stayed on their feet.)
Heartfelt, straightforward and more than a little plaintive, James speaks to sensitive teen-agers (and post-teen-agers) who'll admit -- alone with an album or at a concert with like-minded people -- that they're not as cheerful and confident as others seem to be.


Quotation of the Day
"If those people in congress can't manage their own personal money, how are they supposed to manage ours?" JoANNE SQUIBB of Seattle  [ 8:1 ]


EXECUTIVES
*
American Express Integrated Payment Systems Inc., Englewood, Colo., a unit of First Data Corp., named Charles Brooks president. *
Etienne Aigner, New York, a unit of the Hartstone Group, an international apparel accessories company, named Michael P. Cangemi senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Patents; Ultrasound To Pinpoint Muscle Pain
John D. Reid, a chiropractor in Hayfield, Minn., has invented a system that uses ultrasound technology to pinpoint the elusive muscle injuries behind "whiplash," tennis elbow and persistent back pain.
Although muscle pain is often acute, its true origins are notoriously hard to verify because there is often no external evidence of the injury and the actual injury may not be where the patient feels the pain.


Action Seen On Chrysler's Succession
Amid speculation that the Chrysler Corporation board is about to hire Robert J. Eaton, who would be groomed as a successor to Lee A. Iacocca, directors are scheduled to meet Saturday in New York in an unusual special session.
Mr.
Eaton, who is 52 years old, is president of the General Motors Corporation's European operations.
Mr.
Eaton was expected to fly to New York from Hungary, where he presided today over the production of G.M.'s first Opel car in Eastern Europe.


The College Died, but the Students Really Lived
The painter Josef Albers taught color by spreading scraps of contrasting paper across his classroom floor.
Charles Olson discussed poetry with his students into the early morning hours.
And in the college dining hall, the composer John Cage staged the first "happening," serving his audience coffee in the cups they'd used as ashtrays.
Images like these testify to the history and lore of Black Mountain College, an experimental school in North Carolina whose faculty and student roster reads like a catalogue of the avant-garde in 20th-century America: Robert Rauschenberg, Jacob Lawrence, Kenneth Noland, Cage, Olson, Buckminster Fuller, Robert Creeley, Merce Cunningham.


Dinkins to Leave Hospital Today
Mayor David N. Dinkins, looking wan and slightly the worse for his bout with a bacterial infection, said yesterday that he would be able to leave the hospital this morning, and expected to be back at City Hall for at least some part of the workday by early next week.


Your Money; Some Tax Twists On Mutual Funds
Mutual fund switchboards tend to light up at this time of year, as customers call with questions about the annual tax documents that the funds are required to send to investors and the Internal Revenue Service.
Several tax breaks and liabilities either elude or surprise many people who invest in funds.
Those aware of them can save money and possibly problems with the I.R.S.


'Rienzi' at Carnegie Hall
The Opera Orchestra of New York is to present a concert version of Wagner's "Rienzi" at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall.
Eve Queler is to conduct the performance, which features Reiner Goldberg in the title role, Richard Johnson as Paolo Orsini, Monica Pick-Hieronomi as Irene and Sharon Graham as Adriano.
Joining the Opera Orchestra will be the Princeton Pro Musica and the 50-voice chorus from the Valley Forge Military Academy.
Tickets are $18 to $78.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Burmese Seek Refuge from Their Military Government


Senate Approves Tax Plan
In an unexpectedly close vote, the Senate passed election-year tax legislation this evening that President Bush is sure to veto.
The vote was 50 to 47, with four Democrats crossing party lines and three Democrats not voting.
All 43 Republicans opposed the measure.


Victory for Hoyas, Sadness for Thompson
On a day that offered him a mixture of triumph and sadness, John Thompson watched his Georgetown Hoyas earn a fourth consecutive berth in the Big East tournament semifinals with a 77-64 victory over Miami at Madison Square Garden last night.
Alonzo Mourning scored 28 points and blocked 2 shots and Joey Brown added 14 points and grabbed a game-high 7 rebounds for Georgetown, which will play St.
John's at 4 p.m. today.


New York State Needs Merit Selection for Major Trial Courts
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Task Force on Judicial Diversity is to be commended for its candid condemnation of the partisan election of justices for the New York State Supreme Court (news article, Feb. 12).
The task force documented the gross underrepresentation of women and minorities on the state's major trial court bench and points to the party politics that drive judicial selection.


House Bank Chief: Politicians' Politician
Jack Russ, who resigned Thursday night as sergeant-at-arms of the House of Representatives in the furor over the bank scandal, is a deft politician who excelled at doing favors for members of Congress.
Mr.
Russ, a Capitol Hill celebrity who played tennis with President Bush on the White House courts and racquetball with the President in the House gymnasium, came to Washington from Picayune, Miss., in 1967 as a part-time doorkeeper and aide to his patron, Representative William Colmer, a Mississippi Democrat.


Worse Than the House Bank
House Republicans deserve credit for forcing Speaker Thomas Foley to abandon his effort to limit the disclosure of members who abused their personal checking privilege at the House bank.
Full disclosure is a necessary, if painful, step toward restoring trust in Congress.
But in the process, for House Republicans to portray themselves as champions of ethics reeks of sanctimony.
Quick as they were to jump on a scandal that may embarrass more Democrats than Republicans, they continue to oppose reforms needed to clean up the far larger scandal: the way Congressional campaigns are financed.


Munich Chamber Group
The Munich Chamber Orchestra, conducted by Hans Stadlmair, is to make its only New York City appearance this season at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
On the program are Mr.
Stadlmair's Capriccio for Flute and Strings, Mercadante's Flute Concerto in E minor, Hoffstetter's Divertimento in F, Schubert's Five German Dances and Seven Trios, and Mozart's Divertimento in D (K. 136).
Andrea Griminelli will be the soloist in the flute concerto.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.00
5.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.04
4.01
5.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.21
4.17
5.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.40
7.28
7.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.06
8.03
8.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.99
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.78
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jets Sign Fishback
The Jets added a Plan B free agent to their roster yesterday, signing JOE FISHBACK, a former Atlanta Falcons special teams player.


Seesaw Game Tilts the Nets' Way
With 4 minutes 23 seconds left in the third quarter at the Civic Center tonight, the Celtics were leading the Nets by 83-64, and it looked as if Boston would have no trouble completing a rout and handing New Jersey its fifth loss in a row.
But the rout never materialized.
New Jersey's offense did, and the Nets ended their losing streak by scoring a surprising 110-108 victory on the road.


Senators Compromise on Aid for Israel
Two Senators overseeing the foreign aid bill have reached a compromise on $10 billion in loan guarantees sought by Israel that would immediately grant $1 billion in guarantees and leave the rest subject to restrictions set by the President on building new settlements in the occupied territories.
Congressional and Administration officials said today that President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d were considering the draft compromise by Sen.
Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, and Sen.
Robert W. Kasten Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, who are respectively the chairman and ranking minority member of the foreign operations subcommittee.


2 Arrested In Selling of Permits In Bribe Case
Two employees of New York City's Department of Transportation have been arrested and charged with conducting an illegal scheme to sell permits that allow overweight trucks to travel on city streets and bridges, the city's Department of Investigation said yesterday.
An inquiry by the department found that the employees accepted more than $100,000 in bribes in the last three years to issue about 50 permits.
The employees are Howard S. Handler, 35 years old, who lives at 444 Winant Avenue on Staten Island, and James Wyche, 51, who lives at 1545 Nelson Avenue in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx.


17 IN THE REGION ADMIT OVERDRAFTS
With the certainty of full disclosure hanging over them, 17 of the New York region's 54 representatives acknowledged today that they had written overdrafts on their checking accounts at the House Bank.
As the representatives headed home for a weekend of rest and campaigning after a week of partisan political angst, many frantically tried to put the best face on a scandal that began as a administrative foul-up but now threatens some political careers.


A Time-Honored Tradition
In the long and celebrated history of Congress, no tradition is more firmly established than scandal at the House Bank.


Patents; Patents Chief Plans to Step Down
The Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Harry F. Manbeck Jr., has told employees at the Patent Office that he would probably step down sometime in mid-April.
A blunt-spoken and sometimes impatient man who had previously served as chief patent counsel for the General Electric Company, Mr.
Manbeck, 63 years old, took over the commission almost exactly two years ago.
Mr.
Manbeck said he wanted to pursue other interests, though he did not specify them.
Lawyers close to the agency said he had become somewhat tired and frustrated by the job.
A spokesman for the patent office said he was not available for an interview


Homestake to Acquire International Corona
In a deal that mystified Wall Street analysts, the Homestake Mining Company said today that it would acquire the International Corona Corporation in a stock swap worth about $400 million based on Thursday's closing prices.
Based in San Francisco, Homestake has operations in the United States and Australia.
Under terms of the deal, Homestake will offer 35 of its shares for every 100 Corona shares.


Pravda Suspends Publication


Fading Red Line; A special report; New Hope in Inner Cities: Banks Offering Mortgages
In blighted North Philadelphia, where gutted homes intersect with broken dreams, the banking industry is meeting the inner city.
Prodded by Federal laws and an aggressive community-action group called Acorn, banks here and in other cities across the country have started making mortgage loans in neighborhoods they have traditionally avoided.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the Finance Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified the headquarters city of the Capital Re Corporation.
Its offices are in New York.


Beliefs
Numbers alone cannot explain the interest in the turmoil within the Christian Science Church.
One peculiarity of the church is its prohibition against giving membership figures, but the estimated total of 150,000 to 170,000 ranks Christian Science below the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel and the Coptic Orthodox Church.
There are more Roman Catholics in North Dakota than Christian Scientists in the United States.
But Christian Science is a faith whose current financial and spiritual travails overlap with those of many other religious groups.
It is also a native American species, a distinct contribution to the world's religions.
It is a belief that at one moment seems respectable almost to the point of colorlessness, and at the next moment seems wildly unconventional, almost to the point of dangerousness.


Lafayette Is Playing the City Game in the City
They take it right to the rim in the bustle of Manhattan.
In slower, suburban Brooklyn, they take their time.
That's what they used to say, anyhow, but it sounded like food for contemporary thought yesterday on Benson Avenue in Brooklyn, outside Lafayette High School.


Haitian Orphans Make Do With One Poor Meal a Day


Classical Music in Review
Tallis Scholars Church of St. Mary the Virgin


A Stonewall Cabaret
The Stonewall Chorale, a gay and lesbian chorus, is to present "Classical Cabaret" at 8 P.M. today at the Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street, in Manhattan.
The program, conducted by the group's new music director, Nancy Vang, includes madrigals, chansons and songs by composers ranging from Monteverdi to Kander and Ebb.
Tickets are $12 and $15.
Information: (212) 608-4504.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League


Brooklyn Man Convicted in Strangling of Girl, 15
A jury yesterday convicted a Brooklyn man of strangling a 15-year-old Hasidic girl on the Williamsburg Bridge in 1990, then setting her body afire on a steel catwalk suspended from the bridge's deck.
The man, Raymond Vargas, 29, of Bushwick, was found guilty after eight hours of deliberations over two days in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
He faces 25 years to life in prison in the slaying, which took place Dec. 16, 1990.


Hopes Slip Through Wildcats' Fingers
With the final seconds ticking down and their season waiting to be defined, the Villanova Wildcats were close enough to a tie score to touch the possibility again and again and again and again.
At least four times in a basketball eternity, Wildcat hands strained upward in an unsuccessful attempt to tip in a rebound, tie the game with Syracuse and extend their stay in the Big East tournament.


A New Jersey Resident Proves He's 'For the Birds'


An 'Inadvertent Error'
It was an "inadvertent error," and Nebraska should not be punished for it.
That was the decision handed down by the Big Eight yesterday as it ruled that the Cornhuskers would not have to forfeit two of their 1991 conference victories because they used a player later found to have been ineligible.
As a result, Nebraska retains its co-championship with Colorado.


Redmen Find an Answer to Tournament Puzzle
The baffling five-year St.
John's losing streak in the Big East tournament came to an emphatic end last night as the Redmen overcame an early 11-point deficit and rallied in the second half to defeat Connecticut in overtime, 64-59, in a quarterfinal game at Madison Square Garden.
St.
John's (19-9) advanced to a semifinal game against Georgetown at 4 P.M. today and moved within one game of Lou Carnesecca's 19th 20-victory season as the Redmen's coach.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; Buchanan Sees Foreign Influence in Bush's Camp
As he scratches for votes in Illinois and Michigan, Patrick J. Buchanan is banking on a two elements -- anger and ethnic groups -- to propel his campaign back into political relevancy.
He is playing to anger about Japan's increasingly dominant automotive industry with a commercial that reveals links between some Bush campaign advisers and Japanese lobbying efforts in this country.


Senator D'Amato's Blindness
Two indictments handed up this week -- one against the brother of Senator Alfonse D'Amato, Republican of New York, and the other against a fund-raiser for his campaigns -- have deepened concern about the Senator's blindness to legal and ethical transgressions.
Nobody knows whether the charges will stand up in court.
And the Senator himself has not been accused of any legal wrongdoing.
But the indictments, coming on top of a previous wrist-slap from the Senate Ethics Committee, suggest that he has allowed both his office and his campaigns to be shamefully misused.


Man Held in Death Of Ex-Wife and Rape
A parolee who appeared in court on Wednesday on charges of threatening his ex-wife with a knife stabbed the woman to death this morning and then abducted and raped another woman, the police said.
The suspect, Oscar H. Linderberry, 47 years old, of Cortland, was captured this afternoon in a garden apartment complex in Endicott, 11 miles west of Binghamton.


The How-To's of Unemployment Pay
With the nation's unemployment rate now at 7.3 percent, the highest in almost 17 years, tens of thousands of Americans are applying for unemployment compensation for the first time.
Many find it an uncomfortable and confusing process.
"One of the unusual characteristics of this recession, particularly in New York, is that it is affecting people who never experienced unemployment," said Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, regional commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
"Contending with unemployment is a job of its own. It's a whole new learning situation."


Investing in Japan
To the Editor:
I would like to add one point complementing the excellent articles on Japan by Ezra F. Vogel (Op-Ed, Feb. 8) and Robert B. Reich (Book Review, Feb. 9).


Prosecutor Seeks Adult Trials for 3 Youths Held in Killing
The Passaic County prosecutor filed legal papers today seeking to try as adults three of the four teen-agers charged with murder in the bizarre strangulation of a friend in Clifton last month.
The fourth youth, who is 14 years old, is cooperating in the investigation, said Michael O'Shea, head of the juvenile section of the prosecutor's office, and the authorities have agreed to continue prosecuting him as a juvenile in New Jersey Family Court here.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE HOCKEY  Two Double-Overtimes


Priestly Celibacy Fraught With Problems
To the Editor:
"Inquiry in Chicago Breaks Silence on Sexual Abuse by Catholic Priests" (front page, Feb. 24) is a calm and measured article about an explosive and emotional subject: sexual abuse by members of a clergy that is presumed to be celibate.


'Columbus' Premiere
The Dessoff Choirs are to present the premiere of the concert version of Kurt Weill and Ira Gershwin's "Columbus" scene from Otto Preminger's film "Where Do We Go From Here?" at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The program, conducted by Amy Kaiser, will also include the premiere of Leroy Jenkins's "Let America Be America Again," Copland's "In the Beginning," Virgil Thomson's "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry" and other works.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Of Checks and Balances And the Angry Voters
Checkbook in hand, JoAnne Squibb rushed to the bank this morning, determined to cover an account that sometimes falls out of balance.
She had been reminded of her own precarious financial situation by the morning news, which was full of talk about how nearly 75 percent of the representatives in Congress had overdrawn checks in the House bank.
The more she thought about it, waiting in line at the bank, the angrier she got.
"If those people in Congress can't manage their own personal money, how are they supposed to manage ours?" Ms.
Squibb, a Seattle hotel worker, asked.


Judge Permits Parade Ban of Gay Group
Puzzling both sides in the St.
Patrick's Day parade dispute, a judge for New York City's Commission on Human Rights decided yesterday that the parade sponsors discriminated against a gay group that seeks to march but that they have a First Amendment right to do so because of the parade's "Irish and Roman Catholic" nature.
Meanwhile, a Federal court judge said he would probably not decide until Monday, the eve of the parade, whether to allow the gay group to march.
The intimations are that the issues will continue to be in court long after this year's procession has passed.


Boston Journal; Gay Group In a Parade Stirs Anger In 'Southie'
It has been 17 years since rocks were thrown in anger in South Boston in reaction to the court-ordered busing that brought black schoolchildren into the Irish enclave here known as "Southie."
Racial tensions have since ebbed, but the issue of forced tolerance, and predictions of new violence, surfaced again this week when a Superior Court judge ordered this close-knit community to accept another group of outsiders, if only for a day.


14-Year-Old Is Raped In Her School
A 14-year-old student at a Manhattan high school dedicated to music and the arts was raped by another student in the school yesterday morning, the police said.
The girl was forced onto a walkway above the stage in the auditorium of the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and the Arts and raped between 11:10 and 11:50 A.M., said a police spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Nardoza.
The rapist, who was unarmed, was an acquaintance of the victim, said Lieut.
Ellen Hale, commander of the Manhattan Special Victims Squad.


Review/Dance; Disobedient, If Civilized, Audience
When the audience arrived at the Bessie Schonberg Theater for "Torn Language/Dialogue of Doubt" on Thursday night, it became part of the show.
Spectators were ushered onto the stage, where voices kept ordering them to divide themselves up according to sex, race and income.
Their response was a form of passive resistance.
No one did much to obey.
People either stood where they were or milled casually about.
Finally, everyone was allowed to sit down in the auditorium.


Paint-by-the-Numbers Programming
Taligent Inc., the joint venture between Apple Computer and I.B.M., boasts that sometime in the second half of the decade it will offer a breakthrough software product to let computer users with no knowledge of programming create their own spreadsheets, word processors and other program.
The Serius Corporation, a three-year-old company founded here by an 18-year-old computer whiz, has a program that can do these things now.


Ask Not for Whom the Owl Hoots
To the Editor:
You report that Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. has proposed an exception to the Endangered Species Act "in order to save jobs and permit logging" in the last great stands of Douglas fir and spruce in Washington, Oregon and California, the only habitat of the endangered northern spotted owl (news article, Feb. 21)


Laslo Benedek, 87, Film Director Known for 'Wild One,' Is Dead
Laslo Benedek, a cameraman, screenwriter and director whose directing credits include "Death of a Salesman" (1951) and "The Wild One" (1953), died on Wednesday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a short illness, said Tonda Marton, a friend.


BRIEFS
*
BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco, completed its acquisition of Valley Capital Corp., Las Vegas, Nev., a bank holding company, in an exchange of common stock. *
BDM Holdings Inc., McLean, Va., acquired Vinnell Corp., Fairfax, Va., a technical services concern.
Terms were not disclosed.


Overdrawn Accounts: The Explanations Begin


How to Do Good Better
Scandal at the United Way of America has cast a shadow on local United Ways from coast to coast.
William Aramony, the national organization's recently ousted president, had no authority over local fund-raising or its uses.
But his $390,000 salary and grandiose style have opened questions about the entire system.
It would be tragic if this affair made donors pull back.
The United Way is one of the nation's largest and more efficient fund-raisers.
The national body services the local units; it does not direct them.
But the Aramony case shows that even a respected charity may misuse money.


U.S. Vehicle Sales Rose 14% in Early March
Sales of North American-made vehicles rose 14 percent in early March, compared with an unusually weak period last year.
Although sales remained soft, analysts took heart from auto makers' reports of strong sales to individuals, as opposed to fleet buyers.
Sales of cars rose 9.4 percent, to 142,943, for the March 1-10 period, from 130,640 a year earlier.
Sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans and sport-utility vehicles, were 90,183, a 22 percent increase from sales a year earlier of 73,905.
Together, sales totaled 233,126, a 14 percent increase from 204,545 in the 1991 period.


Bear-Repellent Spray Joins The Arsenal Against Crime
A late-night encounter with a grizzly bear has become the mother of invention for William Pounds, an outdoor equipment retailer who has developed a hot pepper spray for use by wilderness hikers.
The success of the spray in warding off bear attacks has prompted Mr.
Pounds to repackage the product recently for use against human assailants.
"It was my first night in Montana," Mr.
Pounds said in recalling the 1977 bear scare.
"It was dark, and I was in my tent. The bear was digging around outside. There was nothing I could have done. A weapon would have been quite useless in the dark, and a liability in the tent."


High School Baseball Coach Wins in Court
A Superior Court judge today invalidated the 5-to-4 school board vote in Union, N.J., that ended the 33-year reign of New Jersey's most successful high school baseball coach.
Observing that the arrival of spring training lent urgency to the case, the judge, Miriam N. Span, ordered the board to meet within a week to explain publicly why the coach, Gordon LeMatty, was not reappointed.
The board's lawyer, Robert Levy, said the meeting would probably be held Thursday evening.


UConn Center Must Sit Out
The National Collegiate Athletic Association announced yesterday that it had denied Connecticut's appeal that the senior center Rod Sellers be able to play in the first round of the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Connecticut officials acknowledged last night that an incident in the Midwest Regional semifinal loss to Duke last year had caused the suspension.
In that defeat, Sellers pushed the head of Duke's Christian Laettner onto the court floor of the Pontiac Silverdome.


Israelis Say Some U.S. Officials Are Trying to Harm Relations
Israeli officials charged today that members of the Bush Administration were trying to embarrass this country by planting what the officials call false reports that Israel may have shared Patriot missile technology with China.
For a second day, the Israelis denied unequivocally that any such transfer of a Patriot missile or its technology had taken place.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry also issued a denial, saying, "Such a groundless and irresponsible report is not worth commenting on."


Pravda's Voice Is Stilled In an Open Market's Din
Pravda, the paper founded by Lenin and other pre-Revolution Bolsheviks and universally recognized for most of its 80 years as the voice of the Communist Party, bitterly announced today that it was suspending publication for lack of funds.
Lavishly subsidized by the party through most of its existence, the paper fell victim to the harsh realities of shortages, soaring prices, unimaginative management and a dwindling readership.
The daily had already reduced publication to only three issues a week of four pages each, and kiosks were freed to set their own prices.


CHRONICLE
JOHN SIMON, the often acerbic theater critic for New York magazine and film critic for the National Review, and PATRICIA HOAG, a singer who teaches musical theater at Marymount Manhattan College, were married Thursday at their home in Manhattan.
The wedding was performed by Judge Roger B. Hunting of Bronx County Civil Court.
Among the 22 guests on hand to witness the ceremony and celebrate afterward were BEN BAGLEY, the record producer, PHILIP BOSCO, the actor, and GINGER PRINCE, an actress who served as maid of honor.
"She was last seen as the stripper in 'Gyspy,' " Mr.
Simon said yesterday.
"However, for this she was fully clothed."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Labor Is Left Looking for a Candidate
This should be a time of high influence and major muscle flexing for organized labor, as the race for the Democratic nomination moves into the industrial Midwest, to places like Flint and Saginaw and Detroit.
Instead, many in the labor movement find themselves frustrated and divided.
The candidate of choice for much of labor, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, faltered in the early contests and finally left the race last Monday, just a week before the Michigan and Illinois primaries.
This left the United Automobile Workers, among other unions, without a candidate, and with little time to coalesce around a new favorite, even if it could agree on one.
Many people here say that none of the remaining candidates has captured the hearts of the labor movement.There are no Walter F. Mondales, Edward M. Kennedys or Hubert H. Humphreys here, men with a a long and affectionate history with labor.


Women Bring Concern About Rights to U.N.
Thousands of women from around the world appealed to the Secretary General today to insure that women's rights and violence against women be included as central concerns of the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights.
A coalition of women's groups presented boxes of petitions bearing 75,000 signatures, including thumbprints, from 78 countries to the United Nations Center for Human Rights.
In an accompanying letter to Secretary General Boutros Ghali, the coalition requested that the appeal be conveyed to the conference's preparatory committee, which will meet in Geneva this month.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Democratic Candidates Resume Ad Brawl
After a slight lull, the three major Democratic candidates for President are back into the video brawl.
The chief combatants in the commercial wars are Paul E. Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts, and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, with new television advertisments in Michigan and Illinois.


Coach Is Reprimanded
A little lesson in hustling he imposed on his team has turned into a learning experience for Houston's coach, BRAGG STOCKTON.
It seems that Stockton became so disgusted with his team's effort that he ordered his players to run laps after two recent losses.
That might have been a good idea, except for one thing.
The forced run violated National Collegiate Athletic Association rules barring practice after official games.


Memorial for Minna Citron
A memorial service for the painter and printmaker Minna Citron is to be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow at the Art Students League, 215 West 57th Street.
Among those scheduled to participate are Will Barnet, the painter; Rosina Florio, executive director of the Art Students League, and Judith Brodsky, associate professor, Department of Visual Arts at Rutgers University and past president of the Women's Caucus for Art.
Mrs.
Citron died on Dec. 21 at the age of 95.


Bridge
In most tournament competition, with team play by imps the exception, overtricks are crucial.
One of the best overtricks of the year so far came on the diagramed deal, played on Feb. 28 at the Long Island Regional Championships in Smithtown, L.I.
South was Mel Colchamiro of Bellmore, L.I., who has long been one of Long Island's best players.
His partner was Lynn Frey of Kings Point, L.I., who has bridge in her blood.
Her father, Alan C. Greenberg, is a former national champion as well as chairman of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the brokerage.


Panel Calls for Wider Help For Ex-Soviet Arms Experts
In the first detailed plan suggesting how the West should respond to the breakup of the Soviet scientific complex, a panel of America's top scientists and engineers called yesterday for an international effort that is far more swift, costly and ambitious than what has been done to date.
The panel, made up of more than 120 scientists and engineers, said up to $150 million should be spent quickly to bail out Moscow's scientific enterprise and keep its top weapon experts from taking lucrative jobs with third-world despots.


METRO DIGEST
A TRAIL OF OVERDRAFTS
With the certainty of full disclosure hanging over them, 17 of the New York region's 54 members of Congress acknowledged that they had overdrawn their accounts at the House Bank.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  ONE VICTIM, MANY ENEMIES


Tony Graham Is Dead; Graphic Artist Was 59
Tony Graham, a graphic artist known for his drawings and prints of New York City, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of colon cancer, said Diane Ceribelli, a friend.


Hispanic Editor's Death Tied to Anti-Drug Stance
Who wanted to kill Manuel de Dios Unanue?
The answer to that question remains as elusive as the hooded gunman who emerged from the shadows last Wednesday night and shot the former editor of El Diario-La Prensa in the head.
The hard-driving journalist had crusaded against drugs, assigning and writing stories that detailed the workings of the trade from high-rolling Colombian kingpins to low-level drug hustlers on Upper Manhattan street corners.


Biegen's Sentencing Delayed As Lawyers Continue Talks
A state judge yesterday postponed the sentencing of Arnold I. Biegen, who admits to embezzling more than $1 million from an elderly widow and the David N. Dinkins re-election campaign, as Mr.
Biegen continued to talk to prosecutors.
Law-enforcement officials said that Mr.
Biegen, hoping to lighten his sentence, has been providing potentially important information on a broad range of matters not limited to the Mayor's 1989 campaign.
Given Mr.
Biegen's admitted felonies, however, anything he provides must be checked and corroborated.


Review/Opera; A 'Parsifal' at the Met With Meier and Jerusalem
"Parsifal" is an opera that is also a ceremony.
Wagner called it a "stage-consecrating festival play": its tale of ritual threatened and ritual restored was itself meant to be a ritual, consecrating Bayreuth as a shrine in a renewed religion of art.
To a certain extent, every opera house that now puts on this massive work must approach it in the same spirit, as an induction into another world, a timeless realm once claimed by religion.
Its stage actions are meant to inspire an esthetic transformation in the audience; the true Grail of "Parsifal' is meant to be the music.


Morse Shoe Chairman Sees Potential to Grow
Morse Shoe Inc., maker of Fayva and other brands, announced yesterday that it had named David Pulver as chairman.
Mr.
Pulver will also continue as chairman and president of Kidco Inc., a chain of children's apparel stores.
He replaces Manuel Rosenberg, who resigned as chairman and chief executive.
The company said Mr.
Rosenberg had left to "pursue other interests." While the company, based in Canton, Mass., is searching for a new chief executive, day-to-day operations will be overseen by James Collins, who was named chief administrative officer.


Reynolds Plans a New Version of Winston
In another effort to revive Winston cigarettes, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company plans an ambitious introduction of a different version of its flagship brand that would be more like Marlboro, which overtook Winston in the 1970's to become America's best-selling cigarette.
Winston Select, as the new version is named, will be available nationally by early May, Peggy Carter, a spokeswoman for Reynolds in Winston-Salem, N.C., said yesterday.
It is part of broad efforts by Reynolds, the nation's second-largest tobacco company behind Philip Morris, the maker of Marlboro, to reverse declining sales of its familiar brands.


Feminists Painfully Watching Holtzman and Ferraro Battle
The glaring scenes of an all-male Senate Judiciary Committee -- the only group permitted to question Clarence Thomas about charges of sexual harassment at his Supreme Court nomination hearings -- enraged many women last year.
Galvanized by anger and frustration, they began to call more insistently than ever for greater numbers of women to run for United States Senate.
This year in New York -- with the two most prominent women ever to compete against each other seeking the office -- anxious and conflicted partisans of both New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro of Queens may already be getting more than they bargained for.


One Killed in Bronx
A 21-year-old man was killed and two others were critically injured in a sidewalk shooting in the Bronx, the police said.
The victims, none of whom were identified, were found at 7:30 P.M. on the sidewalk in front of 735 E. 182d Street in East Tremont, a police spokesman, Andrew McInnis, said.
He said the shooting appeared to be drug-related, but there were no witnesses.
The police had not made any arrests early this morning.


Patents; Faster Operation For Imaging Gear
A researcher at the Essex Corporation, a small company in Columbia, Md., that provides systems engineering services to the Federal Government, has invented what company officials say is a light-based computing technology that allows medical imaging equipment and advanced radar to construct images far more rapidly and cheaply than is now possible.
At the moment, for example, computer-aided tomography systems create detailed images of the inside of a person's body by beaming millions of X-rays through the patient and then measuring the intensity of X-rays as they reach detectors on the other side of the body.
These signals are then converted to digital data using a high-speed special-purpose computer and the data is plotted at high speed to reconstruct an image.


City Opera and Charity To Present Joint Benefit
The New York City Opera and the Princess Grace Foundation U.S.A. are to present "A Salute to Young American Artistry," an awards ceremony and benefit, on Nov. 12 at the New York State Theater.
The ceremony, which will combine the two organizations' annual awards programs, is to be followed by a performance of City Opera's "110 in the Shade," the 1963 musical by Harvey Schmidt and Tom Jones, and a dinner on the Promenade of the theater.


U.N. Giving Vance New Peace Mission In Caucasus Dispute
Former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, who brokered a cease-fire in the Yugoslav civil war in January, was asked by the United Nations today to undertake a new peacekeeping mission to the Caucasus region of the former Soviet Union, where Armenia and Azerbaijan are close to war.
The mission, announced by Secretary General Boutros Ghali, would have been unthinkable a year ago, when Moscow opposed any outside interference with its efforts to hold the disintegrating Soviet Union together.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about layoffs at the Nassau County Department of Social Services reversed the identities of two workers who lost their jobs.
Sue Blaustein was at the center, Debbie Olsen at the right.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Richard Brooks, a director, producer and screenwriter, referred incorrectly at one point to one of his films.
It is "Looking for Mr. Goodbar," as noted earlier in the article.


County Executive Details Affordable-Housing Plan
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today detailed an ambitious program to scatter 5,000 units of affordable housing throughout one of the wealthiest counties in the nation over the next five years.
Mr.
O'Rourke, who announced the plan last month in his State of the County message, characterized it as a "home ownership" program that would address for the first time a need for affordable housing that has been long perceived as one of the county's most intractable problems.


Foley in a Harsher Light
When Thomas S. Foley became Speaker of the House in 1989, he was hailed for fairness, patience and deference to his colleagues, a welcome change for lawmakers after the brief, abrasive reign of Jim Wright.
Today, as the House looks foolish over its bum checks, that same Foley leadership style is under attack.
Many lawmakers complain that Mr.
Foley failed to appreciate the political implications of the House Bank affair, leaving most of them exposed to a general accusation of a cover-up while seeming to concentrate on meticulous fairness toward the worst offenders.


Lawyers Can't Be Stool Pigeons
Must a lawyer be a whistleblower who is required to report adverse, potentially damaging evidence against a client?
The Office of Thrift Supervision, in charges against the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler and three of its members, appears to answer yes -- a disturbingly broad, questionable yes.
Though the firm this week settled the $275 million lawsuit under enormous pressure -- including paying the Government $41 million without admitting wrongdoing -- the questions the case raises remain troublesome.
Laced through the more than 80 pages of charges are repeated assertions that the firm knew of evidence that would contradict or weaken positions of Charles H. Keating and his Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, its clients in Bank Board examination proceedings.
The Office which regulates the savings industry, alleged that "material facts" involving risky underwriting practices and an overstated financial position should have been disclosed to it.


Violence Paves the Way to South African Vote
Politically motivated violence, most of it affecting black South Africans, has increased as whites prepare to vote in a referendum that asks whether they want President F. W. de Klerk to continue to negotiate a future without apartheid.
More than 220 blacks have been slain since President de Klerk called the referendum three weeks ago.
Confusion about the causes has surrounded the fighting, prompting speculation that white extremists might be seeking to abet violence among blacks to frighten whites into voting against the referendum, which is set for Tuesday.


Gunshots Fired at Congressional Candidate in Bitter Chicago Race
The volatile race between Gus Savage, the firebrand six-term Congressman, and his challenger, Melvin J. Reynolds, a political moderate and former Rhodes scholar, took a bizarre turn late Thursday night when Mr.
Reynolds was injured as shots were fired into his campaign car.
Mr.
Reynolds was cut on the right side of his forehead by shards of glass, shattered by at least two gunshots from an adjacent car five days before Tuesday's 17 primary.
He was treated at a nearby South Side hospital and released that night.
The incident occurred about 10 P.M. while Mr.
Reynolds was stopped at traffic light on a residential street as he was returning home from a day of campaigning.
Speculation About Shooting
As the police began their investigation and assigned plainsclothes officers to escort Mr.
Reynolds round-the-clock, there was more speculation than fact.
Supporters of Mr.
Reynolds stopped just short of directly accusing the incumbent of any wrongdoing, while supporters of Mr.
Savage accused Mr.
Reynolds of setting up the shooting to gain voter sympathy.


U.S. Ships Enter Gulf as Iraq and U.N. Spar Over Truce Conditions
As Iraqi diplomats wrangled with the United Nations Security Council over Iraq's non-compliance with the Council's cease-fire conditions, the aircraft carrier America steamed into the Persian Gulf on Thursday with two escort warships for what the Pentagon said was a routine patrol.
Still, the carrier's movement is an unavoidable reminder that the United States and its allies retain the political will to take punitive measures should Iraq refuse to comply with its cease-fire obligations to destroy all of its weapons of mass destruction and medium-range ballistic missiles.


Witherspoon to Fight First Pro Bout in China
The former heavyweight champion TIM WITHERSPOON has agreed to fight in the first professional boxing match in China, probably against another former champion, TONY TUCKER, on July 10.


Kenya Insures Game Park Safety for Tourists
To the Editor:
"A new spate of violence against foreign visitors in Kenya's game parks is threatening to undermine the financially strapped country's biggest earner of hard currency, tourism" (news article, March 1).


Gravano Ends Testimony After 9 Exhaustive Days
Salvatore Gravano finished his testimony against John Gotti yesterday, asserting that he became a Government witness and told the truth because of a desire to "turn my life around."
When a defense lawyer suggested that Mr.
Gravano's real reason for cooperating with the Government was to obtain a lenient sentence and keep the money he accumulated in a life of crime, the witness replied, "That's not my major concern."


Relentless Champion of the Harried Commuter
At the center of the battle between New York City and the suburbs over who gets what share of state transportation dollars is State Senator Norman J. Levy, a relentless negotiator from Merrick, L.I., whom even city officials say they wish they had on their side.
Most recently, Mr.
Levy, chairman of the Senate Transportation Committee, blocked a plan supported by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that would have kept the subway fare at $1.25 by shifting $90 million in surplus money from the commuter railroads to the city Transit Authority.
Instead, the city is likely to have to kick in tens of millions of dollars more than it had planned to keep the fare from rising.
Merely the Latest Skirmish
The skirmish over the transit money is just the latest in the nearly perpetual battle between the city, whose cause is usually taken up by the Democratic-controlled Assembly, and the suburbs, represented by the Republican-led Senate.


'Satanic Verses' Coming Out in Paperback
An anonymous group calling itself the Consortium is publishing a paperback edition of Salman Rushdie's novel "The Satanic Verses," with the book scheduled to be in stores before the end of the month.
A spokesman for the group, who spoke on condition of remaining unidentified, would not say who was financing the publication, who was part of the group or who would receive any profits the book earned.


Pension Funds Lose in London Real Estate
A widely watched $425 million investment in British properties by a large group of public and private pension funds ended in a complete loss this week as a unit of Citicorp in London began to foreclose on all of the partnership's investment.
The disastrous outcome of the investment, the first major foray of American pension funds into the European property markets, is the latest example of the enormous losses that many funds have suffered in real estate investments.


Fernandez Leaves Game Because of Knee Injury
Sid Fernandez, being counted on as the Mets' top left-handed starter, was forced from today's exhibition game against the Yankees in the first inning because of a buildup of fluid on his left knee.
Fernandez, who had surgery on the knee last fall, was taken to the Fort Pierce Medical Center.
The Mets said results of the examination would not be known until Saturday.


The Rev. Paul Abels Dies at 54; Gay Pastor Lead 'Peace' Church
The Rev.
Paul M. Abels, a former Greenwich Village pastor who was the first openly gay minister with a congregation in a major Christian denomination in America, died on Thursday at his home in Rensselaerville, N.Y.
He was 54 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Thomas Hunt, his companion for the past 14 years.


Rockwell to Cut Earnings By $1.5 Billion This Year
The Rockwell International Corporation said today that it would reduce its earnings this year by $1.5 billion to reflect a change in the way it accounts for the health-care costs of its retirees.
At the same time, Rockwell said that it saw no signs of an economic turnaround and that because of the resulting weakness in its automotive- components, factory automation and electronics businesses, it now expected full-year earnings per share to be down by 15 percent, not including the effect of the accounting change.


Review/Dance; Unmasking Repression
Like Picasso, Nuria Olive-Belles, a choreographer and film maker, comes from Barcelona.
And while she is not a Picasso, the fact that she sees the world through issues of sexuality recalls an aspect of the painter's work, particularly his explicit sketches of Barcelona's brothels.
A hypocritical society that seeks release is not peculiar to Catalonia.
Yet in her imaginative mixed-media piece, "The Bulls at the Ball," Miss Olive-Belles places this theme in a specifically Spanish, even Catalan, context.
Using live dancers, her own films and a not-so-irrelevant clip of Boris Karloff as Frankenstein's monster, she pastes together a passionate tale of love and repression.
The piece, which had its premiere on Thursday night, continues through Sunday (at 9 P.M.) at Performance Space 122 (150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street).


An Opel Takes Hungary Back to the Future
The first Western car to be assembled in Central Europe since Communism fell rolled off the production line here today, anointing the General Motors Corporation and its Hungarian host as pioneers in the embryonic regional auto industry.
For Hungary, the first G.M. car to be produced at the ultramodern plant 120 miles west of Budapest was the fruit of a half-century dream to revive auto manufacturing in Hungary.


Times Square Landmark Files in Bankruptcy
One of Manhattan's most famous and financially troubled landmarks, 1 Times Square Plaza, the triangular building renowned for its electronic "zipper" of news headlines and for dropping the ceremonial ball on New Year's Eve, has filed for bankruptcy protection.
"Obviously, any building that stands empty is bad for the city and bad for the district," said Gretchen Dykstra, president of the Times Square Business Improvement District.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; A Tough-Talking Bush Visits a Hard-Hit State
President Bush campaigned across Michigan like a tightrope walker today, balancing expressions of concern for the faltering economy with tough talk about his critics and the recovery that he says is just around the corner.
Sweeping into the state for a five-hour visit, Mr.
Bush was at his most partisan in accusing Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, of telling a "bald-faced lie" by suggesting that the Bush Administration might have influenced General Motors' decision not to close a Texas automobile plant and close one instead in nearby Willow Run, Mich.


Corruption Grows Greedy in Russia
Acting a bit like the police chief in "Casablanca" who was shocked to find gambling going on in the back room of Rick's, the Russian Government has begun to address the problem of corruption.
It is a belated response to the widely held view that under democracy, officials have become even greedier than they were under Communism.
"Most residents of the Russian Federation believe the problem has become very acute, that corruption has reached unheard-of proportions," Gennadi Burbulis, the First Deputy Prime Minister, said last Friday as he called for the creation of a new anti-corruption committee.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Senate passed election-year tax legislation that Bush is sure to veto.
The vote was unexpectedly close, at 50 to 47.  [ Page 39. ]


Sports of The Times; Big East's Wild Blue Yonder
Seven years have passed since Villanova, Georgetown and St.
John's barreled into the Final Four, the first time in college basketball history that three teams from one conference reached the national semifinals.
The conference was the Big East.
The league's spectacular performance after only six years of operation highlighted a period of meteoric growth.
It became known as "the conference of the '80's."


Shirley Wedeen, 65, A College Professor
Shirley Ullman Wedeen, a Brooklyn College educator and past chairwoman of the City University's Faculty Senate, died on Thursday at home in Brooklyn.
She was 65 years old and died of cancer, her family said.


Lawmakers Brace for Storm on Checks
Dispirited and fearful after voting early this morning to bare the tainted banking records of 355 members and former members of the House of Representatives, the chamber's lawmakers prepared today to place their political fate in the hands of constituents, and hoped for the best.
After a long night of anguished debate and emotional votes, party leaders jockeyed to defend members who had overdrawn their accounts at the House Bank, or to strike the wounded.
Lawmakers and members of their staffs said they were rifling through their records to figure out whether they had overdrawn and, if so, by how much.


Don't Make a Shrine Out of Hitler's Bunker
To the Editor:
The idea of the German archeologist Alfred Kerndl to reconstruct Hitler's underground complex of war command posts in the former East Berlin, as a sort of museum (Berlin Journal, Feb. 19) strikes a thoroughly discordant note.
Quite unlike the recently refurbished Wannsee Haus, where Gen.
Reinhard Heydrich secretly unveiled his "final solution of the Jewish question" to high government officials, the 14 command bunkers were essentially demolished by the Russians and merit no revival.


Liberty Science Center
To the Editor:
In "Cut Off From the New Reality" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22), David Gelernter warns that our science-illiterate young people stand less and less of a chance in today's technomarket.


Technicality Allows Doctor to Practice
The Manhattan doctor who severed the arm of a fetus during an illegal abortion late last year is technically free to practice medicine while awaiting an appeal of New York State's decision to revoke his license, Health Department officials confirmed yesterday.
A loophole in a recently revised state law allows the doctor, Abu Hayat, to perform abortions during the appeal process, said Faith Schottenfeld, a spokeswoman for the State Department of Health, which revoked the doctor's license on Feb. 25.


Counting Your Savings
Mortgage interest rates rose slightly over the last two months, but they are still lower than they have been in years.
Home buyers and owners can still reduce payments appreciably, or they can choose a shorter mortgage term to cut interest expenses.
Here are figures for the interest on a $100,000 loan at the current national averages for 15-year, 20-year and 30-year fixed rates and for the savings that can be realized with 15- and 20-year loans.
For comparison, figures are also given for a 30-year mortgage at the average fixed rate available two years ago.
Mortgage Term
Monthly
Total
Interest
And Rate
Payment
Interest
Savings
30 years (3/13/90) at 10.13%
$887.19
$219,388
---------
30 years at 8.71%
783.85
182,186
---------
20 years at 8.57%
872.26
109,342
$72,844
15 years at 8.33%
974.80
75,464
106,722
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.) Drawing


Nuclear Shocks From Ukraine
Ukraine has halted the transfer of its tactical nuclear arms to Russia, where they were being sent for dismantling.
That should shock Washington into swift new measures to control loose nukes in the former Soviet Union.
Ukraine's President, Leonid Kravchuk, who has pledged to make his country nuclear free, defends the suspension by saying he had "no guarantee" that the missiles would in fact be destroyed once the warheads reached Russia.
The United States, which has a profound interest in furthering disarmament in the old Soviet Union, could help in three ways.


CHRONICLE
It has been 20 years since SALLY PRIESAND became the first woman to be ordained by the Reform branch of Judaism, and that turning point will be marked Tuesday at Founder's Day exercises at the New York School of the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion.
Rabbi Priesand, spiritual leader of the Monmouth Reform Temple, Tinton Falls, N.J., for 11 years, will speak.
She said yesterday that she planned to address "the lessons I have learned over the last 20 years."


To Lure Birds, You Need Accommodations
With the signs in the window ("We Buy Coins" and, much smaller, "Wife or Girlfriend Wanted") and a jumble of stacked boxes and furniture inside, John Besante's downtown storefront here looks more like a quirky second-hand shop than a major attraction for bird lovers throughout the state.
But it is here that people have flocked in recent months to get a free birdhouse -- or two or three -- faster than Mr.
Besante and his friend Tom Delaney could make them.
This week alone, a half-dozen visitors who peeked in the dusky storefront had to be told to leave their names and numbers.


Duchesnays Turn Pro
They have had their fun, winning the world championship last year and a silver medal for France in the Olympics last month.
Now ISABELLE and PAUL DUCHESNAY think it is time to make some money from their ice dancing.


Are Your Income Tax Deductions Typical? It May Not Matter
Taxpayers often want to know whether the itemized deductions on their returns look reasonable, and some take comfort if their own deductions are more or less in line with national averages.
Indeed, these average figures, released by the Internal Revenue Service, are incorporated into the two leading consumer tax software programs for use on personal computers, Turbotax by Chipsoft and Andrew Tobias's Taxcut 1040.
When users select "audit" from the programs' menus to have the programs check the returns they have prepared, they are told how much their own deductions deviate from the national averages for their income group.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Arkansas Pushes Plan To Break Welfare Cycle
When Gov.
Bill Clinton calls himself the Presidential candidate who can "put an end to welfare," he might be speaking of someone much like Robin Redhorse, who quit her job as a coffin builder in Georgia after she separated from her husband, then moved back to Forrest City, Ark., and began drawing a $162 monthly welfare check to support herself and 5-year-old daughter.
Ms.
Redhorse joined the state's welfare-to-work program, known as Project Success, and within a year it helped her land the best job of her life, a position as a Government clerk that, she notes with pride and precision, pays $15,808 a year.
Without Project Success, she said, "I'd still be drawing a check, probably."


Seton Hall Gets Lucky With Loose Ball
There was more confusion than euphoria in the Seton Hall locker room at Madison Square Garden yesterday, even though the Pirates had just survived with a wild, last-second victory over Boston College.
No one could quite figure out what had happened on the key possession at the end of the Big East tournament quarterfinal game.


Floyd Hogs the Stage Playing an Exit Scene
Those who thought Raymond Floyd's victory last Sunday was an emotionally wringing last hurrah will have to reconsider, because another triumph for the 49-year-old PGA Tour veteran could be just around the corner.
This afternoon, Floyd kept the lead at the Honda Classic by shooting a 68 in the second round for a total of 10-under-par 134.
That was good enough to lead Corey Pavin and John Riegger by a stroke.


Kenya Insures Game Park Safety for Tourists; Political Oppression
To the Editor:
"Violence continued in the Kenyan capital," you report in "Violence in Nairobi Draws a Warning by U.S." (news article, March 5), "when the police fired tear gas canisters and clubbed demonstrators protesting the forceful eviction of women on a hunger strike from a city park."


Citicorp Sets Plans to Sell $150 Million Preferred Issue
Citicorp announced plans yesterday to strengthen its financial condition by selling $150 million of new preferred stock.
The sale, which will help the New York banking company move closer to the minimum capital requirements set by regulators, comes as analysts and investors are becoming more optimistic that the worst of the company's problems have passed.


Classical Music in Review
'Zaide' Juilliard Theater


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Debate; Candidates Battle for Right to Call Themselves Friend of Middle Class
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas tonight accused Paul E. Tsongas of trying to "pound these middle-class and lower middle-class people into the dirt" by suggesting that some Medicare benefits could be limited in the future and that a middle-income tax cut was unnecessary.
In an hourlong debate broadcast by the local CBS affiliates here and in Detroit tonight, the Presidential Democratic candidates brought their attack advertising strategies to live television, but in an exchange that often descended into mere squabbling rather than confrontation.


As Economy Goes Bust, Barter Is Booming
When Chris Hansen inspected the shoals of fresh fish laid out on crushed ice in the S &amp; S Seafood store the other day and decided to buy $19 worth of yellowtail flounder fillets and glistening sea scallops, he was completing an exercise older than the Babylonian marketplace and as new as today's unemployment figures.
Just 90 minutes earlier Mr.
Hansen, who owns an office-machines supply store in nearby Neptune, had sold $100 worth of computer paper and printer ribbon cartridges to Jeff Shields, owner of a brake and muffler shop farther down the New Jersey coast at Point Pleasant.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Wednesday referred incorrectly to a new product line called Wall Stars from the Upper Deck Company.
Wall Stars are large adhesive-backed posters of athletes, not cards.


Japan's Growth In Savings Falls
Japan's growth in savings fell to a record low 6.5 percent in 1991, the Government reported today, fueling anxiety that the foundation of the postwar economic boom was eroding.
The Bank of Japan said it was the second consecutive year for a record low savings growth.
In 1990, savings grew by 7.7 percent.


More Than 570 Die In Quake in Turkey
A strong earthquake struck eastern Turkey, killing more than 570 people, the country's semi-official news agency reported.
It quoted an official as saying that at least 500 bodies had been pulled from the wreckage in Erzincan, the city hit hardest by the quake, about 350 miles east of Ankara.
Panicked survivors spent the night outdoors in freezing temperatures.


Student at School Grazed by Shot
A young man fired a handgun last night during a talent show in the auditorium of a high school in Queens, grazing a 16-year-old student who was dancing in the aisle, the police said.
It was not immediately clear why the man opened fire, but the police said the victim, who was grazed in the hip, appeared to be an innocent bystander to the shooting, which occurred about 9:15 P.M. in the crowded auditorium of Springfield Gardens High School at 143-10 Springfield Boulevard.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about approval of a rate increase for Consolidated Edison of New York misstated the effect on consumers.
The company said the average New York City resident's bill will rise $36 a year, while the average Westchester resident's bill will rise $48 a year.


Patents; Counting Up Shaves As Cut Protection
Arthur Kotick, a retired restaurant owner in Lake Worth, Fla., has patented a simple little invention for men who cut themselves while shaving because they forget how long it has been since they changed razor blades.
Mr.
Kotick's device is a small plastic cube to hold the razor and would be mounted on the bathroom wall.
The key feature is a small manual counter, like those used to count people as they walk into a room, that a person would click forward each time the razor is used and keep track of how old a blade has become.


Rysanek Master Class
Leonie Rysanek is to conduct the first master class of her career on April 5 at 7:30 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The soprano is to be interviewed before the work session by Thor Eckert Jr., a music critic and editor.
The event is a benefit for the Robert M. Jacobson Fund of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation, which provides financial and professional help for young singers.
Craig Rutenberg of the Metropolitan Opera music staff is to be the pianist.
Tickets are $25; information: (212) 362-8719.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH GIVES BREAK TO AUTO INDUSTRY ON GASOLINE FUMES
Four days before the Michigan primary, President Bush told business executives today that the Government would not require automobile manufacturers to install pollution-control devices on new cars to capture gasoline fumes released into the atmosphere during refueling.
In making the announcement just three days after the primary in Texas, Mr.
Bush settled a long dispute between auto makers and oil companies over which industry would be required to invest in new equipment to clear the air of benzene and other chemical compounds that contribute to urban smog.


Lessons in AIDS Come With a Curl
LA COIFFURE BOUTIQUE in Harlem is typical of the beauty parlors sprinkled throughout this city's struggling neighborhoods.
They signify the victory of order over chaos, energy over entropy and yes, a new press-and-curl over the late-winter blahs.
A half-dozen women were taking care of business at the establishment on Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard at 127th Street the other day.
Some huddled under old-fashioned helmet dryers, others scrutinized each snip of scissors as if unimaginable disaster loomed and still others chatted excitedly about a new baby.
The air reeked of cosmetological chemicals.
Every so often a buzzer would sound, signaling that someone needed to be buzzed in.


Flawed Heart Valve Is Presenting Patients With Harrowing Choice
Each day, Deborah Stenzel has lived with the worrisome knowledge that the mechanical valve implanted in her heart is flawed and could suddenly fracture and kill her.
But Ms.
Stenzel, who lives in Winona, Minn., may soon be faced with a decision that is equally wrenching: whether to have that valve surgically replaced in a procedure that is itself painful, costly and potentially fatal.


Dow Up 27.28 to End Week at 3,235.91
Stocks advanced yesterday in moderate trading after a smaller-than-expected rise in producer prices indicated that inflation was being restrained.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,235.91, up 27.28 points for the day and 14.31 for the week, while the broader market was stronger, too.


Taking Measures to Cope With Deer
DEER.
Deer.
Deer.
Many people love to see them.
Others consider them a liability.
Increasingly, opinions are changing, and much of it has to do with where and when the herds are seen.
If herds are seen in far off open spaces, gracefully bounding and leaping away, deer can be a thing of beauty.
But when deer are seen by the dozens in your garden, they are a downright nuisance.
Or worse, the herds may never be seen, but a trail of destruction can be left behind by their feeding, causing frustration and annoyance.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Incidents of Bias Create Concern Among Students
Though officials at Rutgers University here say their battle against bigotry on campus has been continuing and persistent, several incidents of prejudice that have occurred in recent weeks on campus have left some students skeptical and angry.
On a study hall wall graffiti including racial slurs were reported within days of the discovery of a similar message in a residence hall.
The graffiti were removed by the university.
In the same week, an anonymous personal advertisement in the classified ad section of a campus newspaper, The Livingston Medium, spoke rudely about blacks.


A Peace Dividend for Israel?
If Middle East negotiators ever strike a deal, will Israel's siege economy soon be awash in milk and honey?
Much, of course, would depend on the nature of the deal, whether it included Syria and Lebanon, whether it maintained an open economic border between Israel and the West Bank.
Recent history is not encouraging.
The "cold peace" with Egypt has yielded few discernible economic benefits.
And the most recent negotiations have been marked by a level of bitterness that augurs poorly for future economic cooperation.
Even in the best conceivable circumstances, few Israeli economists anticipate an immediate dividend from reduced military spending or increased trade.
Some expect that outlays for settling property claims and securing new defense perimeters would actually exceed the initial gains.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 15, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
4
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
3
4
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
4 *
7
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
5
45
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
8
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
7
2
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) A serial killer in the Twin Cities.
8
4
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) A woman and a man find true love while fighting to save her family's business.
9
3
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the death of a widow.
10
17
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
11
3
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Life in a fantasy land.
12
8
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
13
2
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
14
6
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman starts a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
15
8
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
16 *
1
FATHER MELANCHOLY'S DAUGHTER, by Gail Godwin. (Avon, $5.99.) The plight of a clergyman's daughter after her mother deserts her father and her own relationships go awry.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
1
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
2
4
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
3
43
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
436
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
1
PREDATOR, by Jack Olsen. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The story of a serial rapist in Washington State.
6
7
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
7
35
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
8 *
12
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
9
7
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
10 *
35
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
31
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
79
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
60
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
28
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
3
WAYNE'S WORLD, by Mike Myers and Robin Ruzan. (Hyperion, $7.95.) Lists, games, etc., inspired by a "Saturday Night Live" skit.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large prin


Laurie Blaufox and Gary Lee Marry
Laurie Blaufox, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
M.
Donald Blaufox of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Gary Solomon Lee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Lee of Maidenhead, Berkshire, England.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lee, 29 years old, is a lawyer at the C. T. Corporation, a legal services and publications company in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of nuclear medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center.


Corrections
Report in the Travel Advisory column on Feb. 23 misidentified a passenger ferry between Seattle and Victoria, British Columbia, and referred incorrectly to its operation.
It is the Victoria Clipper and it is in service all year.


Sharks at Home in New Aquarium
Visitors to the new Thomas H. Kean New Jersey State Aquarium in Camden, which has been attracting big crowds since its opening Feb. 29, are advised to reserve tickets or buy family memberships to avoid waiting in line.
Those with advance tickets and memberships are admitted immediately.
The aquarium, situated across the Delaware River from Philadelphia, has a 760,000-gallon open ocean tank in which sharks, striped bass, sea robins, cow-nose rays and many other kinds of fish live.
There are four views into the ocean tank, including an 18-by 24-foot window on the "Edge of the Abyss," offering a glimpse of life in the deep.
Nearby a shallow touch tank allows visitors to stroke small sharks, skates and rays.


Economic Transfusion
To the Editor:
You say in "Fake Fixes for the Economy" (editorial, Feb. 25) that cutting the capital gains tax rate on old investments "could not possibly spur future growth." As an investment professional coping daily with alternative investment opportunities, I must take the opposite view.


A May Wedding For Ms. Atwater
Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Atwater of Columbia, Mo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Thankful Atwater to Shea Edward Butcher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Butcher of Wakefield, R.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Atwater, 26 years old, graduated from Wheaton College and is a buyer and the manager at the Shoreline, retail clothing stores in Block Island, R.I.
Her father, a retired senior editor at Time magazine, is a professor of journalism and the former dean of the journalism school at the University of Missouri.
He is now on sabbatical and is teaching at the University of Alaska in Anchorage.
The future bride's mother, Patricia Atwater, is a copy editor at The Anchorage Times.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
Jan Hoffman's article "When Men Hit Women" (Feb. 16) hit me hard.
In the end, it came down to the final paragraph: "Ellen Pence's advice to women in battering relationships is simply this: Leave." I was an abused wife for 10 years, until I finally got the courage to leave my husband last spring.
While Pence's advice is entirely appropriate -- because men who abuse their women will not change -- it's never as easy as all that.
For 10 years, I didn't even identify myself as a battered wife.
I was desperately trying to fix something I believed in, my marriage, and to help someone I loved, my husband.
In the early days, I cried to friends and they offered to come get me, but I always said no.
For 10 years, I lived in terror, worried that I would say or do something to set him off.
At first I was devastated every time he got angry.
After a few years, I stopped caring.
I stopped feeling anything at all.


Corrections
The headline of the currency table on the Money page last week misstated the dollar's gain against the yen.
The dollar rose 1.8 percent.


Deals and Discounts
CARIBBEAN RESORTS A number of resorts in Jamaica and St.
Thomas have special air fares in connection with stays.
On Jamaica, a round-trip air fare of $99 from New York is offered to travelers who stay seven nights at Couples, Grand Lido Negril or Jamaica, Jamaica, three resorts operated by Superclubs.
The fare is available from Kennedy, Newark and Islip (L.I.) airports; various airlines are used.
For a seven-night stay, rates at Couples start at $2,510 for two people sharing a double room through April 2; at Grand Lido, rates begin at $1,695 for each of two people sharing a double room through April 30, and at Jamaica, Jamaica, rates start at $1,350 for each of two sharing a room through April 2.
All-inclusive rates include meals, wine, bar drinks, airport transfers, hotel taxes and sports activities.
For more information, call Superclubs at (800) 858-8009.


Quotation of the Day
"I have no pain. I know that I'm not ready to go out and do a 100-yard dash." -- MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS, released from New York Hospital.  [ 35:1. ]


Focus: Golf Communities; Housing Developers Shedding Their Links
SLOWER home sales have driven residential developers to sell the amenities they once counted on to hasten land sales and raise prices -- their golf courses.
At least 10 percent of 2,600 residential developments centered on golf courses are in some sort of financial distress because of a lack of sales, according to real estate and golf industry analysts.


Immigration And Poverty
It is becoming increasingly obvious that our political leaders are oblivious to the demographic future of the United States.
In the year 2010 there will be 284 million Americans, 33 million more than in 1990.
By the late 21st century the population is projected to reach an astounding half a billion.
Is that the future America seeks?
Illegal immigration can only exacerbate the dismal future that awaits our nation through overpopulation.
One may feel compassion for the illegal immigrant Josman from Guyana  [ "Immigrants Wait Years for Legal Status," Feb. 27 ] , but the idea of her bringing her three children here is not a happy prospect for the U.S.
Our ability to eradicate poverty for our present citizens is seriously threatened by this unrestricted flow of illegal aliens.
The importation of this poverty is a far greater danger to this country than the importation of Japanese cars.
Unskilled jobs in the U.S. are rapidly vanishing.
The last thing we need is a crushing overload of unskilled and uneducated illegal aliens.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan's Wife Stays in Step With a Smile but Seldom a Word
At rallies she sits demurely by her husband's side, her round face frozen in a smile, waiting for the cue that will give her her only public role in the campaign.
"Now," her husband says, "I'd like to introduce you to my choice to replace Barbara Bush as First Lady, Shelley Buchanan."


Corrections
A letter to the editor on March 1 about James P. Johnson misidentified the director of the 1939 musical "Swingin' the Dream." He was Philip Loeb.


Noted with Pleasure
The Third Kiss
The novelist Italo Svevo, author of "The Confessions of Zeno," brought his great analytic skills to bear even on the writing of love letters.
This excerpt is from "Memoir of Italo Svevo" by his wife, Livia Veneziani Svevo (Marlboro Press, paper).


Bridge
It is a familiar scene.
Under the lights in a stadium in Boca Raton, Fla., Gabriela Sabatini has won yet another tennis match, and thousands of fans applaud as a monstrous check, about three feet long, is handed over.
But something is different.
The numbers on the check are smaller than one might expect, and Sabatini is giving, not receiving.
And the recipient, who lives nearby, is wearing a suit and is not a tennis player.


HURDLES INCREASE FOR MANY WOMEN SEEKING ABORTIONS
While lawyers and politicians focus on the legal battle over the right to abortion, millions of American women are finding that their access to abortion is growing more and more limited.
Despite the Supreme Court's 1973 ruling in Roe v.
Wade that abortion is a constitutional right, a combination of economic forces, political pressures, and doctors' changing attitudes has put abortion out of reach for many women.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Avon, Conn. 185,000
70 Rosewood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room with fireplace, 2-car attached garage, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,732.
Stamford, Conn. 390,000
575 Haviland Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; pool, new kitchen, h/w floors, 1 acre; taxes $4,725.
Weston, Conn. 512,500  91 Eleven O'Clock Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 51-year-old French country home; stone facade, pond, 3 acres; taxes $5,762.
Armonk, N.Y. 600,000
4 Devoe Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; sun room, eat-in kitchen, family room, playroom, 1 acre; taxes $7,356.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 405,000
40 Chase Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, terrace, eat-in kitchen, family room, wet bar; taxes $9,003.
South Salem, N.Y. 230,000
North Lake Circle  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old contemporary; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, deck, lake rights; taxes $5,238.
OTHER AREAS Commack, L.I. 169,000
12 Cobb Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old split level; den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800.
Waldwick, N.J. 168,000
57 Stuart Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 46-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen and stove, screened porch; taxes $4,026.
Wanaque, N.J. 180,000
28 Wilson Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; new kitchen, large rooms, deck; taxes $5,071.


A Sweet Pleasure From New Orleans: The Praline
PRALINES, those homely, old-fashioned New Orleans candies, are not exactly making a comeback.
They never left town.
Defying all warnings about the perils of sugar and the fat content of nuts, the confections that resemble a mud pie with pebbles are more popular than ever.
A recent praline crawl through the city produced some surprises even for a fan who has munched on them for decades.
The free-form candy made with pecans, milk, butter and lots of sugar -- but is more than the sum of its parts -- has inspired many spinoffs: praline cheese cake, praline ice cream sauce and even an entire restaurant.
Praline permutations are apparently endless and their purveyors come in as many varieties as the candies themselves.
But the common thread to a praline tasting tour of New Orleans is an uncommon cheerfulness.
Perhaps because of the high sugar content, the sellers and/or cooks, who in some places spoon out the candy to harden while the buyer waits, seem for the most part to be inordinately good-humored.


A Program That Helps With Depression
"An Inborn Vulnerability to Depression"  [ Feb. 9 ]  is especially meaningful to me!
I was born nervous.
I have suffered from depression and common nervous symptoms and fears for as long as I can remember.
I had my first depression at age 11, when my mother died, albeit, untreated because of circumstances.
When I was 16, working full-time, I became a "mental health consumer."


Taking Measures to Cope With Deer
DEER.
Deer.
Deer.
Many people love to see them.
Others consider them a liability.
Increasingly, opinions are changing, and much of it has to do with where and when the herds are seen.
If herds are seen in far off open spaces, gracefully bounding and leaping away, deer can be a thing of beauty.
But when deer are seen by the dozens in your garden, they are a downright nuisance.
Or worse, the herds may never be seen, but a trail of destruction can be left behind by their feeding, causing frustration and annoyance.


Technology; Next for the Cellular Phone
Nature created an abundant electromagnetic spectrum, which ingenious scientists have exploited for radar, television and lasers.
But that is small comfort to cellular telephone operators.
The Federal Communications Commission has been stingy with the radio frequencies that make wireless telephone calls possible.
But through clever design that largely prevents any two users from electronically bumping into each other, cellular telephones and the networks that serve them have coped with spectrum scarcity -- up to a point.
That point is rapidly approaching in America's largest cities, where more and more miffed cellular users find their calls garbled, or blocked entirely, when a cellular channel fails to open up.


In the Worst of Times, America Keeps Giving
Few nations rival the United States in its collective lust to get.
But none rival it in its collective urge to give.
Though the country is struggling to pull out of a recession, and some of its more charitable souls are shaking their heads over disclosures of free spending and high living by an official at the United Way of America, the unique American institution known as the nonprofit sector finds itself worried but well.
Whether they put dimes in the can on the store counter or write checks to their school or community hospital, or -- most of all -- put dollars in the collection plate, 75 percent of the households in the United States donate to charity, according to Independent Sector, a Washington-based group representing the nation's nonprofit institutions.
Those households that gave in 1990 donated an average of $978 to such diverse causes as education, the environment, health care, homelessness, the arts and nuclear disarmament.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Teaching Aides Quit in Frustration At Workload Rise
Four biology teaching assistants at the University of California here have quit their jobs over what they said was an unfair increase in the work expected from them.
They also said the working environment became "intolerable" when they tried to resolve their workload problem with the professors they were assisting.
The four assistants are graduate students who are paid $1,200 to $1,500 a month to teach up to 20 hours a week.
They cited a recent surge in pre-med enrollment as the reason for the increased workload.


Gotti Prosecution Shows Surveillance Videotape
Federal prosecutors played a surveillance videotape yesterday to bolster the testimony of Salvatore Gravano, the Mafia turncoat who on Friday finished almost two weeks on the stand in the racketeering-murder trial of John Gotti.
Presented at an unusual Saturday session of the trial, the tape showed Mr.
Gotti, Mr.
Gravano and dozens of associates going in and out of the red-brick Ravenite Social Club, at 247 Mulberry Street, described by the prosecution as the Manhattan headquarters of the Gambino crime family.


Replay and Labor Lead Issues at N.F.L. Talks
As the National Football League owners gather in Phoenix today for their annual meeting, it appears that instant replay will once again be approved but that hopes of solving the league's labor mess remain slim.
At each of the last six owners meetings, instant replay as a means of refining officials' calls has been adopted for one year; last year, it was renewed by the slimmest margin.
Twenty-one of the 28 owners' votes are required for replay approval.
Last year, replay won in a 21-7 vote and a similar close call is expected at this week's meeting, which will last through Thursday.


Starr Boggs Moving
STARR BOGGS of Westhampton Beach, one of the most celebrated restaurants on the East End, is moving from the village to the waterfront.
In May, when the restaurant reopens after its annual winter hiatus, it will be at the Dune Deck Hotel, 231 Dune Road, between the ocean and bay, with a view of both.
In its new site, a mile west of the West Bridge, the restaurant will seat 75 to 80.


Ann M. Moffitt Plans to Marry
September wedding plans have been announced for Ann Morgan Moffitt and Nicholas Webb Danforth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan P. Danforth of Stuart, Fla.
Miss Moffitt is a daughter of Florence E. McNeil of Walton, N.Y., and Jonathan Moffitt of Big Sur, Calif.
The prospective bride, 25 years old, is an account representative for Cellular One, a mobile-communications service in Paramus, N.J.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a building contractor in Big Sur.


'Life Goes On' Lives Up to Its Name
Will Becca Thacher, the bright, mature 16-year-old on "Life Goes On," marry Jesse McKenna, her 17-year-old high-school sweetheart?
Youth aside, Jesse would be every parent's dream -- handsome, intelligent, polite -- if he were not every parent's nightmare.
As viewers of the series and all the residents of its fictional town know, Jesse has tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Becca and Jesse will decide their future on tonight's episode (7 P.M. on ABC).
Before they do, Becca and her father will agree that this "can never be a real marriage"; Becca will visit an AIDS hospice and confront some frightening truths, and Becca's older sister will talk about AIDS with their brother Corky, who has Down syndrome.


Now That They Must, Former Soviets Hustle for Money
Visit with the new Siberian oil barons.
Listen to the ambitious managers at the Vaz Auto Works in Togliatti.
Get to know the street merchants, consultants, real estate brokers and commodity traders in Moscow.
Or watch seven men and women, hired by an entrepreneur in Kiev, assemble small electric water pumps at tables in a sooty rented factory room, using screwdrivers and wrenches.
A surprisingly vital if sometimes crude capitalism is emerging in the countries that made up the Soviet Union as people join the struggle to make money -- sometimes with enthusiasm for their new lives, in other cases simply to hang on to an old standard of living or to afford enough food.
"The opportunities are so blatant -- the gap between what people have and what they want is so great -- that people are rushing to fill it," said Marshall Goldman, associate director of Harvard's Russian Research Center and a frequent traveler to Moscow.
"Some are acting out of desperation and others are grabbing opportunity."


Review/Rap; Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy
The Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy aren't just a band -- they're a coalition.
At C.B.G.B. on Wednesday night, the group included a rapper who sometimes sang, a drummer, a guitarist with jazz leanings, a keyboardist who also slammed metal on metal like an industrial rocker, and an offstage crew that played backup tapes and projected supertitles above the stage.
As the lineup suggests, the band has broad ambitions.
Michael Franti, its vocalist, looks to both Chuck D. of Public Enemy and the songwriter Gil Scott-Heron as models, delivering mid-tempo raps and ballads.
Rono Tse, on keyboards, and Mr.
Franti were both members of the Beatnigs, a well-regarded San Francisco Bay Area band.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


Christine Pike, Editor, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Pike of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announecd the engagement of their daughter Christine Alexandra Pike to Michael Heinz Krogermeier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl H. Krogermeier of Rochester, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


From Old Russia


Social Climbing to the New World
THE WORLDS OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS
By William D. Phillips Jr. and Carla Rahn Phillips.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $27.95.


And Now, Gorbachev Says, Let Us Begin
To the Editor:
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's first monthly column (Op-Ed, Feb. 24) appeared the same day as William Safire's condescending welcome to him as a journalist -- before Mr.
Safire had read the Gorbachev column.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Administrators Give Assistance To Safety Program
When University of Washington students participated in the second Nightwalk campus-safety program of the school year recently, the tour coincided with a new phase in the program's six-year history: for the first time since it began, the university administration had acted on the program's recommendations for improving safety.
Nightwalk, which is sponsored by the student government's crime-prevention committee, invites students to walk over the 680-acre university campus to note areas where lighting is insufficient and where shrubbery is overgrown -- providing spaces for criminals to hide.
Group members also note where emergency phones could be installed for direct access to campus police.


Cindy Spitzer Is Wed
Cindy Ann Spitzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Spitzer of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Craig Wayne Gilston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Gilston of New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Gilston, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of Bankers Trust in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
Her father retired as president of the 905 Food Corporation in New York.
Mr.
Gilston, 27, is the treasurer of Gilston Electrical Contracting, headed by his father, in New York.
He graduated from New York University.


Jill Rogers To Wed in May
Jill Rogers, a theatrical publicist in London, and Joseph Warren Davis, an actor based in New York, are engaged to be married in May.
Miss Rogers graduated from the Academy of Live and Recorded Arts in London.
She is a daughter of Patricia Lamplugh of Hastings, East Sussex, England, and Derek Rogers of London.
Her father is a lighting engineering consultant.
She is a stepdaughter of John Lamplugh, a senior partner in Morgan &amp; Lamplugh, solicitors in Hastings.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A VOICE OF ONE'S OWN: Conversations With America's Writing Women, by Mickey Pearlman and Katherine Usher Henderson. (Houghton Mifflin, $8.95.) Interviews with 28 authors, ranging from Joyce Carol Oates to Amy Tan, illuminate how these women became writers and what shapes their work.
In 1990, when the book was published as "Inter/View: Talks With America's Writing Women," our reviewer, Alexandra Johnson, noted that "the merit of this collection is how it charts the passages, often circuitous, in the complex life process that finally yields the literary product."
COLLECTED SHORT STORIES, by Aldous Huxley. (Elephant/Ivan R. Dee, $14.95.) Although probably best known for the horrifying vision of the future he created in his novel "Brave New World," Aldous Huxley was also a writer of short fiction.
This collection, first published in 1957, encompasses 21 of his works.
"Within a few brief pages," one critic said, "this master satirist conveys the essences of characters in revealing situations, covering a wide range of both settings and plots, from murder to ghostwriting, from 18th-century England to the 20th-century Riviera. This book is essential for all fiction collections, containing as it does all the stories in five previously published Huxley volumes."


World Markets; The Sentimental View of Europe
For much of this year, the anticipation of better times ahead has been driving stock markets in Europe, powering a vibrant resurgence in France, igniting a recent rally in Germany and even providing some buoyancy in Britain.
Analysts say the gains are attributable in part to investors' belief that Europe's very high interest rates will soon be cut.
Investors have also bet that Wall Street's strong performance will cross the Atlantic.
And they assume there will be an economic recovery in the United States, giving Europe a lift.


The Wisdom of the Trees
IT was a chilly gray day when I left the New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street and headed west on 42d against the wind.
Usually under such circumstances, you keep your head down, but the trees pulled mine up.
You can't help but look at those London plane trees, as you walk by Bryant Park.
They, too, lean forward -- all 200 of them -- like rugged New Yorkers bending into the wind.


Better Odds; Faulty Math Heightens Fears of Breast Cancer
The risks of getting breast cancer have been so greatly exaggerated that many women are needlessly taking potentially harmful drugs or even having their healthy breasts removed.
Alarm is growing among cancer specialists, who say it is almost impossible to overcome misconceptions about the odds that originate with deliberately scary predictions by the American Cancer Society.
Those misleading odds, they say, are then repeated by the media and widely misinterpreted by some family doctors.


Yoko Ono, Anew
It was Yoko Ono's fortune and misfortune to marry John Lennon.
Whatever claims revisionist historians (starting with Lennon) make about her early renown, her marriage lifted her from the ephemeral world of underground loft concerts and Happenings to global visibility and, more crucially, gave her access to the recording studio.
The price was stiff: she became the woman everyone loved to hate; one still hears the absurd charge that she broke up the Beatles.
And the verdict on her recordings was that she couldn't sing.
"Onobox" (Rykodisc RCD-10224-29; 6 CD's), a retrospective of Ms.
Ono's music from 1968 to the late 1980's, shows that behind her idiosyncratic, aggressive and sometimes abrasive early vocal style lurked an inventive, original composer.
It also reveals that her later songs, in a more conventional pop style while quirkily left of center, have a lot of say about a great many topics, ranging from the uneasy sides of relationships to feminism, sexism, ecology, anger, pain and loss.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Students Tee Off New Class Option For Golf Managers
When Matt Jester signed up for his college major, he needed to present an application form, his academic record -- and his golf handicap.
Mr.
Jester, a sophomore majoring in leisure studies, is one of the first 10 students in a new professional golf management program at Penn State University.
To qualify, he needed a handicap of eight or below.
Mr.
Jester's handicap is a one.


Keeping in Step With St. Patrick's Day
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY, which falls on Tuesday, has become the occasion for some rather sophisticated food in recent years.
Irish chefs have rediscovered and refined their country's traditional dishes; the cottage industries -- cheese, honey, exotic seaweeds, trout farms -- have been revived, and the result is some of the most interesting new cooking around.
One young Irish chef, James O'Shea, who is owner of the West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn., often serves dishes in his restaurant that, unknown to his customers, have Irish origins.
"Pies are as common in Ireland as pates in France," he said.
"In almost any food shop, you will find an enormous selection to take home -- both in gourmet form and in fat-food form." One of the most popular items on his current menu is a pie made with goat cheese and leeks and cooked in a crust made with bread crumbs.
It is known in Ireland as curd pie.


James Westman, 81, Biologist and Author
James R. Westman, a retired Rutgers University professor and biological and environmental scientist, died Feb. 25 at Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
He was 81 years old and lived in Marco Island, Fla.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Ms. Harris to Marry J. S. Solomon
Kristine Harris, a senior auditor at Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm, in Roseland, N.J., and Jordan Samuel Solomon, a law student at Yeshiva University, are engaged to be married in November.
Ms.
Harris, 24 years old, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
She is a daughter of Joan and Willard Harris Jr. of Wayne, N.J.
Her father, a retired police officer in Paterson, N.J., is a security manager for Bender &amp; Company, a real-estate leasing company in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother teaches second grade at Washington Park School in Totowa, N.J.


Answering His Accuser
To the Editor:
Timothy Tung's letter (Jan. 26) makes several false accusations against me.
He accuses me of having used the names of a dozen well-known Chinese-American intellectuals (Timothy Tung included) without their consent to solicit donations for the Committee for the Promotion of Democracy in China.
This is false.
I have never used his or any other people's names to advertise for donations.
He says that after the Beijing massacre of June 4, 1989, I used that advertisement and those names to go to Hong Kong to solicit donations.
This is also false.
I went to Hong Kong not to solicit funds but to help in the work of rescuing the democratic activists in China who were trying to flee.


Fighting for Rights
A PEOPLE'S CHARTER
The Pursuit of Rights in America.
By James MacGregor Burns and Stewart Burns. 577 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Should the Sliding Door Become Stuck
STUBBORN sliding doors often need just minor adjustments to correct problems.
There are several ways to service the most popular styles, including patio doors.
Interior sliding doors like those across closet openings and between rooms are usually one of these three types:


A Wall Street Revival, With Updating
AFTER three burdensome new works this season, the George Street Playhouse is playing it safe with "Other People's Money," a crowd pleaser so risk-free that the management could well offer refunds to those who are displeased.
But in case a serious-minded theatergoer wonders why a wildly publicized recent hit is included in the repertory of a regional theater with, assumedly, more venturesome inclinations, it's easy to rationalize the choice.


Janise Stager to Marry M. D. Cohen
Janise Harris Stager, a producer of documentary television programs, and Martin Dana Cohen, the deputy director of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Program on Mental Illness, both in Boston, are engaged to be married in May.
Ms.
Stager, 38 years old, is a producer at WHDH-TV.
She graduated from Smith College and has a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Dee and Dr.
Robert Stager of Kent, Ohio.
Her father is a retired optometrist.
Her mother is the vice president of the Kent State University Foundation.


Blanche Kwas Engaged to Wed P. J. Johnson Jr.
May wedding plans have been announced for Blanche Kwas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tone Kwas of Woodbury, L.I. , and Peter James Johnson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Johnson of New York.
Miss Kwas, 32 years old, is the deputy director of the Mayor's Office for People With Disabilities in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and holds a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
March 17
ST.
PETERSBURG NATIONAL OPERA.
The Russian company (formerly the Leningrad Opera) makes its first American appearance, in Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov" at the New York State Theater.
A three-week run of performances will also include Rimsky-Korsakov's "Coq d'Or" and Tchaikovsky's "Pique Dame." Through April 5.
Performances Tuesday to Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturday 1:30 and 8; Sunday, 1:30 and 7:30.
Tickets: $20 to $70.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
March 18


Is Japan Out to Get Us?
To the Editor:
People can and do change their positions.
Communists became capitalists.
Some Humphrey Democrats became Reagan conservatives.
But few people have changed their positions as far and fast as Robert B. Reich.
Ten years ago, Mr.
Reich made his reputation by arguing for national industrial policies that would strengthen business in the United States.
But Mr.
Reich's position was rejected by American business.
Now he argues that it doesn't matter whether the companies that do business in the United States are American-owned or foreign-owned, or whether the profits of enterprise remain here or flow back to Japan and Europe.


Irish Leader Will Try to Ease Abortion Law
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds has decided to seek changes in Irish and European Community law that would broaden the circumstances under which women in Ireland could obtain legal abortions.
Mr.
Reynolds made it clear in statements this week that he wanted to change the law in the light of a recent ruling by the Irish Supreme Court that permitted a 14-year-old girl who said she had been raped to travel to London for an abortion.
The court ruled that the girl's threat to kill herself if the pregnancy continued was adequate constitutional justification for permitting her to go for the abortion, which reportedly took place last week.
The court also indicated that there might be other instances where abortions would be constitutionally permissible here.


Made in America, by Some Originals
Fashion designers never seem to tire of mining the old West for ideas.
Urban stores are starting to look like trading posts, with fringed and beaded styles from such unlikely sources as Gianni Versace and Perry Ellis.
Now along comes the real thing.
JoAnna Wabisca, of Cree and French ancestry, is designing leather and silk clothing that is made by Indians on a Cheyenne reservation in Montana.
Ten workers cut and sew, and 17 others do traditional beadwork by hand.


Meg Crone Is to Wed C. M. Ramsden
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter S. Crone of Charleston, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meaghan Crone to Christopher McLean Ramsden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Ramsden of Barrington, R.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Crone, 27 years old and known as Meg, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her fiance.
She is working toward a master's degree in education at Harvard University.
Her father retired as president of Buffalo Railroad Equipment Corporation in Charleston.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
In her memo about the possibility of a New York Times crossword puzzle, Margaret Farrar writes, "You can't think of your troubles while solving a crossword." How true that is.
I've used it as a cure for insomnia.
When I can't sleep, I pick up The New York Times puzzle.
Within 20 minutes, my mind is soothed, and drowsiness overtakes me.
It's wonderful.
I wonder how many others have found this valuable use for the crossword puzzle.
PENINNAH MILLER
Kalamazoo, Mich.


Alicia Galanter Marries in England
Alicia Anderson Galanter, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Eugene Galanter of New York, was married yesterday to Roland Dominic Walton, a son of John Walton of Radlett, Hertfordshire, England, and Countess Annette d'Exea Walton of Cambridge, England.
The Rev.
Paul Nelson performed the Church of England ceremony at St.
Nicholas Church in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, England.
Mrs.
Walton, 25 years old, received bachelor's and master's degrees in art history from Cambridge University.
She is a painter.
Her father, a professor of experimental psychology, is the director of the psychophysics laboratory at Columbia University.
Her mother, Patricia Galanter, is the chief executive of Adams-Bannister-Cox, a textbook publisher in New York.


D. C. Cross to Wed Miss Stevenson
William H. Stevenson and Jane Stevenson, both of San Pedro, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Joan Stevenson to Daniel Carroll Cross, the son of James Eliot Cross of Gulfstream, Fla., and Meredith Dale of Washington.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Stevenson, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and is a public affairs specialist at the Bureau of Land Management in Washington.
Her father is an economic consultant to businesses in Southern California.


G. C. Whitney to Wed Ms. Douwes
Francoise W. Douwes of Abington, Pa., has announced the engagement of her daughter Francine Caroline Douwes to Gifford Cochran Whitney, a son of Alexandra E. Whitney of New York and the late Harry P. Whitney.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Douwes, 32 years old, graduated from Drexel University and has a master's degree in fine arts from Columbia University.
She is the vice president of development at the Institute for Advanced Studies in the Theater Arts in New York.
She is a daughter of the late Dr.
Karel Douwes, a surgeon in Philadelphia.


TELEVISION
Today
"TAKING BACK MY LIFE." A television movie chronicling the story of rape victim Nancy Ziegenmeyer, who decided to reveal her name in The Des Moines Register in an effort to take the social stigma away from rape victims.
The film stars Patricia Wettig in her first role since "Thirtysomething." CBS at 9 P.M.
March 22 to 24


Pursuing Science, But Not Competition
IN a laboratory that carries about it the unmistakable metallic aroma of chemicals and has an abundance of glass beakers, petri dishes and pipettes arranged in an order fathomable only to the initiated, Mark Melkonian and Ying Taur stare intently at a small rectangle of what looks like blue Jell-O as they jot down observations in a notebook.
These juniors at Byram Hills High School here are not testing new recipes for the General Foods kitchens in nearby White Plains.
Instead, Mark and Ying are pursuing an experiment designed to yield an "electrophoretic analysis of different plasmids in cell bacteria." For those whose memories of science lab are dim, this means that the students pass electricity through a protein gel that contains DNA and enzymes to get what can be understood as a DNA fingerprint.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


Should the Sliding Door Become Stuck
STUBBORN sliding doors often need just minor adjustments to correct problems.
There are several ways to service the most popular styles, including patio doors.
Interior sliding doors like those across closet openings and between rooms are usually one of these three types:


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring special spring activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
ABIGAIL ADAMS SMITH MUSEUM, 421 East 61st Street, Manhattan.
A landmark house dating from 1799 features rooms furnished in the Federal and Empire styles of the early 19th century.
Special events include "Celebration! The Spirit of America in Song," a musical program with Janet Frank, singer, and Thomas Schilling, pianist.
May 17 at 2 P.M.
Open Monday to Friday, noon to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Admission: $2 ($1 students and the elderly; free under age 13).
Information: (212) 838-6878.


Wall Street; Warrants, Wickes and WCI
If God is in the details, there is an unholy mess brewing at Wickes Companies, the California conglomerate whose empire includes the Builders Emporium chain of home improvement stores and the Kayser-Roth line of socks and stockings.
All Wickes common stock is owned jointly by the Blackstone Group and Wasserstein Perella &amp; Company, investment banking firms that played high-profile roles in the takeover battles of the last decade.
Those battles typically wound up in court and the Wickes takeover was no exception.
Wickes is still fighting lawsuits related to the financial deals of Ivan Boesky, the arbitrager turned insider-trading informant, and earlier had settled disputes relating to an aborted 1988 buyout by the company's management.


Ms. Labrecque to Wed in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Labrecque of Fair Haven, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Elizabeth Labrecque to Richard Wyman Shea Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Shea of Attleboro, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Labrecque, 25 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and is an assistant account executive at Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.
Her father is the chairman of the board of the Chase Manhattan Bank.


A Reluctant Rejection On Davids Island
WHEN the City Council decided last week to sever the contract that gave Xanadu Properties Associates exclusive rights to build a luxury residential colony on Davids Island, the developer had gone as far as he could go, he said, in reducing the density of the project.
"You reach a point where a project cannot be further downsized," said James M. Kozak, a vice president of the Xanadu partnership.
"To further reduce the plan's density would be to end up with a scheme that no bank would finance."


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


Fiercest Fight on Taxes: Health Care for Miners
Late one night this week, when the day's 12 hours of tax debate finally ground to a halt on the Senate floor, the only lobbyists left in the hallways outside were from coal companies and the coal miners' union.
Their persistence stood as testimony to just how bitter the fiercest fight over the Senate's tax bill really was.


Sports of The Times; John Thompson Sent The Hoyas to the Wall
TWENTY years.
John Thompson likes to recall the first day with his new Georgetown basketball squad, how he took them to a wall in the gymnasium and said, "Someday a national championship flag is going to hang here."
The players thought that was neat.
Hey, a national championship flag, hanging right here in the gym.
Then Thompson told them the path to a championship flag began with running up and down the gym until he said stop.


Making Faces
JULIEN D'YS SOUNDS A BIT PEEVISH -- albeit charming -- as he discusses the Paris ready-to-wear shows about to take place.
"People always want something new," he says with a sigh.
"But it is so difficult to do every season."
So far, Julien hasn't done too badly, and this is probably why he is the hottest young runway hair stylist in Paris.
This week, Julien and his associate, Yannick d'Ys (the appellation means, literally, "of Ys" and refers to an island in their native Brittany) are set to coif for some of Paris's most adventurous and influential design houses, including Chanel, Jean-Paul Gaultier, Comme des Garcons and johji Yamamoto.


By Default
"It's time to see what a woman can do," said Jack Finn, an old Jersey City Democratic hand, as Marilyn Roman became the first woman Mayor of New Jersey's second largest city last week.
Mrs.
Roman rose to office not because of any savvy campaigning, but rather because she was, um, there.
She had been City Council president when Mayor Gerald McCann was forced out, convicted on Federal fraud charges, making her acting Mayor.
A great deal of Council bickering ensued over who would be named interim Mayor.
Last Thursday, after a month in which the eight members of the Council were unable to assemble the five votes needed to elect any of 13 candidates, they ceded the job to her.
The 56-year-old Mayor, who will serve until a special election in November or until the Council re-organizes, possibly in July, has taken a leave of absence from her job as director of the Education-Business Alliance for the city's Board of Education.
She'll remain as City Council president.


Mutual Funds; A Steady March Into Funds
Individual investors are gradually increasing the proportion of stocks that they hold through mutual funds compared with what they own directly.
This trend began in 1981 and has accelerated except for one minor slip after the 1987 stock market crash.
H.
Bradlee Perry, chairman of David L. Babson &amp; Company, an investment advisory and mutual fund company based in Cambridge, Mass., offers a number of reasons for this tendency: investors' worries about being at a disadvantage relative to institutional stock traders, bigger marketing efforts by the fund industry, high brokerage commissions for individuals and 1991's rally in small stocks, which are particularly difficult for individuals to evaluate.


Corrections
A styling credit today on page 38 of Men's Fashions of The Times, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about Miami, omits the name of a hair stylist.
He is Ric Pipino of Pipino-Buccheri Salon.


No Balance? No Problem!
A voter could wind up in trouble with the law for treating a checking account the way some politicians treated theirs in a bank run by the House of Representatives for its members.
After audits last year showed that most members sometimes overdrew their accounts and some members did so routinely, House Democrats began looking for a way to contain the damage.
They hoped to get away with simply closing the bank and making public the names of the two dozen worst abusers of a system that allowed members to write insufficiently funded checks without penalty or interest.
But with the issue being forced by the Republicans -- who have less to lose simply because there are fewer of them -- the House Democrats agreed last week to the publication of the names of all 355 current and former members who wrote checks against insufficient funds over a 39-month period investigated by a House panel last fall.
The names of the 24 worst abusers are to be released this week, with the rest following in 10 days.
The abuses ranged from apparently inadvertent overdrawing of less than $100 in a few checks to habitual writing of dozens of uncovered checks a month for thousands of dollars.


Reporter's Notebook; Fever Gone, Eating Well, Dinkins Leaves Hospital
Mayor David N. Dinkins, looking a bit drawn but happy, left New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center yesterday morning after an uncomfortable week of treatment for a bowel infection.
"I feel terrific," Mr.
Dinkins said in the hospital lobby as he was about to leave.
"I will soon be back to par."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FROM PURITANISM TO POSTMODERNISM A History of American Literature.
By Richard Ruland and Malcolm Bradbury.
Viking, $29.95.


Fools or Traitors?
MOLEHUNT
The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA.
By David Wise.
Illustrated. 325 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


From Nature, A Bouquet With Thorns
"BEWARE the Ides of March." I do.
Early spring is my queasy season.
The longed-for thaw gives me the willies: I don't like everything suddenly loosening up.
Terra no longer so firma underfoot, I also feel an internal giving way: spring runoff in both nostrils, a gutslide of fear sucking hope into my boot tops.
Whooosh.
It's March malaise.
Anxiety free-floating, along with dandelion fluff, in the air.
And now that Mother Nature seems to suffer from Alzheimer's disease, spring is more unsettling than ever.
Not only has she forgotten to blanket us with the requisite number of snows, but she has also, in one hot flash after another, forced bulbs to bloom too soon.
It's hard to enjoy the warm sun and burst buds, when they appear as suddenly as democracy in Eastern Europe.
While all this is technically pleasant, we could use more of a transition.


Shelley Rosen Weds Ira Taub
Shelley Rosen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Rosen of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday evening in New York to Ira Stuart Taub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Taub of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Bruce Block performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Taub, 25 years old, graduated from Emory University, and is studying for a master's degree in nutrition at New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Streichler North River Warehouses in Jersey City.


Talking: Mortgages; Resolving Errors in Payments
THE makeup of monthly mortgage payments has become so complex in recent years that many borrowers wonder whether their lender is correctly calculating how much of the loan has been paid off.
Some borrowers may be concerned that their principal balance isn't dropping as sharply as it should, given the additional voluntary payments they have made.
Or they may wonder why a large repayment of the principal is still due at the end of the term on a 15- or 25-year loan.
Others may suspect that the payments due on their adjustable-rate mortgages are not reflecting the full extent of the drop in interest rates over the last year.


Chilean Resort Stays Small
THE little resort town of Zapallar, Chile, wakes up slowly.
At midmorning, the only signs of activity on the beach are a young man sticking colorful umbrellas into the sand and two elderly men walking along the shaded stone pathway that runs the length of the cove.
Brightly painted fishing boats bob up and down in the bay and dolphins play among them.
Slowly the townspeople come filtering down.
Two nannies in uniform leading five small children make camp under an umbrella.
The children immediately rush to play tag with the waves.
A stylish couple, speaking Spanish with an Argentine accent, is next.
A blond afghan hound saunters around looking for handouts.


Fiscal Remedies Via Electronics
To the Editor:
F.
Murray Abraham's prescription for curing the fiscal ills of Broadway  [ "An Actor's Modest Proposals for New York's Ailing Theater," March 1 ]  is excellent, but there are two far more financially rewarding fixes within reach: selling last-minute tickets at fractional prices via automated teller machines, and videotaping every play for sale to cable and network TV and to video stores.


Orangemen And Edwards Get in Gear
Michael Edwards?
When Seton Hall calculated all the plays, the myriad of scenarios, the unexpected trap doors that could sabotage its chances of reaching the Big East championship game, Edwards's name never even surfaced.


Heinrich M. Ledig-Rowohlt, 83, Publisher With a Storybook Past
Heinrich Maria Ledig-Rowohlt, an illegitimate child who grew up to learn that his father was a prominent German publisher and who eventually took over the company, died on Feb. 27 at the East-West Clinic in New Delhi.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Ledig-Rowohlt died of pneumonia, a family spokeswoman said.
He lived in Reinbek-bei-Hamburg, Germany, and Lavigny, Switzerland, and was in India for the International Publishers Association Congress.


Oceanographers Say Winds May Have Parted the Waters
Applying an expert knowledge of wind over water, two oceanographers have developed what they say is a plausible scientific explanation for the parting of the waters that enabled the Israelites to make their miraculous escape from Egypt in the biblical story of the Exodus.
The oceanographers calculated that strong winds blowing along the narrow, shallow Gulf of Suez, a northern extension of the Red Sea considered the likely site for the crossing, could account for the phenomenon.
Steady winds of 40 knots could push enough water to the south to cause a 10-foot drop in sea level, exposing a large swath of sea floor over which the Israelites could have walked to safety.


Main Course


Manhattan String Quartet Returns to Pleasantville
THE Manhattan String Quartet, in its 14th appearance for the Pleasantville Chamber Music Society since the society was founded in 1976, closes out the society's season today.
Long a favorite with Westchester audiences, the Manhattan has chosen quartets of Ravel, Shostakovich and the contemporary American composer George Rochberg.
Its 3 P.M. performance at the Presbyterian Church in Pleasantville is free; call 769-1827 for more information.


Skate Escape, Updated
VYACHESLAV KOZLOV will continue to play for the Detroit Red Wings while a Federal judge considers a lawsuit that contends that Kozlov is still contractually bound to his team in the former Soviet Union.
The former Soviet Red Army team, now the Central Sports Club of the Army, is seeking to overturn last week's preliminary Wayne County Circuit Court ruling that allowed Kozlov to play in the National Hockey League.


Ms. Morgenthal Wed
Dawn Holly Morgenthal, the daughter of Carole and Marvin Morgenthal of Little Neck, Queens, was married last evening in Jericho, L.I., to Barry Joel Bonder, the son of Eleanor and Gerald Bonder of Montreal.
Rabbi Stanley Steinhart officiated at the Jericho Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Bonder, 27 years old, is an assistant counsel at Euram Management in Uniondale, L.I.
Mr.
Bonder, 30, is the vice president of In-Touch Management Systems, a computer software company in Garden City, L.I.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Clinton's Rivals Seek Midwest Toehold
The Democratic Presidential campaign focused on the critical primaries of the industrial Midwest this weekend, with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas running strongly in Illinois but with former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California trying to trip him up in the more uncertain political terrain of Michigan.
The stakes on Tuesday are high.
If Mr.
Clinton wins both states, after his sweep of the South on Super Tuesday, many Democrats say he will be hard to stop in his drive for the nomination.


Irish Pub Music
To the Editor: I read with great interest the article on pubs in the west of Ireland that feature traditional music, but I must add a word.
Seven years ago I made a solo trip to the Connemara region of County Galway and wanted to visit a local pub to hear Irish music.
I mentioned this to the bartender at the hotel where I stayed.
She frowned and shook her head, saying that I, as a young woman alone, would be out of place at the pub, which was frequented by the farmers and fishermen of the area.
She added, however, that it would be more acceptable for me to visit a pub alone in a large city, such as Dublin.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Jan. 92
Jan. 91
Change
Starts
1,167
844
+38.3%
Completions
1,018
1,123
- 9.3%
Sales
612
406
+50.7%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.10
8.98
9.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.13
6.10
7.57
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.91
8.83
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.99
5.89
7.42
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.01
8.90
9.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.00
5.88
7.32
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.16
9.04
9.96
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.49
6.53
7.82
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.55
4.41
6.48
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.02
8.02
9.54
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


An Insider's Guide to PARIS PLAYERS
Everyone who is anyone in the fashion business will be in Paris this week for the fall '92 shows.
If hemlines are going to drop, or silhouettes shift, this is where it happens.
Here are some of the powerful personalities who are part of the scene.


A Young Conductor Starts at the Top
Some conductors have established solid careers and then sunk without a trace.
Franz Welser-Moest is different: he has risen without a trace.
This little-known, inexperienced 31-year-old Austrian has suddenly been thrust into the center of London's musical life and now finds himself emblazoned on the international scene.
After a brief relationship, the London Philharmonic has appointed him music director, with powers that such eminent predecessors as Klaus Tennstedt, Sir Georg Solti and Bernard Haitink never possessed.
Mr.
Welser-Moest had previously directed only a youth orchestra, and orchestras in Norrkoping, Sweden, and Winterthur, Switzerland, hardly international centers of music-making.
Now he is conducting the London Philharmonic on a world tour, ending with concerts on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall and on Thursday at Carnegie Hall.
And this fall he will lead the orchestra into a much-prized residency at the Royal Festival Hall in London's South Bank Center.


The Executive Computer; Picking the Right Microprocessor Grows More Complex
The world of microprocessors has changed dramatically, moving from a linear path based on power to a diversity of specialized chips.
As chips advance along many different paths simultaneously, the resulting hubbub could leave customers immersed in a great deal of confusion.
The traditional progression of microprocessing power, from 8086 to 80286 to 80386 to 80486 and beyond, is no longer quite so easy to predict now that the "me too" era is ending.


Hurry Sundown


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Incidents of Bias Create Concern Among Students
Though officials at Rutgers University here say their battle against bigotry on campus has been continuing and persistent, several incidents of prejudice that have occurred in recent weeks on campus have left some students skeptical and angry.
On a study hall wall graffiti including racial slurs were reported within days of the discovery of a similar message in a residence hall.
The graffiti were removed by the university.
In the same week, an anonymous personal advertisement in the classified ad section of a campus newspaper, The Livingston Medium, spoke rudely about blacks.


POSTING: Expansion in Harlem; Dance Theater Back From the Brink
When the Dance Theater of Harlem was forced to shorten its 1990 season two years ago after out-of-town engagements fell through, fans fretted about the fate of the ballet company founded in a Harlem church basement in 1969.
But one sign that the company, which performs throughout the world, has regained its financial feet is the $6 million building expansion and renovation project it is scheduled to begin in June.


MEMO TO THE DEMOCRATS
Blumenthal and Chace advise the Democrats to "propose a suspension of economic aid to any nation that refuses to sign the nonproliferation treaty," since this would "make it easier to isolate 'crazy states' like Iraq from the start." But crazy states like Iraq -- and Iran, Lybia and Syria -- have been signatories of the nonproliferation treaty for two decades.
So much for that.
My own memo to the Democrats could fit on a Post-it note: If you want to be entrusted with the new world order, you had best demonstrate an understanding of the old one.
M.
A.
DOBSON
Newport, R.I.


Making a Difference; Mr. Business At the U.N.
MAurice F. Strong, Secretary General for the upcoming United Nations conference on environment and development, does not often let the bureaucracy get in his way.
"He puts his projects into action and files the paperwork later," said Monique McClellan, a conference spokeswoman.
Indeed, Mr.
Strong has taken the business skills he honed as head of several major Canadian companies and applied them to the conference, making sure it will be well run and well funded.
The conference, also called the Earth Summit, will be held in Rio de Janeiro in June.
Its mandate is to find ways to counter global pollution and poverty.


DANCE
March 17 to 29
MERCE CUNNINGHAM DANCE COMPANY, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Cunningham celebrates 50 years of making dances that are as simple and complex as seashells.
There will be three premieres, including "Beach Birds," a dance influenced by James Joyce and set to music by John Cage.
There is also "Loosestrife," named after a wildflower and set to music by Michael Pugliese; "Change of Address," danced to music by Walter Zimmerman, and a revival of "Channels/Inserts." Performances are at 7:30 opening night and then Tuesday to Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets range from $15 to $35.
Information: (212) 581-7907.
April 7 to 18


Kearny, a Place Full of Memories
The March 1 article on Kearny ("Recalling Bonnie Times in a Little Scotland by the Passaic") brought up a host of memories.
Kearny is the place where I was born and grew up, and it will always have a warm spot in me.
My mother was born in Scotland in a small town near Edinburgh.
When we were children, she sang the old Scottish songs to us, and I still remember them -- "Bonnie Doon," "Flow Gently, Sweet Afton" and "Comin' Through the Rye," to name a few.
She became a member of Clan Campbell, one of the many Scottish groups around town.


ON THE STREET
Here is a sampling of fairs, festivals and parades that are planned in New York City in the spring.
Many dates and times are tentative, since these events require permits from the Mayor's Office.
Information was gathered from festival sponsors as well as the Community Assistance Unit at the Mayor's Office.
Major holiday parades are listed on page 26.
Today


Super Tuesday II: High Stakes Again
The Democratic Presidential campaign focused on the critical primaries of the industrial Midwest coming Tuesday, with Bill Clinton running strongly in Illinois but with Paul E. Tsongas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. trying to trip him in the more uncertain political terrain of Michigan.


CAMPUS LIFE: Denver; A Composer's Music Is a Message to Students
To the music world, David Amram is a prolific American composer, but to music and dance students at the University of Denver here, he is known as the encourager in residence.
Mr.
Amram, whose work ranges from orchestral music and jazz to operas and film scores, is spending this year in Denver as a visiting professor and the recipient of the university's Leo Block Chair in the Humanities.
In addition to classwork and public performances, Mr.
Amram presented his Shakespearean opera "Twelfth Night" recently in tribute to the late Joseph Papp, the theater impresario, who wrote the libretto to the opera.


'I Feel Terrific'


A Symphony In the News Is the News
A little time has passed since John Corigliano's First Symphony appeared at the New York Philharmonic's concerts.
Those performances, conducted in January by Leonard Slatkin, were part of an event that went beyond the merely musical.
Passions were aroused, political and sociological nerve endings sharpened.
A calmer look is in order.


With an N.C.A.A. Title in Hand, Trapp Aims Higher
Ask James Trapp whether his chances of making the United States Olympic team are better in the 100 meters or 200 meters, and he says, "I think my chances are best in both."
That's spoken like a true sprinter.
But if you press him, the junior from Clemson University says: "I think the 200 is my best event. I run a fair 100 and a real good 400 meters, and the 200 is in between."


For Alan Menken, A Partnership Ends But the Song Plays On
Alan Menken is speaking of his principal songwriting partner, the lyricist Howard Ashman, who died a year ago.
"I can't say that it was a once-in-a-lifetime collaboration, because I have a long lifetime to go," Mr.
Menken reflects sadly.
"But I've never been in a room with a mind like that. I've never been in a room with someone who took my music and possessed it as his own the way Howard did."


Transit Strike Deadline Looms for Philadelphia


Where Diners Can Bask a Bit and Savor Fresh Air
MID-MARCH stirs the blood of serious cooks, just as the first day of spring training rejuvenates baseball fans who have muddled through the dark months listlessly watching sweaty indoor sports.
At this time of year the pipeline that delivers fresh produce shortens weekly, allowing products to arrive faster and fresher.
Farmers' markets explode with color: bright yellow peppers, pale green asparagus, glossy black eggplant, pink-red radishes.
Menus lighten and become more playful and iconographic.
New York City is not exactly Los Angeles or San Francisco in the outdoor dining department.
Mercurial weather and maddening congestion discourage that.
And even if we had more outdoor spots, early spring can still be chilly enough to turn your grilled tuna into salad fodder.
But during this transitional time of the year, one can still enjoy a glimmer of spring at various restaurants around New York City that have skylights, French doors that open to the street, atriums or expansive views.


MEMO TO THE DEMOCRATS
Sidney Bumenthal and James Chace's article urging Democrats not to cede the foreign policy field to President Bush was timely, but it neglected to mention the last two Administrations' decade-long appeasement policy toward Saddam Hussein that continued up to the eve of the Kuwait invasion ("Memo to the Democrats," Feb. 23).


POP
Today
ALLMAN BROTHERS BAND, Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, Manhattan.
The masters of Southern rock still meld blues, country, rhythm-and-blues, jazz, folk and hints of psychedelia into weary-but-unbowed songs and far-reaching jams.
March 15 at 8 P.M.
Also March 17, 18, 20, 21 and 22 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 496-7070.
March 24


Ms. Connelly, Teacher, Wed
Jennifer Kathleen Connelly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terrence R. Connelly of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Talcott Enders, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Enders of New York.
The Rev.
John W. Lennon, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Enders, 23 years old, is a preschool teacher at the Childrens' Learning Center in Stamford, Conn.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Connecticut College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a managing director of Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Mary Q. Connelly, is the marketing director of Sally Winsby Eldercare Management in New York.


Should the Sliding Door Become Stuck
STUBBORN sliding doors often need just minor adjustments to correct problems.
There are several ways to service the most popular styles, including patio doors.
Interior sliding doors like those across closet openings and between rooms are usually one of these three types:


On Tour With a Thoroughly Modern Beethoven
"AND now, boys and girls," said Daniel Warnaar, principal of the Dater Elementary School in Ramsey, "let's welcome one of the greatest musicians who ever lived." Da-da-da-DUM.
"Beethoven!"
Accompanied by applause, the elegant 19th-century composer with hisunruly dark hair strode pompously onto the stage of the auditorium and straight to the piano bench, where he proceeded to dazzle the youngsters with an excerpt from a stormy sonata.


The American Way
To the Editor:
I am a member of the demographic group John Milward refers to, and I take indignant exception to his premise.
For instance, not only am I as hip to "on" rappers and their work as anyone, I feel a great debt is owed them.
Rap artists have managed a long-overdue achievement -- the doing away with four cloying and anachronistic components of music as it was: melody (with its disturbing propensity to engender visceral response via some improbable progression, chord or key change), lyrics demonstrating minimal language skills (archaic), musical instruments (once thought indigenous to the art form) and eroticism of the incendiary-crescendo type.


Ahead of His Time


Preventing the Next Saddam Hussein
It's no secret that the nations now scrambling to destroy Iraq's nuclear program, including the U.S., helped supply Baghdad with the tools to build the bomb.
Legislation now before Congress could keep that from happening again.
And President Bush?
He's against it.
The legislation, co-sponsored by Howard Wolpe of Michigan and Edward Markey of Massachusetts, both House Democrats, puts Mr.
Bush's nonproliferation promises to the test.
Will he continue to permit dangerous exports or accept the need for tougher restraints?


Miss Jackson Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Jackson of Lawrenceville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katharine Townsend Jackson, to Charles A. Rogers Jr., the son of Abby L. Rogers of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Dr.
Charles A. Rogers of Victor, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Jackson is a client-relations manager at Copley Real Estate Advisors Boston and a graduate of Kenyon College.
Her father teaches American history at the Lawrenceville School.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Students Tee Off New Class Option For Golf Managers
When Matt Jester signed up for his college major, he needed to present an application form, his academic record -- and his golf handicap.
Mr.
Jester, a sophomore majoring in leisure studies, is one of the first 10 students in a new professional golf management program at Penn State University.
To qualify, he needed a handicap of eight or below.
Mr.
Jester's handicap is a one.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Tsongas Being Haunted By Memory of Dukakis
Standing between Paul E. Tsongas and the White House is not just Gov.
Bill Clinton or President Bush, but the ghost of Michael S. Dukakis.
Mr.
Tsongas jokes about the inevitable comparisons to the other Greek-American Presidential candidate from Massachusetts, the one who infuriated many Democrats four years ago for letting the White House slip beyond his reach.
But memories of Mr.
Dukakis haunt Mr.
Tsongas and his campaign.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York SENATE
1.
Taxes: Procedural vote to allow Senate consideration of a Republican tax plan.
Rejected 60 to 37, March 11.
2.
Taxes: Vote to kill an amendment that would strip a major provision from a Democratic tax plan - a $300 tax credit for children.
Approved 57 to 39, March 12.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Y
Lieberman (D)
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Y
Lautenberg(D)
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
N
Moynihan(D)
N
Y
KEY: Y = Yea; N = Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present HOUSE
1 Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill imposing conditions on the renewal of China's normal trade status Approved 357 to 61, March 11.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
2. Geidenson(D)
Y
3. DeLauro(D)
Y
4. Shays(R)
N
5. Franks(R)
Y
6. Johnson(R)
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews(D)
Y
2. Hughes(D)
Y
3. Pallone(D)
Y
4. Smith(R)
Y
5. Roukema(R)
Y
6. Dwyer(D)
Y
7. Rinaldo(R)
Y
8. Roe(D)
Y
9. Torricelli(D)
Y
10. Payne(D)
Y
11. Gallo(R)
Y
12. Zimmer(R)
Y
13. Saxton(R)
Y
14. Guarini(D)
Y
New York
1. Hochbruechner(D)
Y
2. Downey(D)
Y
3. Mrazek(D)
Y
4. Lent(R)
N
5. McGrath(R)
Y
6. Flake(D)
Y
7. Ackerman(D)
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
9. Manton(D)
Y
10. Schumer(D)
Y
11. Towns(D)
Y
12. Owens(D)
Y
13. Solarz(D)
Y
14. Molinari(R)
Y
15. Green(R)
Y
16. Rangel(D)
Y
17. Weiss(D)
Y
18. Serrano(D)
Y
19. Engel(D)
Y
20. Lowey(D)
Y
21. Fish(R)
Y
22. Gilman(R)
Y
23. McNulty(D)
Y
24. Solomon(R)
Y
25. Boehlert(R)
Y
26. Martin(R)
Y
27. Walsh(R)
Y
28. McHugh(D)
Y
29. Horton(R)
Y
30. Slaughter(D)
Y
31. Paxon (R)
Y
32. LaFalce(D)
Y
33. Nowak(D)
Y
34. Houghton(R)
Y
KEY: Y = Yea; N = Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Stella Flame, Designer, Wed
Stella Flame, a women's clothing designer and retailer, and Michael I. Somers, an investment banker, both in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Yakov Hilsenrath officiated at the Essex House.
The bride, 40 years old, graduated from New York University, from which she also received a master's degree in public administration.
She owns a boutique bearing her name in New York.
She is a daughter of Hanna and Saul Flame of Highland Park, N.J.
Her father is a real-estate developer.


Answering His Accuser
To the Editor:
Timothy Tung's letter (Jan. 26) makes several false accusations against me.
He accuses me of having used the names of a dozen well-known Chinese-American intellectuals (Timothy Tung included) without their consent to solicit donations for the Committee for the Promotion of Democracy in China.
This is false.
I have never used his or any other people's names to advertise for donations.
He says that after the Beijing massacre of June 4, 1989, I used that advertisement and those names to go to Hong Kong to solicit donations.
This is also false.
I went to Hong Kong not to solicit funds but to help in the work of rescuing the democratic activists in China who were trying to flee.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article about cable television last week rendered a comment from James P. Mooney, an industry spokesman, incorrectly.
Referring to demands that cable companies pay networks for the right to retransmit programs, he said, "I suppose we'd have to concede there's a certain free-market rationale toward that, because if we're making a buck retransmitting something that's theirs, I guess you could come up with a rationale that says you ought to at least give them some compensation."


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Students Tee Off New Class Option For Golf Managers
When Matt Jester signed up for his college major, he needed to present an application form, his academic record -- and his golf handicap.
Mr.
Jester, a sophomore majoring in leisure studies, is one of the first 10 students in a new professional golf management program at Penn State University.
To qualify, he needed a handicap of eight or below.
Mr.
Jester's handicap is a one.


Emily Sherman To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Sherman of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Emily Ann Sherman, and Julian Michael Marynczak, a son of Veronica Marynczak of Almond, Wis., and the late John Marynczak.
Ms.
Sherman, 29 years old, is a freelance script supervisor and choreographer.
She graduated from Antioch College and received an advanced dance and choreography certificate from the Dance-Theater School of Amsterdam.
Her father is the senior vice president of corporate communications at Paramount Communications in New York.
Her mother, Bobbi Sherman, is a freelance script supervisor and promotional video producer.


Lissa P. Cohen Plans to Wed
Lissa Paula Cohen, a teacher in Olney, Md., and Andrew Frazier Shorr, a public-health and medical student, are engaged to be married in September.
Ms.
Cohen, 28 years old, teaches first grade at the Brooke Grove Elementary School and is a director of summer day camps for the Jewish Community Center of Greater Washington in Rockville, Md.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is a daughter of Stanley M. Cohen of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Barbara Abrams Cohen, and a stepdaughter of Suzanne B. Ducat.
Her father is the regulations quality officer of the Federal Department of Education.
Her stepmother is a producer for the Public Broadcasting Service and a senior producer at WETA-TV in Washington.


Keeping in Step With St. Patrick's Day
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY, which falls on Tuesday, has become the occasion for some rather sophisticated food in recent years.
Irish chefs have rediscovered and refined their country's traditional dishes; the cottage industries -- cheese, honey, exotic seaweeds, trout farms -- have been revived, and the result is some of the most interesting new cooking around.
One young Irish chef, James O'Shea, who is owner of the West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn., often serves dishes in his restaurant that, unknown to his customers, have Irish origins.
"Pies are as common in Ireland as pates in France," he said.
"In almost any food shop, you will find an enormous selection to take home -- both in gourmet form and in fat-food form." One of the most popular items on his current menu is a pie made with goat cheese and leeks and cooked in a crust made with bread crumbs.
It is known in Ireland as curd pie.


Results Plus
SKIING Mahrer Wins Downhill in Aspen Daniel Mahrer of Switzerland capped a brilliant two weeks of racing yesterday by capturing the final men's World Cup downhill ski race this season, in Aspen, Colo.
Mahrer, with two victories and a second-place finish in the three downhills held this month, fought his way through tight turns on the bottom half of the course and beat his teammate William Besse by 33 one-hundredths of a second.
The 30-year-old Mahrer was timed in 1 minute 41.91 seconds.(AP)


William Finkelstein Loves a Good Divorce
The year was 1985.
A 33-year old novice attorney and aspiring writer -- named William M. Finkelstein was coming to grips with practicing law in New York.
As befit a first-year lawyer, he handled mainly routine matters: wills, estates, research for more experienced litigators, low-profile divorce cases.
Then one day, analyzing yet another marriage dissolution, he came to a startling conclusion: he had a rare chance to change the very nature of New York State divorce law.
"It involved something called 'The Theory of Negative Contribution,' " recalls Mr.
Finkelstein.
An arcane argument employed in nasty fights over the distribution of marital assets, this theory had been rejected in every case.
"But I was convinced, in my freshman folly, that I had found an exception." He was, he says, ready to take it to the State Supreme Court, if necessary.
To Albany!


Boy's Dream Becomes Man's Pain
FOR five months Sylvester Williams has lived with four other inmates in a dormitory room at the Connecticut Correctional Center on Whalley Avenue in New Haven.
As the oldest in the room, he said, he often counsels the others, telling them that selling or using drugs is not the answer.
A good, solid education, he reminds them, is the only thing that matters.
"But then," he said, "they look at me as if to say: 'Hey, look at what you had, and look at you now. So who are you to be talking anyway?' "
Mr.
Williams, 34 years old, a former all-American basketball player and starting forward with the New York Knicks, is now serving three and a half years for second-degree assault on his girlfriend.
He has spent the past two years in and out of jail and in a drug rehabilitation program.
He was stabbed during an argument with his girlfriend in November and is confined temporarily to a wheelchair as a result of surgical complications following the incident. 'Baby in a Man's Body'
In a recent interview at the prison Mr.
Williams described his life as a kaleidoscope of triumphs and shattered dreams.
The man known to his fans as Sly Williams grew up in New Haven poised to play basketball, he said, with little interest in his education or in confronting his personal problems.
He attributed his descent to his inability to escape self-inflicted burdens and a lack of childhood role models.


BICYCLING
Here is a sampling of spring bicycle tours and races, all of them open to the public, offered around New York City.
Most groups require that riders wear helmets.
Today
NEW YORK CITY SPRING RACING SERIES, Central Park.
An 18-mile race with medals awarded to the first five finishers.
Sponsored by the Metropolitan Cycling Association.
Starts at 6:30 A.M.; registration closes at 6:15 A.M. in the Ramble Parking Lot, Park Drive East at 79th Street.
Also on March 22, same time, and March 29 at 6:15 A.M.
Fee: $7.
Information: (212) 315-0706.
"SIBA SEA BREEZE," St.
George, Stapleton and South Beach in Staten Island.
A brisk 25- to 35-mile ride along the northern and eastern shores of the borough, from St.
George to Great Kills Park.
Sponsored by the Staten Island Bicycling Association.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. on the steps of Borough Hall in St.
George.
Free.
Information: (718) 273-0805.
ERIN GO BIKE, Fresh Meadows, Queens.
A moderately hilly 40-mile ride to a mystery location on Long Island.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at Cunningham Park, Union Turnpike at 196th Place, Fresh Meadows.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
March 21
DAM AND DOUBLE DAM, Woodlawn, the Bronx.
A 35-mile trip through Westchester County along greenway routes and around reservoirs.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Free.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at Woodlawn Cemetery, at Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues.
Return trip via Metro-North; bicycle pass required for the train (passes are sold at Grand Central Terminal, window 27, for $5).
Information: (212) 932-2300.
March 22
ST.
PATRICK'S TEA-TOTALERS RIDE, north shore of Staten Island.
A moderately paced 16-mile ride along the northern shore of the borough.
A snack of tea and Irish soda bread will follow.
Sponsored by the Staten Island Bicycle Association.
Meets on March 22 at 10 A.M. at the bridge near the intersection of Martling Avenue and Clove Road, West Brighton.
Free.
Information: (718) 273-0805.
March 28
STATEN ISLAND, St.
George to Tottenville.
A flat 40-mile ride circumnavigating the borough.
Sponsored by the Transportation Alternatives Tour Club.
Meets at 9 A.M. at the South Ferry Terminal, Battery Park, lower Manhattan.
Also April 18, same time.
Free.
Information: (212) 777-3172.
March 29
JONES BEACH RIDE, Wantagh, L.I.
A leisurely 50-mile ride over mostly flat terrain to Jones Beach.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at Cunningham Park, Union Turnpike at 196th Place, Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
April 4
QUEENS FOR A DAY, a 35-mile tour of New York's largest borough.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at Queens Borough Hall, Queens Boulevard at Union Turnpike, Rego Park.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
April 5
NEW YORK CITY SPRING RACING SERIES, Prospect Park, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
A 22-mile race, with medals awarded to the first five finishers.
Sponsored by the Metropolitan Cycling Association.
Starts at 6:30 A.M.; registration is at 6:15 A.M. at the Grecian Temple in Prospect Park, adjacent to Parkside Avenue.
Also April 12, 19 and 26; same times.
Fee: $7.
Information: (212) 315-0706.
April 18
BROOKLYN-QUEENS GREENWAY, a 35-mile ride along the path of a proposed greenway.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Grand Army Plaza Entrance to Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Eastern Parkway, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
April 19
GATEWAY TO BIRDLAND, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A 50-mile ride through the Gateway National Recreation Area, with stops at the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, Fort Tilden and Floyd Bennett Field.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9 A.M. at the Grand Army Plaza entrance to Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Eastern Parkway, Park Slope.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
SANDS POINT RESERVE, Fresh Meadows, Queens.
A mostly flat 30-mile ride to the castle built in 1902 by the railroad tycoon Howard Gould.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at Cunningham Park, Union Turnpike at 196th Place, Fresh Meadows.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
April 25
BIRDING BY BIKE, Bloomfield, S.I.
A leisurely 18-mile ride along the Arthur Kill with stops to watch birds.
Sponsored by the Staten Island Bicycle Association.
Meets at 8:30 A.M. at the bridge near the intersection of Martling Avenue and Clove Road.
Free.
Information: (718) 273-0805.
April 26
DESTINATION: CONEY, Brooklyn.
A flat, scenic 25-mile ride through Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 9:45 A.M. at the parking area near the south entrance to City Hall, Broadway at Park Place, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
MORGAN'S ISLAND, Fresh Meadows, Queens.
A 45-mile, moderately hilly ride via landfill isthmus to what used to be J. P. Morgan's personal island.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meets at 8:45 A.M. at Cunningham Park, Union Turnpike at 196th Place, Fresh Meadows.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
May 3
19th ANNUAL UNITED CEREBRAL PALSY BIKE-A-THON, a ride of up to 35 miles to raise money for United Cerebral Palsy in these parks: Central Park, Manhattan; Prospect Park, Brooklyn; Silver Lake, Staten Island, and Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Bikers enlist sponsors to contribute varying amounts of money for each mile cycled.
Registration starts at 8 A.M.
Free.
Registration and information: (212) 603-9100.
May 10
ANNUAL GREAT FIVE-BOROUGH BIKE TOUR, a 42-mile tour through Manhattan, the Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island, on a network of city streets closed to traffic.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bicycle Club.
Meet at 7:30 A.M. in Battery Park.
Fee: $20.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
May 31
ALICE AUSTEN BIKE TOUR AND TEA, Fort Wadsworth, S.I.
A moderately paced 20-mile ride past places that Alice Austen, a 19th-century photographer, may have frequented in her travels.
Sponsored jointly by the Staten Island Bicycle Association and Friends of the Alice Austen House.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Alice Austen House, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Free.
Information: (718) 273-0805.


Lynn Looks for a New Conquest
Two weeks ago Mike Lynn ended his 18-year relationship with the Minnesota Vikings by selling his 10 percent share in the team to a group headed by the team's president, Roger Headrick.
Two options now open to Lynn include purchasing a controlling interest in the New England Patroits or trying to land an expansion franchise for Memphis, an effort that he helped spearhead in the early 1960's.
Lynn still owns a home in Memphis.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Weston
"WESTON is the ultimate hometown," said Patricia Heifetz, who recently sold The Weston Forum, a weekly newspaper she started in 1970.
Nestled in the hills of Connecticut's Fairfield County, just north of Westport, the town has two-acre zoning, four historic districts, two steepled churches and 3,500 acres of open space.


For the Age When You Need No Wings To Fly
FOR children, spring is a time of soaring.
There are the birds, of course, and baseballs, soccer balls and tennis balls.
But what also soar are children's spirits, and to help keep them happily aloft a whole high-flying array of cultural activities is available.
This month, for example, the Queens Symphony Orchestra is presenting a concert with a piano duo and a violin solo just for families, and the Garibaldi-Meucci Museum on Staten Island is offering Italian lessons for youngsters.
May echoes with poetry.
At City College's Aaron Davis Hall in Harlem, kindergartners to high schoolers will recite, sing and dance their way through Langston Hughes's works.
And in the same hall in the same month, more young voices will be heard in an annual poetry festival featuring works by school-age children.
Also in May, a reading of poems and prose, "For Children, by Children," at the Manhattan Theater Club will engage young literati.
ALL AGES March
"GREETINGS FROM CONEY ISLAND," the Big Apple Circus's most recent show on tour, featuring, among others, a Russian aerialist, the Flying Vazquezes (Mexican trapeze artists), and elephants, clowns and horses.
March 24 to April 5 in Cunningham Park, intersection of Union Turnpike and Francis Lewis Boulevard, Fresh Meadows, Queens; May 14 to 25 in Great Kills National Recreation Area, off Hylan Boulevard, Great Kills, S.I.; May 28 to June 3, Prospect Park, near Wollman Rink, Ocean and Parkside Avenues entrance, Flatbush, Brooklyn; June 5 to 9, Van Cortlandt Park, 242d Street and Broadway entrance, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Tickets, $9 to $20.
Information and show times: (212) 268-0055.
RINGLING BROTHERS AND BARNUM &amp; BAILEY CIRCUS, the new, 122d edition featuring Mongolian performing artists, like Kadyr Khan and his horsemen brigade; female contortionists; Amarjargal, who twirls iron weights, and the Mongolian National Folk Dance Troupe.
From March 26 to May 3 at Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue (between 31st and 33d Streets), Manhattan.
Tickets, $8.50 to $27.50.
Information and show times: (212) 307-7171 or (212) 465-6741.
"FAMILY DAY," a Queens Symphony Orchestra event, with a violin solo; a piano duo playing "Carnival of the Animals" (and narrated by Robert Sherman of WQXR), and a question-and-answer session.
On March 22, 2 P.M., at the Colden Center for the Performing Arts, Queens College, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard, Flushing.
Tickets: $12 to $25; $5 for children 13 and under.
Information: (718) 275-5000.
April
"CREATE-A-BUS," a drop-in workshop where children and adults will use a variety of materials and cardboard cartons to design and decorate a bus or surface vehicle of their choice; led by Pablo Pantoja, a model maker.
April 11 from noon to 3 P.M. at the New York Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for children.
Information: (718) 330-3060.
SHAD BAKE, a free spring celebration, with a demonstration of shad cooking on planks over charcoal fires (with tastings); with 12 organizations offering workshops and talks on the fish, folk-singing groups and a puppet show.
Food, T-shirts and refreshments for sale.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
April 12 from noon to 4 P.M. at Inwood Hill Park, 218th Street and Indian Road, upper Manhattan.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
EASTER PARADES, with a participatory parade (children and adults should wear homemade bonnets), prizes for original hats, a puppet show, egg hunt and egg roll, arts and crafts and games like Bunny Says (like Simon Says).
Sponsored by the New York City Department of Recreation and Parks.
On April 14, 15 and 21 from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Passerelle Building (near the United States Tennis Center), Queens.
Admission: $1.
Information: (718) 699-4243 and (718) 520-5920.
"THE POLYPOPAGON DANCE," a dance that requires audience participation, and illustrates how geometric theories influence sculpture.
April 26 at 3 P.M., Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St.
Marks Avenue, Crown Heights.
Admission, $3.
Information: (718) 735-4400.
May
GUIDED FOREST TOURS, a visit to the New York Botanical Garden's 40-acre forest to see boulders striated 15,000 years ago by glaciers, 200-year-old oak and hemlock trees and the plant life that abounds in the Bronx.
Saturday, Sunday and holiday Mondays at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M. and Thursday at 2 P.M.
Meet at the garden's Visitor Information desk, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 220-8747.
"FRANKLIN THE WIZARD," a puppet show about a crystal ball, a wizard, a sweet young boy and a dragon who battle a one-eyed rock and an evil eye.
With original music.
Presented by the Puppet Company, of New York.
May 2 and 3, 10:30 A.M. and noon, at the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $3.50.
Reservations: (212) 369-8890.
NINTH ANNUAL SPRING FAIR, sponsored by the Playground Project and the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation; featuring a petting zoo (with a pig, rabbit, goat, chicken, duck and lamb), pony rides, games (a maze, lollipop toss, giant bubbles, fishing, face painting) and crafts.
Refreshments are sold.
Admission, free.
May 2 (rain date May 3) from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the 91st Street playground, Riverside Park, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 580-7201.
MEADOWFAIR, an outdoor festival with a magic theme, featuring performances by the singer Joanie Bartels and Jennifer, a magician; tricks; workshops with magic paraphernalia; rides; international food, and games.
May 2 from noon to 5 P.M. (rain date May 3) at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Admission to be announced.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"FARMYARD FROLICS," featuring a merry-go-round and other rides, games, prizes, a petting zoo, clowns and food.
Noon to 6 P.M. on May 9 and 10 at the Queens County Farm Museum, 73-50 Little Neck Parkway, Floral Park.
Admission and parking, free.
Food, $2 to $5.
Tickets to events, $1 to $2.
Information: (718) 347-FARM.
"ARTISTS' BOAT REGATTA," part of Prospect Park's spring and summer art exhibitions at the Boathouse and Lullwater, where viewers can see unusual boats, made by artists, floating on the water.
May 16 from noon to 5 P.M. at the Boathouse (where there will also be an exhibition of boats designed by artists), Lincoln Road entrance, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 788-0055.
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.
PARADE, sponsored by the 369th Veterans Association -- a k a the Harlem Hellfighters.
May 17 from 1 to 3:45 P.M. from 44th to 86th Street on Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 566-2506.
June
"WONDER WATER," a new ongoing indoor exhibition about the biological, physical and chemical properties of water; with multi-cultural references to how water is carried around the world; science experiments, and a boat ride on a brook.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Hours: Wednesday to Friday, 1 to 5 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"THE GREAT OUTDOOR PERFORMANCE," an end-of-season celebration with music, dance, dramatic performances in an amphitheater and an art exhibition in a sculpture garden.
With free refreshments.
Free.
June 21 at 2 P.M. at Henry Street Settlement, 466 Grand Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $3; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 598-0400.
YOUTH FITNESS 1 MILER, a Junior Road Runners Club race for ages 2 to 17, with ribbons for everyone.
Check in by 7:30 A.M. on day of race, June 21.
Registration fee: $2 in advance or $3 on the day.
Two-year-olds run one block; 3- and 4-year-olds run two blocks; 5- and 6-year-olds run a quarter-mile, and older children run a mile.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club.
Starts at 8:30 A.M., at 90th Street and Fifth Avenue, Central Park, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 860-4455. 3 AND UP March
"GREAT STUFF," a new exhibition of odds and ends -- erasers, yo-yos, toy taxicabs, socks, Barbie dolls -- that children and adults have collected, with interactive displays.
Through June 1993.
At the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Admission: $4.
Hours: Monday, Wednesday to Friday, 1 to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
"WIND IN THE WILLOWS," a production by the Alliance Theater Company of Atlanta, presents the well-known story of Mole, Rat, Toad and Badger, who, while they explore the English countryside, teach lessons about friendship.
For children 4 and up.
March 21 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Tickets: $12; $7 for children 12 and under.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
"FIRST DAY OF SPRING NATURE WALK," a search in Prospect Park for red-winged blackbirds, redbud blossoms and turtles warming themselves in the sun; sponsored by the Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment and led by a naturalist.
March 21 from 9 to 11:30 A.M., meet at Grand Army Plaza entrance, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Fee: $6; $3 for children under 12.
Information: (718) 788-8549.
"ALICE IN WONDERLAND INTERPRETED," a workshop at which children will hear selections from "Alice in Wonderland" read in English and Spanish.
The Sir John Tenniel illustrations will be used as inspiration for participants to draw their favorite character.
In conjunction with the "Liliana Porter: Fragments of the Journey" show, with works by the Argentine artist (who used the classic story as a reference in her art).
March 22 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania.
Free. (Museum admission is also free on Sundays.) Information: (212) 681-6000.
April
ISAMU NOGUCHI GARDEN MUSEUM, reopening April 1.
Featuring works by the Japanese-American sculptor in 12 indoor galleries and an outdoor garden.
Hours: Wednesday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. (through November).
The museum is at 32-37 Vernon Boulevard, Long Island City, Queens.
Admission: $4 ($2 for children, students and the elderly).
Information: (718) 721-1932.
"THE MIRACLE PLAY OF NOAH AND THE ARK," a medieval mystery play of the biblical story adapted for children, with everyone in the audience being able to play a part.
On April 18, 1 P.M., at the Romanesque Chapel, the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, Manhattan.
Admission, $6; children under 12 free.
Information: (212) 923-3700, extension 159.
"BEARS," a program at the Bronx Zoo to teach children ages 4 to 6 (parents are urged not to participate) how brown-bears raise their cubs, what makes polar bears such good swimmers and how some bears can sleep through the winter without eating.
With a visit to the bears and a chance to make teddy bears and a bear snack of honey, bread, jam and milk.
On April 25 from 10:30 A.M. to noon.
Fee: $19.
At the zoo, Fordham Road and the Bronx River Parkway, Fordham.
Reservations: (212) 367-1010.
"PIANO PIANO PIANO," three piano teachers who will perform solos, duets and trios from classic children's repertory.
For children ages 4 and up.
On April 26 at 2 P.M., the Henry Street Settlement Music School, 466 Grand Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $3; $2.50 for children.
Reservations: (212) 598-0400.
May
"NATIONAL ASTRONOMY DAY," with the theme "Weather and Climate," teaches children ages 3 to 6 how to make such things as satellites in workshops, and about dew points, cloud formations and tornadoes in demonstrations.
May 2 until 5:45 P.M., following the 10:30 A.M. screening in the Sky Theater of "Wonderful Sky," which features Sesame Street Muppets and explores things to look for in the day and night sky, from rainbows to stars.
At the Hayden Planetarium-American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Tickets to the fair and the film: $5; $2.50 for children 2 to 12.
Information: (212) 769-5900.
"TIKKI TIKKI TEMBO," a Chinese fable with music and a performance by the Hudson Vagabond Puppets; with an introduction to woodwind instruments.
Presented by the Bronx Arts Ensemble on May 3 at 2 P.M. at the Benjamin Neuwirth Auditorium, Riverdale Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., 5625 Arlington Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Tickets: $6.
Information: (212) 601-7399 or (212) 549-1899.
"THE MONKEY KING," a performance by the Shanghai Rod Puppet Theater, for children 4 and up, about the fable in which a monkey tries to protect his kind-hearted master from forest demons.
May 16 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Tickets: $12; $7 for children 12 and under.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
GARDENING AND SHEEPSHEARING, a family "You Gotta Have Park" program with plantings and demonstrations of sheepshearing.
On May 16 at 10 A.M.
Free.
At Lefferts Homestead, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue and Empire Boulevard entrance, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Information: (718) 965-8950.
"CHILD'S PLAY/FISH PLAY," a workshop in which toddlers and infants interact with small fish and invertebrates in Discovery Cove; with play-related games (using puzzles, books and a sandbox).
May 20 from 10:30 to 11:30 A.M. at the New York Aquarium, West Eighth Street and Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Fee: $14.75 for an adult and child together.
Reservations: (718) 265-3400.
June
PONY RIDES, for younger children, five-minute rides around a ring, all month. (Horseback riding on trails also available for teen-agers and adults.) At the Van Cortlandt Riding Center, Van Cortlandt Park, Broadway and Mosholu Avenue entrance, the Bronx.
Fee: $2 for pony rides; trail rides, $15 an hour on weekdays and $18 an hour on the weekends.
Hours: 8:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M. daily.
Information: (212) 543-4433.
"URBAN LOG CABIN," a yearlong exhibition, starting June 2, of a scale model of 97 Orchard Street, furnished and "inhabited," depicting life in a tenement in 1870 and in 1915, after the introduction of plumbing; possibly the first tenement dollhouse in America.
At the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
Free.
Hours: Tuesday to Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
MAGIC SHOW, with the magician Jean Maljean, a k a Moose, a circus ringmaster; with audience participation.
June 14, 2:30 P.M. at the Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Free with museum admission: $2; $1 for children 5 to 12.
Information: (718) 592-9700.
PUG DOG DAY, with the Pug Dog Club of Greater New York, featuring a grand march and contests and demonstrations with the dogs dressed in costume.
June 20 at 10 A.M.
Admission: $5 (includes museum admission).
At the Alice Austen House, 2 Hyland Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Information: (718) 816-4506. 5 AND UP March
GALLERY TALKS, guided tours of exhibitions for children, led by a museum educator.
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from 11 A.M. to noon.
At El Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $2; children, free.
Reservations: (212) 831-7272.
"TWO FOR TOPIARY," a family program to learn about topiary; each child and adult pair will make a stuffed topiary using preshaped forms and English ivy.
Take scissors and a box.
March 15 from 1 to 3 P.M. at the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Fee: $26 a pair.
Reservations: (212) 220-8982.
"STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN," a program where children 6 and up and adults can learn about the ins and outs and ups and downs of a staircase.
Led by a museum staff member, participants will tour a creaky central staircase and find out how it stands up; individual model staircases will also be designed.
March 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Materials fee: $1.
Admission: $2.50; $1 for children.
Reservations: (718) 624-0890.
April
"OH STARRY STARRY NIGHT," an Urban Park Rangers program where participants can scan the night sky for the Big Dipper, the North Star and other celestial beings.
April 4 at 7:30 P.M. at Van Cortlandt Park, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Meet at the Visitors Center, south end of the Parade Ground, next to the Van Cortlandt House, 242d Street.
Free.
Information: (212) 430-1832.
"LIVING MUSIC EXPO," part of the Family Fun series, featuring five musical interactive environments (with slides, video, live demonstrations) and a jazz concert.
Produced by 651, a nonprofit theatrical group affiliated with the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
On April 4 at 2 and 4 P.M. at the academy, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Tickets: $12; $7 for children.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
BENNINGTON MARIONETTES, in conjunction with the Little Orchestra Society's "Happy Concerts for Young People," will present a program using movable scenery, special lighting effects, large puppets and prestidigitation to create a carnival atmosphere set to Stravinsky's "Petrouchka." April 11 at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M., Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets: $15 to $28.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
"WHY IS THIS NIGHT DIFFERENT FROM ALL THE OTHER NIGHTS?," a program for children 5 to 7 that deals with Passover, which begins on April 18, through storytelling, singing and an art project.
April 12 at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 399-3368.
BRONX BIATHLON, a Big Apple Triathlon Club event: run 3 miles, bike 20 miles and run 3 miles.
April 26 from 8 to 10:30 A.M., Orchard Beach (parking lot), Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 289-4113.
May
"CHINA'S WILD WEST: EXPLORING EXOTIC BORDERLANDS," a photographic exhibition (through June) about the Chinese western frontier, with a workshop for children ages 5 to 7 to learn about this remote region and its customs, religions and costumes.
Workshop: May 2 from 10:30 A.M. to noon.
China Institute in America, 125 East 65th Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $3.
Information: (212) 744-8181.
"FOREVER WILD: THE ADIRONDACK EXPERIENCE,"an exhibition celebrating the centennial of Adirondack State Park, featuring paintings by Hudson River School artists; photography; birchbark chairs, tables and sideboards in the Adirondack style; handcrafted items like snowshoes and scythes; artwork documenting the architecture and social life of the Adirondack resorts, and an Adirondack guide boat.
Organized by the Katonah Museum of Art.
On view May 6 to July 12 at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Hours: Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursday from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $4.50; $1 for children.
Information: (212) 873-3400.
"FOR CHILDREN, BY CHILDREN," readings by New York City public-school children ages 6 to 12 of their poems and prose.
With a reading also by Katherine Paterson, a Newbery Medal-winning author and Jon Scieszka, an author and teacher.
May 9 at 11 A.M. at the Manhattan Theater Club, 131 West 55th Street.
Tickets: $8; $2 for children.
Information: (212) 645-0905.
"LANGSTON HUGHES FESTIVAL," with recitations and dancing and singing of the poet's work, by public-school children from kindergarten to high school.
May 11 from 10 A.M. to noon.
At Davis Hall, City College of New York, 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 650-5408.
FUN RUN, a run or walking race on a two-mile course, for children and adults; sponsored by New York-based Association for Children with Retarded Mental Development.
May 16 from 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. at Clove Lakes Park, 1150 Clove Road, Sunnyside, S.I.
Free.
Information: (718) 390-8000.
June
"MORNING IN THE MARSH," a family workshop to explore nature's nursery, by collecting and viewing plankton, working with microscopes and seining for shrimps, crabs and fish.
At the New York Aquarium, West Eighth Street and Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
June 6 from 9 to 11 A.M.
Fee: $14.
Reservations: (718) 265-3400.
"THE GREAT DINOSAUR MYSTERY," a musical revue with hand and giant puppets about the extinct beasts; presented by Dinorock Productions (two puppeteers and musicians).
June 6 at 1:30 P.M. at La Guardia Theater, La Guardia Community College, 31-10 Thomson Avenue, Long Island City, Queens.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (718) 482-5151.
"BREAKFAST WITH THE ANIMALS," a family workshop where participants can assist with breakfast preparations and feedings with the animal keepers.
June 13 from 9 to 11 A.M. at the New York Aquarium, West Eighth Street and Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Fee: $18.50.
Reservations: (718) 265-3400.
"TIME, SPACE, MATERIAL: CHILDREN'S IMAGINATION," a Queens-based children's choir will present a program integrating voice, movement, poetry and art with a focus on "our connection to the world around us." June 21, 2:30 P.M. at the Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Free with museum admission: $2; $1 for children 5 to 12.
Information: (718) 592-9700. 7 AND UP March
"CHANGING FACES," an exhibition through October, featuring more than 350 artifacts and photographs detailing the history and development of Hollywood makeup and hair design, and including displays of makeup reconstructions, body suits, wigs and examples of makeup screen tests, which showed film directors and designers what makeup looked like on the screen.
At the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Admission: $5; $2.50 for children under 12 and students.
Tuesday to Friday from noon to 4 P.M., Saturday and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. (No strollers permitted.) Information: (718) 784-0077.
"ITALIAN IS FUN," Italian classes for children (who have a smattering of knowledge about the language) ages 7 to 10; sessions March 21 and 28, April 4, 11, 25, and May 2 and 9, 1 P.M.
At the Garibaldi-Meucci Museum, 420 Tompkins Avenue, Rosebank, S.I.
Fee: $25.
Information: (718) 442-1608.
"U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL FILM FESTIVAL," a program of films and documentaries about the environment (pollution, Chernobyl, acid rain, etc.); including guest speakers.
March 19 to 22 at the World Financial Center, Winter Garden, Activity Room, 225 Liberty Street, lower Manhattan.
Admission: $5.
Information and screening times: (212) 945-0505.
"NATURE'S SKYSCRAPERS," an Urban Park Rangers workshop, where the basics of tree identification are learned by walking through Owls Head Park in Brooklyn.
On March 21 at 2 P.M.
Meet at 67th Street and Colonial Road, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"CONCERTS FOR KIDS," a program focusing on the history and music of Sephardic Jews in Israel, featuring the Jerusalem Ethnic Contemporary Ensemble.
With audience participation.
March 22 at 1 P.M., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 362-8719.
April
"NEW YORK CITY HISTORY FAIR," the second annual event, part of National History Day, with the theme "Discovery, Encounter, Exchange in History: The Seeds of Change." Featuring students' performance and tabletop projects and historical papers.
Prizes awarded.
April 5, hours to be announced, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue, at 103d Street, Manhattan.
The fair is free with museum admission: $5; $3 for children; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"QUEENS GREENBELT SERIES," two-hour exploratory walks and hikes through Queens's natural areas.
April 19, at 1 P.M., the tour starts at Utopia Parkway and Underhill Avenue, Flushing, and ends up at the Kissena Nature Center, Flushing.
Wear sturdy shoes and take something to drink.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
"POWER FOR THE PEOPLE," a tour for children 8 and up, with accompanying adult, of the New York Power Authority, Poletti Power Project, 20th Avenue and 31st Street, Astoria, Queens, a steam-electric power plant on the East River.
Sponsored by the New York Hall of Science.
April 22 from 2 to 3:30 P.M.
Fee: $12 for an adult-child pair.
Reservations: (718) 699-0005.
"ROBOT CARNIVAL," a series of short animated films on robots; part of Snug Harbor Cultural Center's Japanese animation film festival.
April 22 at Hylan Cinema, 2520 Hylan Boulevard, New Dorp, S.I. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (718) 448-2500.
"ELEPHANTS AND RHINOS: THE VANISHING GIANTS," a program at which children can meet an elephant keeper, who will demonstrate care techniques like nail trimming and bathing the elephants Tuss and Sammy; learn how people are helping to save these animals; inspect confiscated artifacts; measure a tusk or two, and meet Rapunzel, a Sumatran rhino.
April 26 from 9 to 11 A.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Fordham Road and Bronx River Parkway, Fordham.
Fee: $19; children, $13 for ages 7 and up.
Reservations: (212) 220-5131.
May
TENBROOKS MOLLY, a group that will perform country-and-western, bluegrass and rockabilly music; part of "Sunday Concerts at Central" sponsored by the Queens Council on the Arts.
May 3 at 2 P.M. at the Queens Borough Public Library, Central Library branch, 89-11 Merrick Boulevard, Jamaica.
Free.
Information: (718) 291-2787.
"LIFTOFF," a workshop for children ages 9 to 12 with accompanying adults to build and launch model rockets and take home their own; with instruction on physics and a rocket kit.
May 3 from 1 to 3 P.M. at the New York Hall of Science, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Fee: $16 for an adult-child pair; each additional person, $5.
Reservations: (718) 699-0005.
OPEN-HOUSE PERFORMANCE SERIES, featuring performances by the Dance Theater of Harlem School; Eddie Torres's Latin Dance Company; Batoto Yetu (an African dance company), and opera singers.
May 3 at 3 P.M. at the Dance Theater of Harlem, 466 West 152d Street.
Fee: $5; $2.50 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 967-3470.
ANNUAL SPRING POETRY FESTIVAL, at which elementary-school-age children will read their poetry onstage from 10 A.M. to noon, and high schoolers will read theirs from noon to 2 P.M.
Winners will be chosen for the best poems.
May 13 at Aaron Davis Hall, City College of New York, 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 650-6343.
June
"ROBOTS IN SPACE," featuring the "Star Wars" robots R2D2 and C-3PO, who act as hosts on a tour of the universe, explaining how satellites and probes help scientists understand the solar system.
June 6 at 11:45 A.M. at the Hayden Planetarium-American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $5; $2.50 for children.
Reservations: (212) 769-5900.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


No Generation Gap
To the Editor:
John Milward's article got me wondering what label a teen-ager like myself might be sentenced with.
My favorite radio station is cutting edge, and I have lately bought albums like Nirvana's "Nevermind" and B.A.D.'s "Globe." Yet I also watch MTV for the sole purpose of mocking my generation.
Rock-and-roll has become so image-conscious and synthesizer-decorated that it has forced me to become part of the blues revival.
While I do frequent record stores, it is mostly to complete my collections of Pink Floyd and Neil Young.


C. K. Tahbaz Weds Ms. Morgenstein
Leah Gallant Morgenstein, a third-year law student at American University, and Christopher K. Tahbaz, an associate at the New York law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, were married last evening in Washington.
Rabbi Richard S. Sternberger officiated at the ANA Hotel.
Mrs.
Tahbaz, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Robert S. and Susan W. Morgenstein of Chevy Chase, Md.
Her father is a pediatric dentist in Rockville, Md.
Her mother is the curator of special exhibitions at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.


Senator Kennedy and Lawyer In Washington Plan to Marry
Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Victoria Reggie, a Washington lawyer, plan to marry later this year, the Senator's office announced today.
Ms.
Reggie, 38 years old, is a partner in the Washington office of Keck, Mahin &amp; Cate.
She is a native of Crowley, La., where her father was a city judge.
She graduated from Newcomb College in New Orleans and from Tulane Law School.
Her parents are longtime friends of the Kennedy family.


Primaries Demonstrate Democracy at Work
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by "Primaries Are No Test of Character" by Walter F. Mondale (Op-Ed, Feb. 26), lamenting "the loss by party leaders of the power to screen and select Presidential nominees." The former Vice President says that while elections are the business of the people, party leaders should make nominations.


Taking Measures to Cope With Deer
DEER.
Deer.
Deer.
Many people love to see them.
Others consider them a liability.
Increasingly, opinions are changing, and much of it has to do with where and when the herds are seen.
If herds are seen in far off open spaces, gracefully bounding and leaping away, deer can be a thing of beauty.
But when deer are seen by the dozens in your garden, they are a downright nuisance.
Or worse, the herds may never be seen, but a trail of destruction can be left behind by their feeding, causing frustration and annoyance.


Metal Urges
Jewelry for men no longer consists of just cuff links, watches and bike chains for the kid down the block.
Sophisticated hardware completes a new male silhouette that's very strong, very sure and very sexy.


By Hong Kong Measure, 1997 Is Any Day Now
On an isolated concrete isle in Hong Kong's central business district stands the Bank of China building, a narrow, shimmering monolith that cuts a sharp, overbearing image against the sky as it looms over the nearby residence of the British-appointed Governor, Lord Wilson.
As Hong Kong's tallest building, it towers as a symbol of the political and economic strength of China in this capitalist territory.
Five years before the British hand over control in 1997, the Chinese have moved in.
When Lord Wilson was appointed Governor five years ago, the British were still clearly the ruling power.
Now their influence is fading, and they seem lame ducks.


POSTING: Urban Land Institute; A Capital Move for Rosan
The glacial pace of commercial construction in New York City has led Richard M. Rosan, a developer and former president of the Real Estate Board of New York, to leave the city and take a job in Washington as the executive vice president of the Urban Land Institute.
"My background is doing government and association work, as well as being a developer," Mr.
Rosan said.
"So, I figured this would be the sort of thing I would like doing."


Turning Back the Clock to Reinvent the Mall
Welcome to the latest edition of McArchitecture.
Like a slugger at the age of 35, or a dog at 9, a shopping mall has pretty much had it by age 25.
But with more malls passing this milestone and no money to build new ones, the name of the architectural game has become "asset enhancement." Translation: reinventing and repackaging old malls.
Across the country, from the Beaver Valley Mall outside Pittsburgh to the Beaverton Mall near Portland, Ore., first- and second-generation malls, built mostly in the 1950's and 60's, are being overhauled to compete with their descendants.
Most are receiving overblown cosmetic implants, but in some instances, mall makeovers are being viewed as an opportunity to right old wrongs.


Man Shoots Attacker, Then Tries to Save Him
After being stabbed at least four times in a deserted subway station in Manhattan early yesterday, a 43-year-old court officer emptied his revolver at the man who had attacked him and then dragged the near-dead assailant off to find him help, the police said.
"He told me not to leave him," the officer, Charles Falzon, said yesterday.
"He told me to help him. He looked scared. I asked him his name. He told me it was George. I said, 'O.K. George, I'm going to get you some help.' "


U.S. Sees Increasing Need for a Strike on Iraq
A year after the end of the Persian Gulf war, senior United States officials are expressing a rising feeling that military force must be used soon to eradicate Iraq's remaining capacity to make weapons of mass destruction.
In interviews this week, the officials emphasized that military action would be taken only with United Nations approval and would not be aimed at reopening the gulf war or deposing the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein.
The Central Intelligence Agency is already mounting an undercover effort to separate Mr.
Hussein from his power base in the military and the Baath Party, and speed his downfall.


Corrections
A record review on March 1 misidentified the singer of the role of Valentin in Andre Cluytens's first recording of Gounod's "Faust" for EMI.
It was the baritone Jean Borthayre.


Boulder Journal; Coach's Anti-Gay Stand Ignites Rage
The University of Colorado's president can walk down the street and scarcely be recognized.
The school's top professors are still more anonymous.
But the football coach, Bill McCartney, is famous.
As the man who has built a football powerhouse here, Mr.
McCartney's statements -- about sports or anything else -- have a wide and receptive audience.
Mr.
McCartney has lately been speaking about homosexuality, which he has called "an abomination." And he has lent his name to a group that seeks to limit gay rights.


Alison Roscoe To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome V. Roscoe of Pinehurst, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Alison Roscoe to David Leigh Hendrickson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland M. Hendrickson of Darien, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Roscoe, 37 years old and known as Alison, graduated from Mount Vernon College and is an account executive at Estee Lauder U.S.A. in New York.
Her father retired as a senior vice president at McCaffrey &amp; McCall, a New York advertising agency.


Noted with Pleasure
The Third Kiss
The novelist Italo Svevo, author of "The Confessions of Zeno," brought his great analytic skills to bear even on the writing of love letters.
This excerpt is from "Memoir of Italo Svevo" by his wife, Livia Veneziani Svevo (Marlboro Press, paper).


Wall Street; The Mystery Action in Continental Airlines
The rule is as old and bleak as a Dickens workhouse: If everything a bankrupt company owns is owed to its creditors, its owners are left with nothing.
Continental Airlines Holdings is bankrupt.
On Feb. 6, it proposed settling its debts through a plan that Standard &amp; Poor's said "would pay unsecured creditors with common stock and would eliminate the interests of preferred and common stockholders."


INSIDE
New Strain to U.S.-Israel Ties
Suggestions that Israel has been improperly re-exporting American arms technologies have further strained relations.
Page 10.
A Korean Nuclear Agreement
North and South Korea agreed to inspect each other's suspected nuclear weapons sites, but the accord lacks a precise timetable.
Page 3.
More Than a Tax Bill
The Senate version amounts to a Democratic statement of how society could be made fairer.
A comparison of the three tax proposals.
Page 30.
Former Hostage Reminisces
Seven years after Terry A. Anderson, chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press, was kidnapped in Lebanon, he reminisced.
Page 10.


Tommy Tune and 'Bye Bye Birdie'
TO find out why musical comedies were once a necessity of life for a lot of otherwise clear-headed people, go to the Shubert Theater in New Haven this week.
"Bye Bye Birdie," in a jumpy, expertly coordinated revival, will very likely prove the point.
The show is not musical theater art, but what a super artifact it is.
And though it is not one of the great musicals, it is a very good one, a very happy one.


Who Created Deficit In North Hempstead?
In "Assessing Blame for Nassau Deficit"  [ Feb. 2 ] , North Hempstead Town Supervisor Benjamin L. Zwirn is quoted as saying:
"'The county should have begun cutting expenses years ago. Instead there have been overly optimistic revenue estimates, and expenses just kept going up. There was nobody minding the store."'


Designers Demonstrate How the West Was Fun
FOR spring, fashion resembles an haute hoedown.
Many designers went Western or American Indian this season, including Isaac Mizrahi, Rifat Ozbek, Marc Jacobs for Perry Ellis, and Karl Lagerfeld for Fendi, possibly in subconscious communion with the film "Dances With Wolves." The buckskin, fringe and concha belts have been flying.
While prairie designer styles can be pricey -- and in their runway incarnations, a bit too costumey to wear east of Laredo -- a lot of smaller manufacturers have picked up the trail.


Hillary Barnett, Buyer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Barnett of Mystic Pointe, North Miami Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hillary Barnett, to Victor Bitar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Georges Bitar of Beirut.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barnett, 30 years old, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan and is a buyer for Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her father retired as an executive sales manager for the Equitable Bag Company, a shopping bag manufacturer in New York.


Primaries Demonstrate Democracy at Work; Reject Elitism
To the Editor:
Walter F. Mondale's suggestions for reform of the Democratic Party are welcome as part of a much needed debate, but the suggestions show an elitism that should be rejected.


Picking Up The Pace On a Trend
MY friends Paula and Donald live in Brooklyn, in the Fort Hamilton section to be exact.
Like a lot of people, they are in the market for a new vehicle and they've talked about the search.
Like a lot of people too, they are looking not for an automobile but for a truck.
"We were down in Norfolk, Va.," Donald said, "driving around in my nephew's pickup, and I realized that you could really
see
out of one of these things.
That's what I want.
To be up high and to have good visibility."


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column last Sunday about shutdowns of new investment in some funds misstated the policy of the Oppenheimer Global Bio-Tech Fund on investment by existing shareholders.
Shareholders may buy additional shares.


Deals and Discounts
CARIBBEAN RESORTS A number of resorts in Jamaica and St.
Thomas have special air fares in connection with stays.
On Jamaica, a round-trip air fare of $99 from New York is offered to travelers who stay seven nights at Couples, Grand Lido Negril or Jamaica, Jamaica, three resorts operated by Superclubs.
The fare is available from Kennedy, Newark and Islip (L.I.) airports; various airlines are used.
For a seven-night stay, rates at Couples start at $2,510 for two people sharing a double room through April 2; at Grand Lido, rates begin at $1,695 for each of two people sharing a double room through April 30, and at Jamaica, Jamaica, rates start at $1,350 for each of two sharing a room through April 2.
All-inclusive rates include meals, wine, bar drinks, airport transfers, hotel taxes and sports activities.
For more information, call Superclubs at (800) 858-8009.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-15  IRAQ HUNTS SHIITE REBELS


THE GUIDE
POETRY READINGS
Poetry readings may not measure up to Broadway musicals for Americans seeking an evening's diverson, but Twin Souls Productions hopes to put a dent in that perception.


Political Talk
Fashionably Late?
It is often said in Albany that everything important happens at the last minute, or later.
The budget, for one thing, has been late for seven years in a row.
But nowhere is the dictum more true than in the case of reapportionment this year.


In Defense of the City Health Care Policy
To the Editor:
My mother, a former New York City employee, purchased the city health care policy referred to in "Your Own Account" ( Feb. 23).
We purchased it fully understanding that it didn't cover many things, but thought that, at $400 a year, it was an inexpensive way to get long-term nursing home coverage, a benefit you failed to mention.
Furthermore, the $10,000 deductible was met by other insurance coverage, not by any out-of-pocket expenses.
Since my father had a stroke in 1990 at the age of 85, we have collected well over $20,000 under the policy's long-term-care provision; we will collect another $20,000 this year.
We could not have purchased such coverage at such low cost in any other way.
NINA KEILIN New York, N.Y., Feb. 24


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple; A Proposal to Ban Campus Beer Ads To Reduce Abuse
Seeking to reduce alcohol abuse by college students, the president of Temple University has called for a ban on beer advertising on campus.
The president, Peter J. Liacouras, proposed the ban in mid-February, following the recommendation of a statewide task force on alcohol abuse, of which he is vice chairman.
The task force is made up of health and education professionals and was formed two years ago by the Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Universities to study alcohol abuse on college campuses.


Brooklyn's Last Hope Is Lost in Manhattan
For a few hours yesterday afternoon, the Cinderella run of Lafayette High School in the Public Schools Athletic League basketball playoffs reached unimagined heights.
But then came the fall, crash and burn.
The Frenchies were eliminated by small but quick Brandeis High School, 56-50, last night at Manhattan Community College.
Their dream of going to Madison Squre Garden for the championship game next Saturday died at the free-throw line, where they missed 12 of 21 attempts.


Sports of The Times; Whatever Happened To Sports?
ONCE upon a time sports itself was everything.
Who won?
Who lost?
Who hit the big home run?
Who fumbled at the goal line?
Who made the crucial free throw?
Who missed the short putt?
Which boxer deserved the decision?
But more than ever before, the erosion of sports is threatening its quality of life as entertainment and enjoyment.


Everything Possible, Nothing Sacred
In Federal court in Brooklyn last week, trial buffs could savor the spectacle of Salvatore Gravano testifying against his Mafia chief, John Gotti, in exchange for the assurance of a reduced sentence.
Earlier, in a different case, the brothers Thomas and Joseph Gambino willingly copped a plea and agreed to liquidate their trucking interests in the garment industry rather than face the possibility of doing time.
This might be taken as commentary on the current state of American prisons, which have plainly become places that even professional tough guys will do the once unthinkable to stay out of.
It could also be seen as one more fissure in the general erosion of every imaginable standard beyond self-interest.


Heather Beutel Wed in Connecticut
Heather Beutel, a daughter of William C. Beutel of New York and Gail W. Beutel of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard Sheldon Fortinberry, a son of Glenn Fortinberry of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Mildred Fortinberry of New York.
The Rev.
Eric Erauw, pastor of the Assembly of Peace, an independent evangelical church in Simcoe, Ont., officiated at the Spinning Wheel Inn in Redding Ridge, Conn.
Mrs.
Fortinberry, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Bridgeport and is an art teacher.
Her father is a news anchor at WABC-TV in New York.
Her mother is an artist.


Jaisalmer
To the Editor: Before your readers book an excursion to Jaisalmer based on Olivier Bernier's glowing article "The Genius of Jaisalmer" (Travel, Jan. 19), they should be aware of some facts he overlooked or omitted.
First of all the city has an open sewer system with an olfactory assault the likes of which I have never experienced.
Your readers should plan on walking around with a handkerchief covering their nostrils.


Much Ado About Shakespeare in Washington
History likes dates and this city likes its history.
So Monday, March 2, 1992, will probably go down as the day the Shakespeare Theater came of age.
Of course, theaters, like people, mature slowly, erratically even.
What may appear to be an overnight transformation has usually been in the works for seasons.
A big breakthrough is no more than the accumulation of a lot of small breakthroughs.


Mutual Funds; Fees -- Front, Back and Sideways
Today, mutual fund companies collect money from investors almost every which way.
Some investors pay the sales tab when they buy shares in a fund, others when they sell shares and still others pay year by year by year.
In this fast-changing world, many funds are starting to let their investors choose which way they want to pay.
Meanwhile, Federal regulators are considering imposing a cap on the ongoing fees, and some fund groups are already doing that themselves.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Students Tee Off New Class Option For Golf Managers
When Matt Jester signed up for his college major, he needed to present an application form, his academic record -- and his golf handicap.
Mr.
Jester, a sophomore majoring in leisure studies, is one of the first 10 students in a new professional golf management program at Penn State University.
To qualify, he needed a handicap of eight or below.
Mr.
Jester's handicap is a one.


Drought Shrivels Farms and Hope in Zimbabwe
Across the southern swath of this African nation, the rains have failed this season, leaving farmers like 32-year-old Lismart Matsilele staring in disbelief at barren fields that should be lush with six-foot corn.
"Two weeks ago it was so hot the birds were dying, the animals were dying, everything existing was dying," said a despondent Mr.
Matsilele, kicking the earth that hasn't felt any rain for three months and has been further dried by searing winds and sun.
"We planted, but some of the crops never germinated. Some were burned. The remains we pulled up a few weeks ago to feed the cattle."


POSTING: Guardian Life Grows; Faithful to Union Square
The Guardian Life Insurance Company of America long ago outgrew its 20-story home office, a landmark at 201 Park Avenue South at 17th Street.
But it won't leave its Union Square neighborhood.
Over the years it has expanded into 94,000 square feet of space in four nearby buildings.
And recently, it signed a $7-million, 10-year lease with S L Green Real Estate for 23,000 square feet at 215 Park Avenue South.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
Hoffman states that "violence by women against men is usually in self-defense or retaliation, and is often less severe." Tell that to men like me who have been the victims of domestic violence.
During my stormy four-year marriage, I was abused physically and emotionally by my wife.
It was I who raised my hands in self-defense (but never in retaliation).
When I finally admitted to myself that I was a battered husband, I decided to seek help and support.
I first called Victim's Service hot line and was told point-blank that there was nothing they could do for me.
I called every city agency for victim services and even tried local women's support groups.
I was told by every group that there are no services for battered men.
No one could even suggest where I might find help.


Cameras Don't Lie: Ferraro Is a Winner
Dave Ferraro of Kingston, N.Y., won the seventh Professional Bowlers Association title of his career today, capturing the $150,000 Johnny Petraglia Open at the Carolier Lanes.
It was the fourth time that Ferraro, a 32-year-old right-hander, had appeared in a P.B.A. event televised by ABC this year, but he finished each of those three previous tournaments in fifth place.
Today, he walked home with $28,000.


T.W.A. Increases 'Shuttle' Flights
Trans World Airlines has increased the frequency of its flights to Boston and Washington to begin what it calls a "virtual shuttle service" at Kennedy International Airport.
The airline has added two daily flights to Washington, to make 13, and one to Boston, for a total of 11.
It has also added flights from Kennedy to Atlanta, Chicago, New Orleans and Pittsburgh to serve each city three times a day, and started service on its commuter subsidiary, Trans World Express, to Albany and Providence, from two to four flights a day, and Raleigh-Durham, the hub in North Carolina, one a day.
T.W.A., which is in bankruptcy proceedings, began the new programs March 2.


POSTING: Crossland Bank Designated; Neo-Classical Landmark
Although much younger than its ancient prototypes, the noble neo-classical temple tucked incongruously in the dark canyons of the garment district has gone through many metamorphoses.
Completed in 1924 as the Greenwich Savings Bank headquarters, it became a Metropolitan Savings Bank branch in 1981, a Crossland Savings Bank branch in 1985 and a Crossland Federal Savings Bank branch in January.
Now, it is also an official New York City landmark.
This month, the Landmarks Preservation Commission designated both the monumental exterior -- with 40-foot Corinthian columns on the Broadway, 36th Street and Avenue of the Americas facades -- and the extravagant interior, which includes an elliptical banking room under a 72-foot-high skylight.
The architects York &amp; Sawyer created "a veritable temple to thrift and one of the finest examples" of the academic classical style in this country, the commission said.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
Barbara Kingsolver's perceptive Hers column "Everybody's Somebody's Baby" (Feb. 9) captures with precision and humor how children are treated at home and abroad.
My own 4-year-old daughter quickly perceived how easy it was to engage the interest of Parisians (supposedly the most hard-hearted of Europeans); smiles and seats on crowded buses were offered to her as though they were her natural due.


Abroad at Home; Who Fed This Caesar?
A year after the Persian Gulf war Saddam Hussein remains a menace, evading United Nations orders to destroy his nuclear and missile manufacturing plants.
President Bush has hinted at renewed military action if the evasion goes on.
There could be a June Surprise.
With all that was and still is at stake in Iraq, Congress has been surprisingly slow to look into past American policy.
What was the United States doing while the Iraqi dictator was growing into such a menace?


Louise Corrigan To Wed in June
Mrs.
William McRae Corrigan of High Point, N.C., has announced the engagement of her daughter Louise Harden Corrigan to David Atwater Havens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Havens of Gladwyne, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Corrigan, 26 years old, graduated from Denison University and is an account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York.
Her late father retired as the president and treasurer of the Lilly Company, an industrial coatings manufacturer in High Point.


Problems Seen In Highlands Plan
Re: "Pristine Open Space: A Clash of Interests" (Feb. 9), the well-written article on the Highlands:
The reality of the Highlands plan is that the government wants to control and restrict growth on over one million acres without justly compensating the owners, establish a super-authority similar to the Pinelands commission with tax dollars we don't have, take the development rights from all landowners, large and small, and severely limit ratable growth.


Literary Mobsters Find Enthusiastic Readers
That ominous fellow in the black trench coat carrying a violin case outside Federal court in Brooklyn during John Gotti's murder trial Wednesday was, purportedly, "a face."
A "face," said Douglas LeVien, a former New York City Police detective who worked undercover investigating the mob, is "a guy who looks like a mobster's supposed to look."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
With a Lilt in Her Step
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY provides people an excuse to dance the Irish jig.
Of course, some people don't need an excuse.
Sheila Ryan of Locust Valley is paid to dance the jig.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Incidents of Bias Create Concern Among Students
Though officials at Rutgers University here say their battle against bigotry on campus has been continuing and persistent, several incidents of prejudice that have occurred in recent weeks on campus have left some students skeptical and angry.
On a study hall wall graffiti including racial slurs were reported within days of the discovery of a similar message in a residence hall.
The graffiti were removed by the university.
In the same week, an anonymous personal advertisement in the classified ad section of a campus newspaper, The Livingston Medium, spoke rudely about blacks.


Taking Measures to Cope With Deer
DEER.
Deer.
Deer.
Many people love to see them.
Others consider them a liability.
Increasingly, opinions are changing, and much of it has to do with where and when the herds are seen.
If herds are seen in far off open spaces, gracefully bounding and leaping away, deer can be a thing of beauty.
But when deer are seen by the dozens in your garden, they are a downright nuisance.
Or worse, the herds may never be seen, but a trail of destruction can be left behind by their feeding, causing frustration and annoyance.


Daryl Sack Marries
Daryl Sack, a daughter of Dr.
Gordon and Sheila Sack of Bellaire, Tex., was married last evening to Andrew Scott Epstein, the son of Stephen and Rita Epstein of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Radinsky officiated at the Four Seasons in Houston.
The couple, both 25 years old, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Mrs.
Epstein has a law degree from California Western School of Law in San Diego.
Mr.
Epstein is a third-year law student at Fordham University.


Sanitation Workers Approve a Contract
New York City's sanitation workers overwhelmingly approved their new contract with the Dinkins administration by a vote of 4,281 to 429. the union has announced.
The mail-in ballot followed the negotiating committee's 85-to-0 approval of the tentative agreement, worked out by the executive board of the Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association.


Better Odds; Faulty Math Heightens Fears of Breast Cancer
The risks of getting breast cancer have been so greatly exaggerated that many women are needlessly taking potentially harmful drugs or even having their healthy breasts removed.
Alarm is growing among cancer specialists, who say it is almost impossible to overcome misconceptions about the odds that originate with deliberately scary predictions by the American Cancer Society.
Those misleading odds, they say, are then repeated by the media and widely misinterpreted by some family doctors.


Deep in the Marshes of Iraq, Flames of Rebellion Flicker
In the forbidding marshland of southeastern Iraq, beyond the scrutiny of most of the outside world, the Iraqi Government is conducting a brutal counterinsurgency campaign against Shiite Muslim rebels and their supporters.
The scale of the fighting in this marsh, just across the border from the rebels' haven in Iran, has often been just as intense as the widely reported violence involving the Kurds who live in northern Iraq.
But because the remote marshes can be entered only by small boats that slip past the Iraqi lines from outposts on the Iranian frontier, the journey into the Shiite war zone is undertaken warily, even by the Shiite rebels, and rarely by others.


Egad, Another Meaningless Stat
To the Sports Editor:
Clearly, the article on baseball's "best buys" (The Times, March 2) represents just another meaningless statistic that ranks with how many times a guy spits while at the plate.
I understand the need for us regular folk to make sense out of these stratospheric salaries.
But even the simplest fan knows that players are paid for what they have done, as well as what they will do in the future.
MARTINE BEUDERT Brooklyn


Primaries Demonstrate Democracy at Work; Opposition Leader
To the Editor:
In advocating that party leaders, not voters, should do the nominating, Walter F. Mondale (Op-Ed, Feb. 26) focuses attention on the weakest link in our political system -- the way the two major parties select Presidential candidates.
The process particularly puts the party out of power at a disadvantage.
Today, the leaderless Democrats flounder.
It could as well be the Republicans, if their President were not eligible for a second term.
Change is in everyone's interest.


Merce Cunningham, Explorer and Anarchist
During "Place," a dance work he created in 1966 and performed for several years, Merce Cunningham would pop into a plastic sack and propel himself across the stage like a wet fish on dry land.
It was one of his most theatrical moments in one of his most memorable pieces, very different from the prop-free choreography he currently favors.
Why, he was asked the other day, do audiences no longer see him in a plastic bag?
"Because I was in it once," he replied.


Laurie Kusch To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Eugene Kusch of Vero Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laurie Ruth Kusch, to Jonathan Hart Talcott, a son of Sheila T. Talcott of New York and the late James H. Talcott.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kusch is a graduate of Lafayette College.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Diserio &amp; Kusch in Vero Beach.
Her grandfather Charles Anderson Dana founded the Dana Corporation, a maker of automotive parts in Toledo, Ohio, and the Charles A. Dana Foundation for higher education and medicine in New York.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a zoning conflict in Ridgefield, Conn., referred incorrectly to the status of the case and characterized a proposed golf-course community erroneously.
The developer, Ridgefield Realty Developers Limited Partnership, has reached a settlement with the town that would allow development of the community and end all pending litigation.
The settlement assumes the adoption of new zoning regulations, for which final approval is pending.
The community is to be built under Connecticut's Common Interest Ownership Act and is to include attached units, townhomes and single-family detached housing, and will be not be a condominium development.


Should the Sliding Door Become Stuck
STUBBORN sliding doors often need just minor adjustments to correct problems.
There are several ways to service the most popular styles, including patio doors.
Interior sliding doors like those across closet openings and between rooms are usually one of these three types:


A Prosaic French Town That Produced Poetic Art
A low-keyed exhibition called simply "Barbizon" lately opened with minimal promotion in the Robert Lehman wing of the Metropolitan Museum.
Right now, the name of Barbizon -- a little town on the edge of the Forest of Fontainebleau not far from Paris -- is not one to stir the blood.
This notwithstanding, and although the quality of the ingredients is uneven, the show (on view through May 10) is well timed, given that both Millet and Corot have lately been the subjects of re-examination by major scholars.


A Familiar Iraqi Returns on a New Mission
Throughout the 1980's the short, plump, cigar-smoking Tariq Aziz became a familiar figure at the United Nations as he tirelessly campaigned for support for Iraq's long war against Iran, presenting it as a struggle to stop the destabilizing forces of Islamic fundamentalism from sweeping through the region.
It was a clever pitch that won Iraq significant backing, including modern Western weaponry and vital American intelligence, which allowed President Saddam Hussein to fight to a draw.


A New Jolt for Mets: All 3 Players Identified
Dwight Gooden, Vince Coleman and Daryl Boston are the three Mets under investigation by the Port St.
Lucie Police Department in a rape complaint filed by a woman here March 3, according to a lawyer familiar with the investigation.
The lawyer, who has detailed knowledge of the investigation of all three players, confirmed the identities of the three after their names appeared today in The Miami Herald.
No charges have been filed against the players, and the police have said that their investigation is continuing.


Primaries Demonstrate Democracy at Work; No Winner Take All
To the Editor:
To strength the Presidential nominees of the Democratic Party, Walter F. Mondale suggests increasing the number of uncommitted "superdelegates" (Op-Ed, Feb. 26).
I would add that primary voting should be limited to members of the party, the regional clumping of primaries (like Super Tuesday) should not be permitted and, most important, committed delegates should not be awarded winner take all; rather each candidate should be awarded a share of delegates according to his or her showing.


A Chastened U2 Comes Down to Earth
Clad entirely in black leather, Bono came down from the stage on the second night of U2's two-month "Zoo TV Tour" to a long runway, where he twirled suggestively around a belly dancer as he sang "Mysterious Ways." Moments later, as his bandmates pounded out "Until the End of the World," the singer approached a video camera filming the performance, kissed its lens and then yanked it down to his crotch.
An audience of 15,000 in the Miami Arena watched on a dozen video screens and roared its approval.
For the first time since the 1987 "Rattle and Hum" tour that resulted in the movie and album of the same name, the group is back on the road in the United States.
The Irish quartet played at the Nassau Coliseum last week and will perform at the Brendan Byrne Arena in New Jersey and Madison Square Garden in sold-out shows this week.
But the band, which during the 1980's came to personify a certain lofty idealism and spirituality, has returned in the 90's decidedly more down-to-earth.


U.N. Peacekeeping Force Moves Into Yugoslavia
The first United Nations peacekeeping force to operate on the European mainland began settling into Sarajevo today, its commanders aware of the ethnic tensions among Bosnia's population of Slavic Muslims, Serbs and Croats and the risk they pose to one of the United Nations' most volatile operations ever.
Behind white jeeps flying the blue United Nations flag, the generals who will direct the operation, under Lieut.
Gen.
Satish Nambiar of India, set out this morning to choose a headquarters site in the center of Sarajevo.
As their motorcade swept through the cobbled streets near the site of Sarajevo's most fateful incident, the assassination in June 1914 of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie, many among the weekend shopping crowds waved and applauded.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 23 about the B. Gerald Cantor Rodin Sculpture Garden at Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif., referred incorrectly to Mr.
Cantor.
He is an art collector who lives in California.


Catnapping to Save the Felines of the Hamptons
HELENA CURTIS of Sag Harbor believes in romance.
It's the reproducing she has problems with.
"I advocate neutering and spaying everything," Mrs.
Curtis said.
"Even the staff," added the receptionist at the Animal Rescue Fund in Wainscott.
"Well ----," Mrs.
Curtis said, as if considering the possibility.
"No," she finally said.
"Just cats and dogs."


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
I very much enjoyed your articles about The New York Times crossword puzzle ("50 Years of Crosswords," Feb. 16).
Your Sunday crossword has special meaning for me, since I use it to gauge my husband's health.
In 1989, he contracted meningitis and was hosptalized.
His mental acuity was questionable for a few days.
However, Sunday arrived, and I was sent out to track down a newsstand that carried The New York Times.
The family knew he was recuperating when he was able to complete the crossword puzzle.


Jennifer Crosby To Wed in June
Virginia Duel Crosby of New York and H. Ashton Crosby Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Dunning Crosby to Samuel Whitney Cargill, a son of Therese Russell of Southport, Conn., and the late William S. Cargill.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Crosby, 26 years old, graduated from William Smith College and is a retail sales representative for Paul Stanley Ltd., a women's clothing manufacturer in Los Angeles.
Her father teaches at the Rippowam Cisqua School in Bedford.
Her mother is the director of volunteers at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.


An Italian Menu With Intriguing Spins
EVERY town deserves at least one really good Italian restaurant.
Fortunately Avon now has Max A Mia.
An offshoot of the popular Max on Main in Hartford, Max A Mia has converted a triangular corner storefront into a lively, inviting dining space with enlarged, tinted photographs of Italian scenes.
One mustard-color wall is lined with booths; the opposite brick wall, behind the bar area, has a wood-burning pizza oven and is decorated with strands of garlic bulbs and wooden piels used for removing pizza from the oven.
Despite a no-reservations policy (except for six or more), with consequent inconvenience for potential customers, the staff is a welcoming one, and service, once we were seated, was brisk and helpful.


Science Fiction
It is hard to believe that CHINA MOUNTAIN ZHANG (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19) by Maureen F. McHugh is a first novel.
The author, who has spent several years teaching in China, has imagined a 22d century unlike any other I have read about.
It is full of believable details and surprises.
What makes it so fresh is that it feels so ordinary.
There is no trick to inventing an exotic future; what is difficult is to make the exotic sound familiar -- so that the people of the future inhabit a world that, however different from the reader's, appears every bit as real.
Ms.
McHugh's 22d century is dominated by China; the United States, after undergoing a socialist revolution, has apparently settled down with only minor grumbling to play its assigned role as a secondary power.
The main character, who lends his name to the book, is an "ABC" -- American-born Chinese -- which places him far above all non-Asians on the social ladder but far below the Chinese-born, who get all the good jobs even though everyone is theoretically equal.
Zhang is smart, nonpolitical, good company and a good friend.
He also has two secrets that he wisely keeps from the authorities: his mother is Hispanic (not good for his social standing) and he is gay (even worse).


Mexico Moves Ahead With Embattled Dam Project in Mayan Area
After years of public protest and delay, the Mexican Government is moving ahead with a hydroelectric dam project that some environmentalists and archeologists say could damage an ancient center of the Mayan civilization and the ecology of North America's largest surviving rain forest.
A spokesman for the Federal Electricity Commission denied that the one or more dams it now planned to build on the Usumacinta River, which marks an isolated stretch of the border between Mexico and Guatemala, would produce such effects.


Fitzpatrick Stymies LaFontaine And Sabres
Solid goaltending by Mark Fitzpatrick spoiled Pat LaFontaine's first visit to Nassau Coliseum since he was traded to Buffalo in October as the Islanders beat the Sabres, 4-1, this afternoon.
Daniel Marois, Pierre Turgeon, Steve Thomas and Marty McInnis had the goals and Benoit Hogue had two assists for the Islanders, who benefited greatly from Fitzpatrick's 38 saves.


From the Dark Satanic Mills
The English poet and artist William Blake was an odd mixture of mystical romantic and cantankerous critic.
His illuminated books, parables of earthly life, were peopled with fanciful creatures drawn from an elaborate invented mythology.
Blake published these works himself, but his ambition to reach a wide audience was never realized.
Now the William Blake Trust, in association with Princeton University Press, has initiated a five-volume facsimile series of Blake's illuminated books.
The first two volumes, JERUSALEM: The Emanation of the Giant Albion (Blake Trust/ Princeton University, $75) and SONGS OF INNOCENCE AND OF EXPERIENCE (Blake Trust/Princeton University, $59.50), are currently available.
Produced with meticulous care, each has a brief introduction -- for "Jerusalem," by Morton D. Paley, a professor of English at the University of California, Berkeley; for "Songs of Innocence and of Experience," by Andrew Lincoln, a lecturer in English at the University of London.
Each volume also contains exquisite reproductions of the original plates, a new transcription of Blake's text and scholarly but accessible plate-by-plate commentaries.


Couples Takes Lead in Honda
Although ageless Raymond Floyd stumbled slightly this afternoon, his tag-team partner, the presently peerless Fred Couples, took up the slack and rushed into the lead after three rounds of the Honda Classic.
As Floyd was finally losing a lead after five consecutive rounds of being on top of the leader board over two tournaments, Couples today shot a seven-under-par 65 for a total of 14-under 202.
That was one shot better than Mark Brooks, who burned up the Weston Hill Country Club with a course-record 64 today, and two ahead of Blaine McCallister, who had his third straight 68.


Separating the Men From the Apes
THE THIRD CHIMPANZEE
The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal.
By Jared Diamond.
Illustrated. 407 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
I commend all the hard work that has led to the criminalization of domestic violence and the many programs for batterers and battered women all over the country.
But as all of us who work with perpetrators and victims know, it is simplistic to think that resocializing men through batterers' groups will solve the whole problem.
While all batterers have been raised in a patriarchal society, they differ in many other ways.
So it is not at all surprising that even excellent programs like the one in Duluth have not been as successful overall as they hoped to be.
To date, treatment and intervention programs that do not support the existing feminist philosophy have not been encouraged.
For example, some state-funded programs require postponing treatment of the couple's relationship for six months to a year until the man has completed a batterers' program, in spite of the fact that there has been no evidence this kind of treatment is more effective or less dangerous than the other.


EVERYBODY'S SOMEBODY'S BABY
Kingsolver didn't have to go to Spain to find people who like children.
She could have gone to the nearest firehouse.
As a New York City firefighter, I have lifted my share of children into the seat of many a fire engine.
There is something about the look on their faces when they put on that fire helmet and pretend they are racing down the street, sirens blaring.
Even the most seasoned salt will sneak a wave to children as we drive around town.
As Kingsolver said, the children of today are our future doctors, Presidents and even firefighters, and every child needs love.
JOSEPH FARRELLY
Staten Island


Car Ferry Plan Fails in Seattle
The Bermuda-based Sea Containers has dropped its plan to operate car ferry service between downtown Seattle and Victoria, British Columbia, this year.
The company said that it had been unable to resolve various issues with the British Columbia Government, the Canadian Coast Guard, Canadian Customs and the Port of Seattle.
It complained that it had been asked to pay rent at the Seattle and Victoria terminals far higher than that paid by the Stena Line, which ran a car ferry on the route until November 1990, and that it faced a pilotage fee not levied on other vessels.


CAMPUS LIFE: Denver; A Composer's Music Is a Message to Students
To the music world, David Amram is a prolific American composer, but to music and dance students at the University of Denver here, he is known as the encourager in residence.
Mr.
Amram, whose work ranges from orchestral music and jazz to operas and film scores, is spending this year in Denver as a visiting professor and the recipient of the university's Leo Block Chair in the Humanities.
In addition to classwork and public performances, Mr.
Amram presented his Shakespearean opera "Twelfth Night" recently in tribute to the late Joseph Papp, the theater impresario, who wrote the libretto to the opera.


Data Bank/March 15, 1992


Torborg Proves Selective On Topics
About 50 miles south of where the threat of scandal hung heavy over a subdued Mets camp, a representative squad from the New York ball club took on the Atlanta Braves today, a reminder that even in the midst of trouble, business must be conducted.
Yes, three Mets players are the subject of an investigation by the Port St.
Lucie Police Department that could result in sexual-assault charges.
But on this day, Jeff Torborg, the Mets' manager, wanted only to talk baseball.
Even after a 9-1 loss.


Braniff Says It Exceeds Industry Standards
It is unfortunate that your reporter did not reach out to Braniff International executives to get the fair, honest and complete story on Long Island's airline to Florida  [ "Oh, the Quest for the Cheapest Air Fares," March 1 ] .
Had she done so, many of the inaccuracies and omissions could at least have been corrected.
One might even get the impression that Braniff International was in some way responsible for the foul weather that one day, which must certainly have played a part in her and everyone's mood that day.
The facts, however, belie her conclusions.
It is true that our flight was overbooked on that particular Saturday, being the Saturday of Presidents' weekend, and one of the busiest travel days of the year.
So were the flights of other major airlines at MacArthur Airport.
Our problem was exacerbated by a computer-input error -- yes, we do have computers, including at MacArthur; it is the electronic ticket printers which have been ordered but have not yet arrived or been installed -- which permitted the normally authorized booking limit to be exceeded.


'Hidden Laughter' Premieres In Hartford
"THIS is where we breathe. No more intruders down here -- ever." Harry Pertwee, a literary agent, is talking to his wife, Louise, in the sumptuous garden that surrounds their weekend cottage, a retreat from London's hubbub.
It is named Little Paradise.
One needn't be seasoned theatergoer to sense, early on in "Hidden Laughter," a world premiere at Hartford Stage, that the country is no paradise for the Pertwees, and that the floral outburst, immaculately tended by the vicar of the village, is the playwright's camouflage for disordered lives.


This Week
Prune, Plant and Read Up
Continue pruning overgrown shrubs, grapes and raspberries, but don't touch things that flower early.
If the soil can be worked, plant onions, spinach, lettuce and early Chinese greens.
But don't jump the gun.
If the earth is wet and heavy, you will only be packing down the soil.


The Roots of the Dream
THE PAPERS OF MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.
Volume One: Called to Serve, January 1929-June 1951.
Senior editor, Clayborne Carson.
Volume editors, Ralph E. Luker and Penny A. Russell.
Illustrated. 484 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $35.


Submarine Workers Protest at the White House


G.O.P. Sees the Bank Affair As Big Campaigns Weapon
Republicans are hoping to use the House Bank affair and the impasse over tax legislation to make substantial gains in the House and to hold on to the Presidency.
But Democrats argue that whatever the headlines in March, by November the economy will matter much more.


Foreign, to the Democrats
When even Richard Nixon voices alarm at how little help America has offered Russia's bold reformers, how does President Bush respond?
In terms that leave him sounding like Mad magazine's Alfred E. Neuman: "What, me worry?"
Well, Mr.
Bush said last week, maybe the Administration will try to help stabilize the ruble.
But otherwise, "There isn't a lot of money around . . . I don't have a blank check." As if anyone were asking for one.
Given the chance of a lifetime to encourage democracy, the Leader of the Free World can only sigh.
Are his Democratic rivals any more responsive?


6 Ships, 2 Queens, Many Headaches
Being stubborn was not enough.
Christopher Columbus also had to turn on the charm to persuade Queen Isabella to finance his trip west in 1492.
"Actually, Your Majesty, I thought you were much older," he told her in Seville, brazenly stroking royal vanity.
The Queen melted.
"You seem to have a way with women, Columbus," she whispered suggestively.
She then promptly handed over the 15th-century version of a fat check.
Wait, that's not right.
The "way with women" line was spoken by the Queen in Siguenza.
It's really very confusing -- two epic films about Columbus shot in Spain at the same time, with lots of big stars in long gowns wandering through medieval palaces.


Networking; Getting It Under Control
The explosion in the number, size and complexity of networks makes managing them rough.
"We've got several thousand PC's and several hundred Macs talking to 75 LAN servers and I.B.M. mainframes and DEC minis," said Dan Kohner, manager of network services at the M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center at the University of Texas.
"Managing it all keeps me up nights."
Though standards abound in networking, they apply to specific applications rather than to the broader concept of network management.
And vendors' solutions to various problems do not always work elegantly in tandem.
For example, Novell's Netware, which dominates LAN operating systems for PC's, is incompatible with the Appletalk system used with Apple Macintoshes.
A network administrator must intervene.


In a 'Bonding Drama,' It's On With the Dance
THEATER is divided into genres and subgenres, and there are classifications for musicals, political drama, family drama and so on and so forth through as many little divisions as suits the classifier.
One of those categories is "bonding drama." They are usually set in gyms or sports arenas, and include plays like "Doubles," "Steaming," "The Changing Room" and "Stepping Out." "Stepping Out," by Richard Harris, is at Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through Saturday.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Incidents of Bias Create Concern Among Students
Though officials at Rutgers University here say their battle against bigotry on campus has been continuing and persistent, several incidents of prejudice that have occurred in recent weeks on campus have left some students skeptical and angry.
On a study hall wall graffiti including racial slurs were reported within days of the discovery of a similar message in a residence hall.
The graffiti were removed by the university.
In the same week, an anonymous personal advertisement in the classified ad section of a campus newspaper, The Livingston Medium, spoke rudely about blacks.


Sobered, BAM Still Thinks Big
In difficult times, people look back to better days.
Perhaps institutions do, too.
The Brooklyn Academy of Music, at any rate, seems to be doing so with "Atys," a production of Lully's opera by William Christie and Les Arts Florissants that proved a big hit for the academy in May 1989 and returns on Wednesday evening.
"Atys" recalls the early days of "BAM Opera," a series of contemporary works, rarities and adventurously staged items from the standard repertory, dreamed up in the late 1980's by Harvey Lichtenstein, the academy's president and executive producer.
It was after "Atys" that the academy's operatic luck began to change.


Two Shootings, on Heels of Student's Rape, Deepen School Worries
Several new incidents of violence were reported at New York City high schools on Friday, adding to the sense that the dangers of the streets are invading the city's schools.
A 16-year-old student was wounded during a talent show in a crowded Queens high school auditorium on Friday night when a gun was accidentally fired, school officials said.
Earlier at the same show, a 17-year-old student was arrested for illegally carrying a loaded .44-caliber revolver, they said.


Ramona Mazur Wed
Ramona Eve Mazur, the owner of R. M. Fashions in New York, and Mario Singer, the vice president of Classic Medallics and Frederick Singer &amp; Sons,a manufacturer of religious gifts and jewelry in Long Island City, Queens, were married yesterday at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., by the Rev.
John Henry, an Episcopal minister.
Mrs.
Singer, 35 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bohdan Mazur of Staatsburg, N.Y.
Mr.
Singer, 38, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Singer of Manhasset, L.I.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


The $1 Million Question
The United States Attorney's office in Indianapolis is studying an F.B.I. investigation into DESIREE WASHINGTON's report that she was offered $1 million to drop the rape complaint she brought against boxer MIKE TYSON.
Federal authorities hope to determine before Tyson's sentencing hearing on March 26 in Indianapolis whether additional charges are warranted, said TIM MORRISON, an assistant U.S. attorney.


12-1 Technology Dazzles Dance Floor
A new candidate to challenge Arazi for the Triple Crown of racing in 1992 strode to the front today when the 12-to-1 longshot Technology outran Hammer's favored Dance Floor by four and a half lengths and won the $500,000 Florida Derby.
It was only the fifth time that Technology had gone to the post in a career delayed by injury, but the third time he had won and the fifth time he had come home with a piece of the prize.
It was also the first time he had won a stakes race, but he did it with command under the educated pacing of Jerry Bailey, one of the country's senior jockeys and one of the hottest this winter in Florida.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HAMILTON FISH Memoir of an American Patriot. By Hamilton Fish. Regnery Gateway, $19.95.


Turkey Digs Through Quake's Debris
Aftershocks rippled through eastern Turkey today, and rescuers dug in the rubble for survivors after a powerful earthquake that may have killed more than 600 people.
With avalanches and landslides blocking roads and railways and bringing down power and telephone lines, rescuers acknowledged that the full extent of the disaster, which caused heavy damage to the city of Erzincan, remained unclear today.


Three Suitcases: Ronaldus Shamask
Double-breasted tropical-weight wool suit jacket by Ronaldus Shamask for Barneys New York, $825 (with matching pants, not shown).
At Barneys New York, all stores.
Cotton broadcloth shirt from Polo by Ralph Lauren, $75.
At Bloomingdale's.
Cotton twill pants by Tommy Hilfiger, $54.
At Bloomingdale's.
Striped cotton cardigan sweater from Perry Ellis Signature, $355.
At Bloomingdale's.
Macy's, Herald's Square.
Canvas sneakers by Yohji Yamamoto, $120.
At Yohji Yamamoto, 103 Grand Street.
Alan Bilzerian, Boston.
June Blaker, Chicago.
On the shelf: Watch from Hermes.
Hanging above: Tie by Ronaldus Shamask for Barneys New York. (Photographs by Francois Halard for The New York Times)


Pornography Foes Push for Right to Sue
The re-emergence of a proposed anti-pornography law, this time in Massachusetts, has reignited a fight between feminists who believe that pornography is a form of violence against women that must be stopped and those who believe that suppressing pornography is a dangerous form of censorship.
The proposal, raised in several states so far, is based on the theory that pornography is a form of sex discrimination that harms women.
It would allow women victimized by pornography to sue the producers of the pornography and, in some cases, to get an injunction prohibiting the producer, distributor or exhibitor from selling the material.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


Caralyn Cohen Is Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry L. Cohen of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caralyn Hope Cohen, to Steven Paul Fuld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Fuld of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Cohen and her fiance, both 25 years old, graduated from Emory University.
Miss Cohen is the New York corporate sales director for the New Jersey Nets basketball team.
Her father, an owner of the Nets, is the chairman of William A. White/Grubb &amp; Ellis, a real-estate brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Adrianne Cohen, is a theatrical investor and producer in New York.


Whitestone
To the Editor:
Your article on Feb. 2 about Whitestone, Queens, included a statement that "in Beechhurst, the least expensive co-op apartments are the 1,032-unit LeHavre complex, where prices range from $50,000 for a one-bedroom to $90,000 for three-bedrooms."


Cuttings; Appreciating Nature, and Seeing Civilization, Too
William Howard Adams sat on the porch of his log house and stared out at the field that rolled right up to the step.
It was still the yellow-brown of winter, though soon it would be a wash of green.
The house is his study.
The field is his front garden, and it is a perfect one, rolling the way it does right up to a West Virginia cornfield.


Sunday Menu; Vegetable Stew, With a Kick on the Side
Zucchini and fennel are essential parts of this hearty vegetable stew and must not be overcooked.
If they retain some of their crunch, they provide another texture to the dish, beyond the creamy lentils and the firm potatoes.
Look for red lentils in Indian markets or natural-food stores.


A Week of Masks, Hats, Music and Dance
THURSDAY -- The Bal de Tete, popular in the late 40's and early 50's as a theme for society galas, was revived at the Young Friends of The New York Public Library dance at the library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
Guests donned hats and headdresses inspired by great explorers.
For any who arrived without appropriate gear, Eric Javits, the milliner, was there with 300 hats to lend.
At Carnegie Hall, a concert raised money for the endangered Brazilian rain forest.
Sting, Elton John, Natalie Cole, Don Henley and James Taylor sang for the Rainforest Foundation.


Commercial Property: The Port Authority and Starrett Lehigh Buildings; For 2 Huge Relics, Different Futures
TWO 1930's red-brick structures -- relics of Manhattan's industrial past, when giant warehouses were in great demand -- dominate their localities.
But though their pasts are similar, they have developed very differently, one catering to what is left of the island's light industry, the other focusing on high-tech and office tenants.


Your Only as Old . . .
To the Editor:
While understanding the thrust of John Milward's article "Still Rockin' (Sort Of) After All These Years"  [ March 1 ] , there are those of us who are both 40 years old and still excited by the output of younger musicians.
My present albums of choice are by artists like Nirvana, Pearl Jam, the Pixies and Dinosaur Jr.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Administrators Give Assistance To Safety Program
When University of Washington students participated in the second Nightwalk campus-safety program of the school year recently, the tour coincided with a new phase in the program's six-year history: for the first time since it began, the university administration had acted on the program's recommendations for improving safety.
Nightwalk, which is sponsored by the student government's crime-prevention committee, invites students to walk over the 680-acre university campus to note areas where lighting is insufficient and where shrubbery is overgrown -- providing spaces for criminals to hide.
Group members also note where emergency phones could be installed for direct access to campus police.


Sarah Lamont Plans to Wed
August wedding plans have been announced for Sarah Kingsbury Lamont and Jonathan Howard Kocmond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard C. Kocmond of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Miss Lamont is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick F. Lamont Jr. of Lawrenceville, N.J.
Miss Lamont, 22 years old, is a public relations and marketing trainee with Kurtzman/Slavin/Linda, an advertising agency in Northfield, Ill.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the director of corporate relations for I. Orrin Spellman, a public relations consulting firm in Haverford, Pa.


A New Tune For Radio: Hard Times
Though a dedicated optimist, Randall Harris looks out from his tiny AM radio station in Sarasota, Fla., and periodically wonders whether survival is possible.
When his father bought WSPB two years ago to air classical music, the station was so unprofitable that its former owner had turned off the transmitter.
Since then, at least two other stations in the city have "gone dark," in industry jargon, and two more broadcast on and off as their owners search for successful formats.
Mr.
Harris says he doesn't expect to see his first annual profit until 1993, and he is working feverishly to persuade advertisers that classical music has an audience and that his station's ability to broadcast in stereo makes it possible to overcome the notorious inferiority of AM sound.
But the competition is brutal: broadcast and cable television, daily and weekly newspapers, free shopping flyers and direct mail.
"The future of radio is bright," Mr.
Harris contended.
"But that's 10 years from now. Right now, it's incredibly difficult."


Miss Meyer Engaged
Mrs.
Richard G. Hewitt and Theodore R. Meyer, both of New York, have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Jane Meyer and Charles Bennett Gadon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Gadon of Cranston, R.I.
Miss Meyer, 32 years old, is a vice president with U.S.
Auction, a real-estate auction concern in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a master's degree in business management from Columbia University.
Mr.
Gadon, 35, is the engineering and systems manager for Providence Metallizing Company, a finishing concern in Pawtucket, R.I.
He graduated from Northeastern University.


Myths and Fairy Tales in Nearly 75 Languages


Military Action Foreshadowed
American officials increasingly believe that force must be used soon to eradicate Iraq's ability to make weapons of mass destruction.
Page 8.


A Composer Craves Respect
The case of the English Minimalist and soundtrack composer Michael Nyman is a strange one, stranger even than that of most marginal American composers.
Lots of people have heard his music, maybe without quite knowing or caring.
Enough of them have cared so that his London concerts are often full.
Yet his bulging scrapbook contains few comments by the British classical-music press, which has apparently solved the Nyman "problem" by ignoring it, and him.
Mr.
Nyman has never received a commission from the BBC, which seems otherwise to reward every living, breathing musical Briton.
At least American Minimalists are virulently attacked, which may be better than Mr.
Nyman's status as a musical nonperson.


Miss Stark Wed To C. C. Alberti
Susan Nauth Stark, a daughter of Mrs.
Benjamin Allen Stark of Ramsey, N.J., and the late Mr.
Stark, was married yesterday to C. Christopher Alberti, the son of Judge and Mrs.
Charles R. Alberti of Williamstown, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen Chinlund performed the Episcopal service at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Alberti, 36 years old, is the director of institutional support for the International Rescue Committee, an organization based in New York that aids refugees of political, religious or racial persecution.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father owned and published the Want Ad Press in Ramsey.


Yes but No; No but Yes
LIFE ITSELF
Abortion in the American Mind.
By Roger Rosenblatt. 194 pp.
New York: Random House. $20.


SPORTS
Here is a sampling of spectator sports in the New York metropolitan region and participatory sports in New York City this spring.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS Basketball


300 Voices, 100 Musicians Offer Berlioz's Requiem
THE Greenwich Choral Society, the Fairfield County Chorale and the Greenwich Symphony are joining together for the first time for what should be two extraordinary performances of Berlioz's Requiem.
The remarkable score is rarely heard in concert because of the performing forces required, including an orchestra augmented by 16 kettledrums, 4 gongs and 5 pairs of cymbals as well as brass ensembles positioned in four corners of the hall.
The composer said in his autobiography that the Requiem was "enormous, passionate, gigantic and colossal," further pointing out its ability to leave a listener "overwhelmed by tremendous emotion, shaken to the depths of his soul." Less than three years before his death Berlioz summed up his depth of feeling for the piece, writing to a friend that "if I were threatened with the destruction of everything I have created except for one work, I would beg mercy for the Requiem."


For Alan Menken, A Partnership Ends But the Song Plays On
Alan Menken is speaking of his principal songwriting partner, the lyricist Howard Ashman, who died a year ago.
"I can't say that it was a once-in-a-lifetime collaboration, because I have a long lifetime to go," Mr.
Menken reflects sadly.
"But I've never been in a room with a mind like that. I've never been in a room with someone who took my music and possessed it as his own the way Howard did."


Marcella Matthaei to Marry Peter M. Ziesmann
Mr. and Mrs.
Konrad H. Matthaei of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Marcella Hague Matthaei to Peter M. Ziesmann, a son of Bili Ziesmann of Sonoma, Calif., and the late Hans Ziesmann.
A June wedding is planned.


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple; A Proposal to Ban Campus Beer Ads To Reduce Abuse
Seeking to reduce alcohol abuse by college students, the president of Temple University has called for a ban on beer advertising on campus.
The president, Peter J. Liacouras, proposed the ban in mid-February, following the recommendation of a statewide task force on alcohol abuse, of which he is vice chairman.
The task force is made up of health and education professionals and was formed two years ago by the Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Universities to study alcohol abuse on college campuses.


FLOWER SHOWS
Here is a sampling of spring flower shows in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"DISCOVERY '92: 500 YEARS OF FLOWER AND GARDEN EXPLORATION," the annual flower show sponsored by the Horticultural Society of New York, Pier 92, 51st Street at the Hudson River.
The show explores the roots of American interest in and contributions to gardening.
Through March 22.
Hours: Monday to Friday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $8 weekdays and $10 weekends ($4 for children at all times; $7 for the elderly on weekdays and $9 on weekends).
Free shuttle buses will leave every 20 minutes from Penn Station, Grand Central Terminal and some branches of Chemical Bank.
Information: (212) 757-0915.
March 21
SPRING FLOWER SHOW: THE AMERICAN ROMANTIC GARDEN, New York Botanical Garden, Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Fordham, the Bronx.
The show will feature annuals, bulbs, perennials and flowering shrubs along with rustic garden ornamentation.
March 21 through May 17.
A "Spring Weekend" will be celebrated in conjunction with the flower show and will feature demonstrations and talks highlighting the garden's flowering trees.
April 4 and 5, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3 ($2 for students and the elderly; under 6 free).
Parking, $4.
Information: (212) 220-8777.
April 9
ORCHID SHOW, Winter Garden, World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street, lower Manhattan.
More than 50 orchid displays from around the world, along with lectures and a variety of flowers for sale.
April 9 through 11, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M., and April 12, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 945-0505.
April 12
MACY'S ANNUAL FLOWER SHOW, Herald Square, Manhattan.
The main floor of the store will be filled with displays of spring flowers.
April 12 to 25. (Lectures on gardening and design are planned throughout the store. Schedules: 212-560-4049.) Store hours: Monday, Thursday and Friday, 10 A.M. to 8:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Wednesday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 560-4495.
April 25 and 26
CHERRY BLOSSOM FESTIVAL, Brooklyn Botanical Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The annual Sakura Matsuri, or Cherry Blossom Festival, is expected to attract more than 35,000 people and will offer dozens of free exhibitions. 1 to 5 P.M.
At 10:30 A.M. there will be a tour of the Japanese garden.
Admission: $2 ($1 for students, the elderly and ages 3 to 12).
Information: (718) 622-4433.
May 1
GRAMERCY PARK SOCIETY FLOWER SHOW, Gramercy Park Hotel, 2 Lexington Avenue, at 21st Street, Manhattan.
The show will feature more than 75 displays that drew inspiration from the works of Cole Porter.
Hours for May 1 preview,6 to 8 P.M.; admission, $35.
On May 2, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., and May 3, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 473-1031.
May 2
ANNUAL CHERRY BLOSSOM FESTIVAL, Queens Botanical Garden, 43-50 Main Street, Flushing.
More than 70 flowering cherry trees can be seen as well as a bonsai exhibition by the Bonsai Society of Long Island.
May 2, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free with suggested donation: $1 (50 cents for ages 5 to 12; free for the elderly and children under 5).
Information: (718) 886-3800.
June 7
ROSE SHOW, Queens Botanical Garden, 43-50 Main Street, Flushing.
Rose displays as well as winning entries in the annual rose show contest, sponsored by the Queens Rose Society. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $1 (50 cents for ages 5 to 12; free for the elderly and those under 5).
Information: (718) 886-3800.


It's Still Suit, Suit, Suit For the Home Team
Periodically over the last several months, George Steinbrenner has privately threatened to file the lawsuit of all lawsuits, the King Kong lawsuit, against Commissioner Fay Vincent, challenging their 1990 agreement that sent Steinbrenner paddling to baseball's Elba.
If the Yankees owner turns his threats into reality and files the suit, he would not be the owner very long.
According to lawyers for major league baseball, the commissioner would almost certainly throw Steinbrenner out of baseball, and then maybe Paramount Communications could buy the Yankees.


Keeping in Step With St. Patrick's Day
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY, which falls on Tuesday, has become the occasion for some rather sophisticated food in recent years.
Irish chefs have rediscovered and refined their country's traditional dishes; the cottage industries -- cheese, honey, exotic seaweeds, trout farms -- have been revived, and the result is some of the most interesting new cooking around.
One young Irish chef, James O'Shea, who is owner of the West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn., often serves dishes in his restaurant that, unknown to his customers, have Irish origins.
"Pies are as common in Ireland as pates in France," he said.
"In almost any food shop, you will find an enormous selection to take home -- both in gourmet form and in fat-food form." One of the most popular items on his current menu is a pie made with goat cheese and leeks and cooked in a crust made with bread crumbs.
It is known in Ireland as curd pie.


The Two Abdul-Jabbars Find a Common Thread
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, the one who is 6 feet 2 inches and has acres of hair, left each junior varsity basketball practice this season with a bundle of books and a pocketful of bus fare.
Practice usually ended at 6:30 P.M., in the dusk of rush hour, but a couple of times it lasted until 7 because Abdul-Jabbar was being punished for running like a snail.
Many of his teammates at Brentwood School had rides home, swooped up by parents driving luxury autos.
Not Abdul-Jabbar.
He would wait at the bus stop, sometimes for a good 30 minutes -- before the bus to Bel Air would show.


Miss Hawke Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger J. Hawke of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Allison Kristen Hawke, and Colum McCann, a son of Sean and Sara McCann of Dublin.
Miss Hawke, 25 years old today, is an administrative assistant with the State Department of Labor in Huntington, L.I.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Mr.
McCann, 27, is a student at the University of Texas in Austin.


Cost of Home-Buying Falls to '74 Levels
LAST winter, Lisa and David Osterman toured dozens of homes in and around Princeton, N.J., in search of one to buy.
But by spring they threw in the towel and signed a lease for another rental.
"We saw places in our price range," said Mr.
Osterman, "but nothing we felt was worth the money."


Miss Stein Wed To S. G. Walker
Jamie Lynne Stein, a daughter of Donald O. and Bette F. Stein of New York, was married last evening to Steven Gregory Walker, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Walker of Amherst, Mass.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer performed the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Gaylord Shimnoski, an Anglican Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Walker, 27 years old, is a kindergarten teacher at the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father is a partner in the S/A Group, a real-estate development concern in Garden City, L.I.


Senate's Tax Bill Wraps Up a Bouquet of Trial Balloons
The tax bill the Senate passed Friday night is not just a $300 credit for children, a 36 percent rate for the affluent or a new set of rates for capital gains taxes.
Nor is it merely legislation intended to make health insurance much more widely available, especially to workers in small businesses.
Those items, and a few more that deal with growth, make up a Democratic statement of what ought to be done to make American society fairer.
And it will remain such a statement, an argument for voters, even after President Bush makes good on his promise to veto whatever emerges from a House-Senate conference on this bill and the companion House measure.


Sunday Dinner; Basking in the Warmth Of 3 Caribbean Oases
Here are three Caribbean-style restaurants in Manhattan where diners can bask in the warmth of the tropics.
Caribe
117 Perry Street (Greenwich Street), (212) 255-9191 -- This funky, moderately priced tropical restaurant in the West Village looks more like a florist's shop than a restaurant, with its jungle of palms thriving in both dining rooms, one with flamingo-pink walls and wicker furniture.


Theater Package In Ontario
Playgoers visiting two of Canada's leading theatrical events, the Stratford Festival in Stratford and the Shaw Festival in Niagara-on-the-Lake, can save money on accommodations under a new package plan called the Stratford and Shaw Midweek Getaway.
The two festivals are about 100 miles apart in Ontario.
Driving from one to the other takes about two hours, passing through Mennonite farm country near Stratford and vineyards and orchards near Niagara-on-the-Lake.
For $399, two people receive tickets to one performance at each festival and a hotel room with Continental breakfast for one night at each town.
Depending on the seats and rooms, a couple could save up to $178, or 30 percent, off the regular cost of accommodations, but the usual saving will be between 10 and 15 percent, according to a spokeswoman for the Shaw Festival.


Q and A
Bastille Day in Tahiti
Q.
I will be visiting Tahiti this summer and will be in Papeete for Bastille Day.
I have heard it is very similar to Mardi Gras and would appreciate
information on any special activities and events. -- Debra Sutton-Jones, Clovis, Calif.


Inside the Circumferential Highway
As other Democratic hopefuls. . . .  (That's a cliche. Hopefully, we can dispense with the transformation of the adjective
hopeful
into a noun. Begin again.)
As Democrats pressing their candidature. . . . (Academics will like that word, but it's in the same prissy league as
governance
and
polity
; besides, what's wrong with
candidacy
? Begin again; this is your last chance.)


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ARDSLEY AUTO AUCTION
Fifteen Chevrolets dating from the early 80's to the 90's will be auctioned off Saturday at 11 A.M. in Ardsley.
What makes the event unusual is the fact that the cars belong to the Town of Greenburgh and they are being sold as an economy measure.


Spandex and Spoofs Galore: Spinal Tap Is Back
All over the world, from the biggest arena concert to the smallest garage, from the richest rock star to the scrappiest youth trying to win a local battle of the bands, the 1984 film "This Is Spinal Tap" is inseparable from the cult of rock-and-roll.
A chronicle of the rise, fall, breakup and resurrection of the fictitious British heavy-metal band Spinal Tap, this spoof "rockumentary" is the first and final satiric word on the music industry.
The lead singer David St.
Hubbins (played by the actor-musician Michael McKean), the guitarist Nigel Tufnel (Christopher Guest) and the bassist Derek Smalls (Harry Shearer) are archetypal rock-and-roll buffoons: they wear ridiculously tight spandex pants, argue over crucial issues like whether the catering-tray olives have pimentos, wreak havoc in hotel rooms and generally attempt -- not always successfully -- to indulge in every kind of rock-and-roll excess.


At Work; Romanians Start From Scratch
Of all the images transmitted to the West during the disintegration of Communism in Eastern Europe, perhaps none were as searing as those from the orphanages and hospitals of Romania after the fall of Nicolae Ceausescu.
It is no surprise then that more than two years after the December revolution, Romania's health care system still evinces the effects of the regime's political savagery.
As government and health-care workers struggle to rebuild, lack of money is a serious problem, but they also face an almost absurdist legacy of repression.
So committed was Ceausescu to rule by fiat and personal domination that he outlawed the study and teaching of management skills taken for granted in any workplace in the West.
Romania is virtually bereft of a managerial class.


ACCIDENTS OF HISTORY
I was struck by the portrayal of the Yuquis as decultured in Sandy Tolan and Nancy Postero's article, "Accidents of History" (Feb. 23).
Interestingly, we do not see ourselves as decultured even though we have lost many arts.
Suggesting the Yuquis have regressed serves to justify the practices of the missionaries as they infantilize them.
If the Yuquis discarded fire and agriculture as excess baggage centuries ago, they also survived a time when many native people didn't.
In this sense, their "culture" has served them well for the last 400 years.
MATTHEW WEINSTEIN
Madison, Wis.


Windfall


A Crowded Time at the Mortgage Desks
EARLY this year, after reading about declining interest rates, Amy Kellogg, a lawyer, and her husband, Michael, a lawyer and a business executive, decided to refinance the mortgage on their house in White Plains.
"We bought our house in the spring of 1987, and then we got what we thought was a pretty good rate for the time, a 25-year mortgage at 9 7/8 percent, from Sound Federal Savings and Loan in Mamaroneck," Mrs.
Kellogg said.
"But when interest rates started falling, we thought we could probably do better."


2 Kings: The Postal War Over Elvis's Image
Two candidates were on the minds of the 14 women who gathered around Fran Colvin's dining-room table in Clifton, N.J., last Sunday afternoon to discuss the election.
"This one shows stamina," Elaine Trautner said, looking at a photograph.
"That he could stay up there all those years. And still be King."


New Yorkers, etc.
At this very moment, there are thousands of engaged and soon-to-be-engaged couples who think their future mates are just about perfect -- just about.
Sure, there are a few small things that grate a little, that could be changed; but they're nothing that can't be dealt with.
Sometimes these matters are brought up before marriage, but more often they're not.
The reason is that there is a fairly general belief that once the vows have been taken, there will be plenty of time to work on the odd habit that irritates.


The Urban Olympics
Why not some gold medals for clothes that hold up and stand out when we're challenged by the games real people play?


Put That Out
Hoping to help save Latin America and the Caribbean from a fate worse than not smoking, the Surgeon General, Dr.
Antonia C. Novello, last week urged countries in those regions to launch anti-tobacco campaigns immediately.
With smoking more price-sensitive in the region, it has declined in recent years.
But it could quickly increase, Dr.
Novello warned, as economic conditions improve.
"It is our hope that hemisphere neighbors can avert the death and disease that inevitably result from tobacco use," she said.
It was part of a week of crusading against cigarettes for Dr.
Novello.
A few days before, she charged that the R. J. Reynolds Company's cartoon dromedary, Joe Camel, was specifically designed to appeal to children.
She and the American Medical Association called on Reynolds to stop using the ubiquitous Joe in its advertising for Camel cigarettes, the No. 6 brand in the nation.
Reynolds denied marketing to children and defended its "right to commercial free speech."


Tech Notes; Scanning for Explosives in the Luggage
I Matron Industrial Products Inc. in Foster City, Calif., has developed a system to detect explosives concealed in luggage using CAT scanning, now common in medical imaging.
The system can spot plastiques and other compact, sophisticated bombs.
Under a $4.8 million grant from the Federal Aviation Administration, Imatron recently began a five-month field trial of its prototype system at the San Francisco International Airport.


Genius for Hire: The Soviet's Best, At Bargain Rates
The millions of scientists and engineers of the former Soviet Union, once feared and respected throughout the world for their big rockets and thermonuclear bombs, for their mathematical rigor and breakthroughs in fields like nonlinear optics, are now desperate amid a crumbling economy.
Many have been thrown out of work.
The lucky ones who still do science often help support themselves and their families by moonlighting.
Inevitably, a growing number who can afford to do so are leaving to work in the West.
And those left behind can often be hired for a song.
That point was driven home last week as a top team of more than 100 fusion scientists at the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy in Moscow signed a contract to go to work for Uncle Sam.
The cost to American taxpayers for one year's effort was an amazingly low $90,000.
So eager was the team to work for the United States that it fired up its world-class apparatus for exploring the feasibility of nuclear fusion even before the contract was signed.


VIDEO
March
"THE DOCTOR." A heart surgeon (William Hurt) who operates with cocksure bravado and breezy intimidation learns a little humility when he finds out he has cancer and must go under the knife himself.
Randa Haines's film works best early on in the hospital scenes, but the "slowly emerging sentimental side endangers the crisp authenticity of its beginning" (Janet Maslin). 1991.
Touchstone. $92.95. 2:23.
Closed-captioned.
Rated PG-13.
March 18.


French and Indian Word Wars
Sacrebleu!
The wife of the President of France and a phalanx of prominent citoyens want to rewrite "La Marseillaise." According to Danielle Mitterrand and her fellow revisionists, their stirring national anthem is too bellicose for their peaceful land.
But their wish to soften it is politically correct humbug.
Political correction has merit when it strikes at specifically offensive language.
Objections to the male bias in words like "chairman" have made "chairperson" acceptable.
Native Americans resent Indian names and imagery in sports -- for example, use of their sacred feathered headdress.
But not even the Germans bridle at lyrics that rallied French battalions to "drench our fields in their tainted blood" 200 years ago.


Holli Williams and Robert Ehrlich Are Married
Holli Michele Williams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Williams of Woodmere, L.I., was married in New York last evening to Robert Ehrlich, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Ehrlich of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Abraham Weisman officiated at the Pierre.


BILLS SEEK TO END LAWMAKERS' PERKS
Driving home on Friday from Capitol Hill to his district in southern New Jersey, Representative William J. Hughes heard caller after caller tell a radio talk show host how angry they were over the perquisites enjoyed by members of Congress.
"The tenor of the calls was, 'Who do they think they are?' " said Mr.
Hughes, a Democrat who has been in Congress since 1975.


Chess
Gary Kasparov of Russia, the world champion, is slowly but steadily increasing his lead in his confrontations with his archrival and compatriot Anatoly Karpov.
In the most recent segment of their series, they drew their game in Reggio Emilia, an elite event in northern Italy that ended on Jan. 6.
Then Kasparov defeated Karpov on Feb. 23 in round two of the elite Linares International Tournament in Spain.
The overall score between the two, after 161 games including both matches and tournaments, is Kasparov 83, Karpov 78.
This is still not a great margin for Kasparov, but it will produce one eventually unless Karpov can break the pattern: when Karpov has White, he draws; when Kasparov has White, he wins.


Three Suitcases: Bill Robinson
For Bill Robinson, traveling is all about options.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 29  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 1.3 million
480 Park Avenue (58th St.)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 3 maid's rooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, c/a, new windows; maintenance $1,790, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Island Homes - Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village 675,000
337 West 12th Street  4-bedroom, 4-bath, single-family, 4-story, Greek Revival town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, solarium, 4 fireplaces; 17- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $5,900 (Brokers: Richard Cantor/Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa 325,000
39 Worth Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 13-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, 2 exposures; maintenance $648, no tax deduction (Brokers: Eychner Associates/ Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper West Side 262,500
801 West End Avenue (99th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, maid's room, dining room; maintenance $605, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Wendy Walters &amp; Associates)  West Side 800,000
25 Central Park West (62d St.)  (Century)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. condo in prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, den, 4 exposures, Central Park view; common charge $1,127 taxes $5,616 (Brokers: H.F. International Realty Ltd./Corcoran Group)  BRONX  Wakefield 197,000
75 East 237th Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Woodlawn 200,000
4219 Katonah Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, sun room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 50- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,550 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy Associates)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 260,000
270 Rugby Road  2-family, brick and frame house; 6 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in second unit; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,780 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Midwood Park 260,000
52 DeKoven Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, aluminum-sided Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,724 (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  Park Slope 440,000
213 Berkeley Place  2-family, 4-story, brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in second unit; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,149 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  QUEENS  Astoria 190,000
21-08 23d Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each; 25- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills 362,000
108-48 67th Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, tapestry-brick Tudor; dining room, maid's room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,600 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 315,000
41 Rae Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, broad-side ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, in-ground heated pool, taxes $3,000 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Grasmere 170,000
466 Oder Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


Making a Difference; 'Any Car Any Color'
Earl A. Scheib founded a chain of auto painting shops around Los Angeles more than five decades ago, betting correctly that drivers would rush to spiff up their cars with a new coat of paint if the price was reasonable.
With the help of his low-budget commercials -- "I'll paint any car any color for $29.95" -- Mr.
Scheib took the chain national in the 1950's and 60's and made a fortune.
But when he died on Feb. 29 at age 85, Mr.
Scheib left behind a struggling company.
Last week, the board of Earl Scheib Inc. named one of his three sons, 55-year-old Donald R. Scheib, to replace him as chief executive and to attempt to get the business growing again.


Making a Difference; Volcker's Newest Venture
Paul A. Volcker, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, seems to be picking up steam these days rather than slowing down.
Mr.
Volcker, who left the Fed in 1987, is taking on a new assignment, chairman of a joint venture called J. Rothschild, Wolfensohn &amp; Company, which will offer investment banking services in Europe.
The job, announced earlier this month, is an extension of the new career he began in 1988, when he was hired by James D. Wolfensohn to be chairman of Mr.
Wolfensohn's investment firm.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Housing starts, in millions
1.17
1.19
Consumer Price Index, percent change
0.1
0.1
Current account, billions
-$10.5
-$9.5
Industrial production, percent change
-0.9
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
78.0
78.3
Thursday
Merchandise trade, billions
-$5.9
-$5.0
Tuesday: Illinois and Michigan hold Presidential primaries *
Corporate real earnings report *
Japan household expenditures  Wednesday: Federal Reserve's beige book *
French industrial production  Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting  Friday: Congressional deadline for fiscal package  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


BEST SELLERS: March 15, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
1
5
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
3
2
3
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska.
4
3
4
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman talk on an "adult party line."
5
1
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
6
4
12
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
7
6
5
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
8
5
23
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
9
7
8
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
10
8
5
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) A private eye probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
11
9
2
KISS, by Ed McBain. (Morrow, $17.) Two 87th Precinct detectives to the rescue of a woman.
12
1
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire developer in rustic mountain country.
13
10
8
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the aid of an actress.
14
13
100
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15 *
1
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
16 *
1
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $21.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
17 *
12
8
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume in the series "The Corps."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
6
2
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia and the influence of the mob around the country.
3
5
22
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
2
17
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
4
3
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his heritage through three generations, from Italy to Ocean City, N.J.
6
7
11
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
7
3
15
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
8
8
3
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) A Scottsdale, Ariz., attorney argues that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
9
10
18
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
10
9
9
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
11
16
5
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America faces.
12
11
26
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
13
38
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
14
15
21
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France.
15
28
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces. (LP)
16 *
12
2
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) An economist argues that in the past 20 years Americans' leisure time has greatly diminished, with foreboding consequences.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
15
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
3
3
10
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
4
15
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
5
6
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) The thesis of this challenging book by a distinguished political scientist is that unto this day black people have not received a fair shake as American citizens -- and that most white Americans don't believe this.
PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic, by Edward Villella with Larry Kaplan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) How a guy from Queens became a great American dancer, and how a great choreographer created through him a new way of dancing for Americans.
It wasn't all fun.
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST, by Alvin M. Josephy Jr. (Knopf, $27.50.) A learned and powerful narrative that reveals how intimately the war and the Western expansion were joined.
THE END OF THE NOVEL, by Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $17.50.) The writer-narrator of this very funny novella by a German poet, publisher and editor decides to have his hero commit suicide, and to remove from the book all episodes that might provide a motive.
An elegant entertainment results.
THE KIND OF LIGHT THAT SHINES ON TEXAS, by Reginald McKnight. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) Stories that exploit their author's uncannily sharp ear, bleak vision and incendiary humor.
GOOD GOSSIP, by Jacqueline Carey. (Random House, $19.) A witty, appealing collection of short stories featuring a continuing cast of men and women trying to end their extended adolescence.
THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, by Gordon S. Wood. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Wood argues with learning and grace that if social change is the measure of radicalism, our revolution was as radical as anybody's.


Aides Expect Jamaica Premier to Step Down Soon
Prime Minister Michael N. Manley of Jamaica, one of his country's most durable political figures, will announce his retirement from office on Sunday, several close associates say.
Friends said Mr.
Manley, who is 67 years old and has suffered intermittent health problems since his landslide re-election in 1989, plans to leave office by the end of April to devote himself to writing memoirs of his 39-year career in public service.


When the Youth Among Vintages Have Their Coming-Out Parties
NEUSTIFT, Grinzing, Sievering, Nussdorf and Kahlenberg: five famous wine towns.
Never heard of them?
Ah, but then, you're not Viennese.
They are the wine villages of Vienna, and they make the most romantic of all spring wines.
Consumers tend to associate wine with autumn and the harvest, when the grapes are picked and the wine is made.
Moreover, the popularity of Beaujolais nouveau in recent years has overshadowed the fact that spring is the traditional time to welcome the new vintage.
Knowledgeable Beaujolais fans have always smiled indulgently at the nouveau hoopla and waited until the following spring for the arrival of the "real" Beaujolais, which has had the whole winter to settle down.


Deborah Hantman, Teacher, Is Wed
Deborah L. Hantman, a daughter of Alan and Rosalyn Hantman of Teaneck, N.J., was married in New York last evening to Steven J. Landzberg, the son of Joan and Abraham H. Landzberg of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Rabbi Louis Sigel performed the ceremony at the Columbia University Faculty House.
Mrs.
Landzberg, 25 years old, teaches at the Village Community School in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband.
Both are members of Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree from Teachers College at Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president at the Rockefeller Center Management Corporation in New York.


THE PROS HDF&gt;hHED,6,39,1; The Cyclone Man and Others Who Bring You Spring
AH, spring!
Finally, the sky glistens and balmy breezes arrive.
Buds appear on the trees, eager to unfurl into leaves.
There are the tootling birds, the scrabbling squirrels, the crocuses.
You walk down the sidewalk and spy dead stoves, ironed-out ironing boards and grungy carpeting overcome by cat hair.
Pollen dust shows up, and one hears "Gesundheit!" more often than "Move it, buddy."


Irish Pub Music
To the Editor: I was interested to read "A Hornpipe, a Reel and a Pint" about Irish music pubs (Travel, Dec. 29).
My family and I spent a year in Northern Ireland as part of an academic exchange and we were much impressed by the Irish pubs.
There is a different feeling in Irish pubs than in bars and lounges in the U.S.
In Ireland they are community gathering spots.
I see them as extensions of people's living rooms.
They are warm, safe, congenial places to gather for conversation, music and company.


Dinkins Replaces Finance Chief
Moving to reshape his fund-raising team for next year's election, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced the appointment of Leonard Riggio, chief executive of Barnes &amp; Noble Bookstores Inc., as the new finance chairman of his campaign.
He succeeds Arnold I. Biegen, who pleaded guilty last month to stealing $158,000 from the campaign funds.
The Mayor also said that Kenneth E. Glover, a senior vice president at RJR Nabisco Inc., would become the campaign treasurer, replacing Dr.
Kevin C. Greenidge, the Mayor's ophthalmologist, who agreed to fill the post temporarily last month.


Better Odds; Faulty Math Heightens Fears of Breast Cancer
The risks of getting breast cancer have been so greatly exaggerated that many women are needlessly taking potentially harmful drugs or even having their healthy breasts removed.
Alarm is growing among cancer specialists, who say it is almost impossible to overcome misconceptions about the odds that originate with deliberately scary predictions by the American Cancer Society.
Those misleading odds, they say, are then repeated by the media and widely misinterpreted by some family doctors.


Business Diary/March 8-13
COMPANIES The F.C.C. Moves to Free the Airwaves -- but for Whom?


Here's the Way To Stop Fighting
To the Sports Editor:
I went with my 10-year-old son to a Devils-Islanders game at the Meadowlands.
We enjoyed the game, but fights broke out twice, lasting close to a minute each, with serious wrestling and punching.


Streetscapes: 80 Wooster Street; The Irascible 'Father' of SoHo
EVEN in the last quarter century of profound change, no neighborhood in Manhattan has been as utterly transformed as SoHo.
From a backwater of decrepit lofts and low-tech industry, it has emerged as an expensive neighborhood of "spaces" shown proudly in magazines like Architectural Digest.
If this rags-to-riches saga started anywhere, it was with George Maciunas's 1967 conversion of 80 Wooster Street, where, amid the limousines and expensive galleries, the shareholders in SoHo's original co-op loft are now having trouble with the cost of repainting the trim.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
Hoffman's article brought back painful memories of interning at a domestic-violence counseling center.
From the therapist's point of view, treating families involved in domestic abuse can be frustrating and exhausting.
Any threat to the relationship between the abusive spouse and the victim, namely therapy, is quickly thwarted.
Holding on to one's spouse is equivalent to staying attached to one's primary relationship with the mother (however abusive she was).
Therefore, leaving one's spouse is extremely difficult and threatening to one's sense of being.
This concept holds true for both the batterer and the victim.
NAN MILLER
Flushing, Queens


Hiding Behind the Antidumping Laws
To the Editor:
I read with great interest James Bovard's article regarding the need to repeal United States antidumping laws (Forum, Feb. 9), and the Feb. 23 response of Don E. Newquist, chairman of the United States International Trade Commission.


Adult Children
To the Editor: My husband and I, and several of my siblings (and assorted offspring), shared many fondly remembered vacations with my parents between the mid-60's and mid-80's.
The trick to these mutually enjoyable vacations: no tricks and no surprises.
We always went to the same low-key resort area, stayed in separate but nearby accommodations, rarely ate together (except for beach picnics or restaurant meals) and made excursions together only after discussion and mutual consent.
None of use felt obliged to observe "togetherness." ANNE C. DENLINGER Merion, Pa.


Proposal Urges Shift of Illegal-Alien Inmates
Two New York lawmakers have introduced a proposal in Congress to relieve state prison overcrowding by converting three closed military bases into lockups for 4,500 illegal aliens convicted of the most serious crimes.
The bipartisan bills, offered this week by Charles E. Schumer in the House and Alfonse M. D'Amato in the Senate, also would provide $100 million a year in Federal funds to reimburse states for incarcerating about 35,000 other illegal aliens.


A Show by 40 Women Who Teach Art
FOR its "New Jersey Project Invitational," the Robeson Center Gallery, at Rutgers University here, has mustered 40 female artists.
One might say "only" 40, for it has long been apparent that the majority of artists exhibiting in New Jersey are women.
Credit for this and the corresponding increases in the number of women in curatorial positions and on art faculties must go to the feminist movement.
In art, however, this began 20 years ago when artists like Miriam Schapiro and Judy Chicago, together with such writers as Linda Nochlin and Lucy Lippard, declared war on male supremacy.


Pamela Foster Plans Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Carlton Foster of Wayland, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Marks Foster, to Stephen Alan Crystal, a son of Helene Crystal of New York and the late Jerome Crystal.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Foster, 24 years old, graduated from Duke University and is a law student at American University, as is her fiance.
Her father is a radiologist at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother, Ronna Foster, is a vice president of the women's division of Combined Jewish Philanthropies of Greater Boston.


For Whatever Ails You, A Balm of Bats and Balls
HANG on, all you flu-ridden and daylight-deprived.
Baseball is coming.
I know it is, because I have seen it with my own eyes, at spring training in Florida.
Soon baseball will be in New York City just about every day from April into October, making everything all right.
The nice thing about baseball is that it shares its grace with the uninitiated.
Just the sound of a baseball game from a passing car radio makes a person relax, like the first warm breeze of the season.


Should the Sliding Door Become Stuck
STUBBORN sliding doors often need just minor adjustments to correct problems.
There are several ways to service the most popular styles, including patio doors.
Interior sliding doors like those across closet openings and between rooms are usually one of these three types:


Too Liberal to Live
THE PELICAN BRIEF
By John Grisham. 371 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


On Her Toes
As Katherine Dunham weakens physically during her fast to protest the treatment of Haitian refugees, her spirit dances on.
Miss Dunham, one of the pioneers of American modern dance, has subsisted on juice, tea and water for six weeks now at her home in East St.
Louis, Ill., and says she will go on until the Bush Administration admits Haitians as political refugees.
"The lives of those people who half drown in those little boats are being equated to animals," she said in an interview last weekend.
"It means I have to declare out-and-out war." She has been advised on fasting by Dick Gregory, and has had telephone conversations with the deposed Haitian President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who is scheduled to visit her tomorrow.
The 82-year-old Miss Dunham, who has a home in Haiti, has rejected Mr.
Aristide's past advice to curtail her fast.
"Even though I'm losing my voice and feeling a little tired, I can't stop fasting until there has been some resolution in Haiti," she said.


Miss Comfort Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Comfort of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nathalie Pierrepont Comfort, to James Alexander Urry, the son of Mrs.
Charles F. Urry of Locust Valley and the late Mr.
Urry.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Comfort, 26 years old, teaches kindergarten at the Trinity School in New York.
She graduated from Pine Manor College and has a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is chairman of Court Square Capital, a New York investment company.
Her mother, Nathalie Comfort, is a vice president of the Museum of the City of New York.


Southern Exposure:
Get past beach, Deco and golden beauties, and there's a vibrant city buzzing with funky charm, seductive ethnicity and a less breathless attitude toward everyday toil -- the perfect setting for men's wear that finally fits as roomily as favorite sweat clothes, moves with breezy elegance and looks as good as a suntan.


ACCIDENTS OF HISTORY
It cannot be denied that the Yuquis are living more comfortably at Chimore with the missionaries.
But is it really necessary to strip them of something as fundamental as their own names?
Or to make them ashamed of their own bodies?
In every way, the Yuquis have been made to feel that their life in the forest was not only irrelevant to their present life, but foolish.
JILL KINGDON DEMPSEY New York, N.Y.


Sunday Outing; The Music Still Goes Round
Hankering for pink and green horses?
A she-dragon, perhaps?
Then the New England Carousel Museum in Bristol, Conn., is worth a trip.
The museum, on the first floor of a 19th-century knitting mill about two hours from New York City, has a large and intriguing collection of antique carousel chariots, memorabilia and creatures -- a dragon, a dolphin and, of course, horses, more than 200 in all.
All the animals on display were hand carved for carousels, many of them more than a century ago.
The oldest piece in the museum is a chariot from 1868.


Victoria Lewisohn Godsick, Teacher, To Wed Leonard H. Hersh, a Lawyer
Dr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Godsick of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Victoria Lewisohn Godsick, to Leonard Harris Hersh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Hersh of Edison, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Godsick, 23 years old, teaches kindergarten at the Dalton School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in New York.
Her mother, Aileen Godsick, is a reading specialist and admissions associate at Dalton.


PHOTOGRAPHY
Today
"GAY BLOCK: RESCUERS OF THE HOLOCAUST," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
The result of a three-year project, this series of more than 20 color portraits, accompanied by texts, pays homage to people now living in Europe, Israel, the United States and Canada who risked their lives to aid Jews in Europe during World War II.
Through April 7.
Hours: Friday to Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; closed Wednesday.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free for those under 16).
Information: (212) 708-9500.


CAMPUS LIFE: Denver; A Composer's Music Is a Message to Students
To the music world, David Amram is a prolific American composer, but to music and dance students at the University of Denver here, he is known as the encourager in residence.
Mr.
Amram, whose work ranges from orchestral music and jazz to operas and film scores, is spending this year in Denver as a visiting professor and the recipient of the university's Leo Block Chair in the Humanities.
In addition to classwork and public performances, Mr.
Amram presented his Shakespearean opera "Twelfth Night" recently in tribute to the late Joseph Papp, the theater impresario, who wrote the libretto to the opera.


Troubled Housing Developers Shed Golf Courses
Slower home sales have driven residential developers to sell the amenities they once counted on to hasten land sales and raise prices -- their golf courses.
At least 10 percent of 2,600 residential developments centered on golf courses are in some sort of financial distress because of a lack of sales, according to real estate and golf industry analysts.


St. Lawrence Skates To Fourth ECAC Title
St.
Lawrence had too much speed and scoring punch for Cornell tonight in the championship game of the Eastern College Athletic Association's hockey tournament at Boston Garden.
The Saints won the game, 4-2, and the title for a fourth time, and the third time for their coach, Joe Marsh.
In the Marsh era at the Canton, N.Y., university there have been ECAC championship teams in 1988, 1989 and now 1992.


Keeping in Step With St. Patrick's Day
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY, which falls on Tuesday, has become the occasion for some rather sophisticated food in recent years.
Irish chefs have rediscovered and refined their country's traditional dishes; the cottage industries -- cheese, honey, exotic seaweeds, trout farms -- have been revived, and the result is some of the most interesting new cooking around.
One young Irish chef, James O'Shea, who is owner of the West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn., often serves dishes in his restaurant that, unknown to his customers, have Irish origins.
"Pies are as common in Ireland as pates in France," he said.
"In almost any food shop, you will find an enormous selection to take home -- both in gourmet form and in fat-food form." One of the most popular items on his current menu is a pie made with goat cheese and leeks and cooked in a crust made with bread crumbs.
It is known in Ireland as curd pie.


Social Events
Aiding Young Opera Singers
March 16 -- Dawn Upshaw, soprano, will give a recital at the Lotos Club, 5 East 66th Street, at 8 P.M., to benefit the George London Foundation, which has made 230 grants since 1971 to young American and Canadian opera singers.
A champagne reception will follow the recital.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 772-2768.


A Show's Star Is the Steam Locomotive
THE Age of Steam was born in the 1820's and may still exist in parts of Asia, along with old Singer sewing machines.
In the United States, steam was gone by the mid-1960's, yet its spirit lingers -- in the hearts of railroad buffs, the locomotives maintained as tourist attractions, the children's television show "Shining Time," a current commercial for spring training in Florida and in a selection of railroad art and artifacts titled "Rolling Steel."
The show, running through next Sunday at the College of New Rochelle's Castle Gallery (654-5423), features electric trains and diesels, too, but its star is definitely the steam locomotive -- greased and ready to go, under way and belching smoke or left to rust at an overgrown siding.


We Could All Learn a Thing or Two From the Chimpanzees
To the Editor:
"Professional societies, scientists, patient groups and others concerned about mental health issues have been discussing the statement of Dr. Frederick K. Goodwin and lobbying for or against his continuing as director of the National Institute of Mental Health" (news article, March 8).
Your discussion of Dr.
Goodwin's comparison between inner-city human beings and murderously violent monkeys misses important points.


Is Japan Out to Get Us?
To the Editor:
I must respond to Robert B. Reich's attack on my book, "The Japanese Power Game," and on other books that have attempted to shed light on relations between the United States and Japan.
To put it bluntly, Mr.
Reich is on very thin intellectual ground, and he makes a number of basic errors in assessing Japan's competitive challenge.


Keeping in Step With St. Patrick's Day
ST.
PATRICK'S DAY, which falls on Tuesday, has become the occasion for some rather sophisticated food in recent years.
Irish chefs have rediscovered and refined their country's traditional dishes; the cottage industries -- cheese, honey, exotic seaweeds, trout farms -- have been revived, and the result is some of the most interesting new cooking around.
One young Irish chef, James O'Shea, who is owner of the West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn., often serves dishes in his restaurant that, unknown to his customers, have Irish origins.
"Pies are as common in Ireland as pates in France," he said.
"In almost any food shop, you will find an enormous selection to take home -- both in gourmet form and in fat-food form." One of the most popular items on his current menu is a pie made with goat cheese and leeks and cooked in a crust made with bread crumbs.
It is known in Ireland as curd pie.


Larkin Hopes Reds Plan to Stay Put
With an influx of front-line players onto his team and his signature affixed to the sixth-richest contract in baseball, Barry Larkin has a good feeling about the Cincinnati Reds.
Sometimes, though, a frightening thought intrudes on his positive outlook.
"Now that we have the players, it's a matter of keeping them here," the highly talented Reds shortstop said.
"I'd hate to see a situation where we get all the players and not be as successful as we hope to be, then watch her unload everybody and go to a situation like Houston. I don't want to be in a situation like that. I want to win. Call me selfish, but I want to win."


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Administrators Give Assistance To Safety Program
When University of Washington students participated in the second Nightwalk campus-safety program of the school year recently, the tour coincided with a new phase in the program's six-year history: for the first time since it began, the university administration had acted on the program's recommendations for improving safety.
Nightwalk, which is sponsored by the student government's crime-prevention committee, invites students to walk over the 680-acre university campus to note areas where lighting is insufficient and where shrubbery is overgrown -- providing spaces for criminals to hide.
Group members also note where emergency phones could be installed for direct access to campus police.


Review/Music; Uchida Is Soloist With Philharmonic
For some, the concert hall is a theatrical event to be seen as much as listened to.
For others, the presence of musicians is tolerated for the spontaneity of gesture and immediacy of sound they add; otherwise, performers are held as obstructions, extraneous impressions to be cleared from the path extending from ear to music.
There is a danger for the first group in that eyes are notoriously poor musicians.
They fix on modest gesture and the expressionless face and cannot hear the passion and beauty that may be emanating from them.
Compelling stage presences, conversely, frequently make mediocre music.


House Bank Was Operated Almost as Payroll Office for Representatives
The House Bank closed in December, after more than 150 years in business, amid a scandal that now threatens to close out some Congressional careers.
Following are questions and answers about the bank
.
How serious a scandal is this?


Haitians Return to Deepening Misery
When the Coast Guard cutter Dependable berthed here this morning amid a collection of rusty freighters and listing wrecks, the marines aboard joined local photographers in crowding the gangway to snap pictures of the thin and threadbare Haitians who are expected to be among the last of the thousands forcibly returned to their country.
But if a strong sense of relief was felt by many of the Americans involved, from the coastguardsmen who have busily plucked Haitians from dangerous seas to the diplomats who have wrangled constantly with a Government the United States does not recognize, for most of those snared in the five-month operation, the future has become neither clearer nor brighter.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 12 about the use of computers to make travel arrangements referred incorrectly to a service that provides overnight delivery of airline tickets.
The service, called Quiktix, is offered by Prodigy Information Services, not Compuserve.
A similar overnight service on the Compuserve network is called AA Online.


Lawyer Held in Extortion of East German Prisoners
An East German lawyer who built an unusual and lucrative law practice specializing in obtaining the freedom of men and women imprisoned in former Soviet-bloc countries was arrested late Friday on suspicion of extorting property and other wealth from East Germans seeking to travel to the West, the German authorities said.
The 66-year-old lawyer, Wolfgang Vogel, played a major role in such spectacular cases as the 1962 exchange of Gary Powers, the American U-2 pilot, for Rudolf Abel, a Soviet spy held in the United States, and the release in 1986 of Natan Sharansky , a Soviet dissident arrested for espionage and later released to the West.


Camera
Most people probably don't know David Tenenbaum, but many may recall a photograph he took for The Associated Press at the 1980 Winter Olympic Games in Lake Placid, N.Y.
The American hockey team had just won the gold medal after defeating the Soviet Union.
Jim Craig, an American player, skated around the rink carrying the American flag, scanning the stands forlornly for his father.


Buffalo, Boar and Caribou on the Range
WHAT are alligator, buffalo, caribou and wild boar doing in a place like Garden City?
They are not at a game farm or roaming Stewart Avenue, but are evening specials at the Garden City Grande Cafe.
This with-it restaurant, which doubles as a late-night weekend dance club called Wings, is an unlikely home for such exotica or for its equally intriguing menu selections.
Although a few dishes miss -- the buffalo was chewy and the boar dry -- most of the food is right on the mark.


CAMPUS LIFE: Vassar; 'Happy Birthday To Vincent' -- Millay, of Course
Students at Vassar College not only study the poetry of one of the college's most famous graduates, they also celebrate her birthday as well.
Edna St.
Vincent Millay, class of 1917, was remembered with the play "Happy Birthday Vincent" for her 100th birthday.


Critical Of Critique
To the Editor:
I resent the veiled implications in Jamie James's article "Two Americans Converge on Whitman"  [ March 1 ] .
In his critique of my "Pilgrim Strangers" and John Adams's "Wound Dresser," both settings of words by Walt Whitman, Mr.
James writes: "Interestingly, it is not Mr. Rorem, a gay composer, but Mr. Adams who dares to emphasize explicitly the poet's homosexuality, and thus implicitly his work's connections with the AIDS epidemic, by concluding with the line 'Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.' "


Tyson's Trial Isn't Sports News
To the Sports Editor:
Mike Tyson is a criminal, not a sportsman.
Thus I am dismayed by The Times' decision to place the bulk of the news story about his rape conviction on the sports pages.
Sexual assault is not a sport.
Reporting the trial's outcome next to show-dog pictures can only serve to trivialize the brutality of Tyson's behavior.
ANN-MARIE PALEY Forest Hills, Queens


East European Antiquities Shed Light on a Hidden World
Eastern Europe's impact in antiquity on the continent's culture has gone unrecognized largely because so little has been known about the region.
During World War II and later under the Communists, it was off-limits to American and Western European scholars.
But barriers have fallen, and new discoveries are being made.
On a recent buying trip, Michael Ward, a New York dealer, found a Slinky-like bracelet, an asymmetric copper ax and a bug-eyed clay goddess.
These items were made up to 7,500 years ago by tribal artisans living between the Danube and the Black Sea.
They are among the 100 examples exhibited in "Hidden Heritage: The Art of Eastern Europe From the Stone Age to the Celts," at the Michael Ward Gallery, 9 East 93d Street, through May 30.


Miss Markham To Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford M. Markham of Falls Church, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Markham, to Morgan Clarke McLanahan, a son of Mrs.
Duer McLanahan of New York and the late Mr.
McLanahan.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Markham, 28 years old, is a public information assistant at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is an associate chairman and assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Georgetown University.


UConn Team's Success Is Well-Kept Secret
EVEN during this mildest of winters, most evenings are chilly on the University of Connecticut campus at Storrs -- cold enough to make watching a hockey game at the outdoor rink a numbing experience.
At a time when the UConn men's and women's basketball teams play their home games in a glitzy new arena, the men's hockey team is one of the few college squads still relegated to playing out in the cold.
Despite that handicap the hockey team has enjoyed its best season ever.
That will probably come as news to many UConn basketball fans, quite a few of whom may not know that the university even has a hockey team.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 1 about the return of war booty misidentified the evangelist depicted in a 10th-century Gospel.
It was St.
Matthew, not St.
Luke.


Students Join Tribute to Jim Henson
HOW do you get to Avery Fisher Hall?
In Armonk these days it helps to be a flutist or drummer, attend either the middle school or high school here and, of course, practice, practice, practice.
About 20 such students, selected by Rick Jaeschke, director of music for the Byram Hills School District, will be on the Avery Fisher Hall stage in Lincoln Center on March 28, when the Little Orchestra Society presents a musical tribute to the late Jim Henson.


All About/Telephone Features; Emboldened Phone Companies Are Pushing the Frills
Knock, knock.
It's the Amway door-to-door sales representative.
But along with the usual assortment of soaps and shampoos, some of these sales reps are now pitching Caller ID, which identifies the telephone number of an incoming call.
Late last year, the Amway Corporation signed up as a distributor in Maryland of fancy new telephone features offered by the Bell Atlantic Corporation.
Using door-to-door salesmen marks the most striking attempt so far by telephone companies to peddle new services, such as Call Blocking, which allows customers to route certain callers to a message saying they are not available; Select Forward, which allows people to designate numbers that should be forwarded to wherever they happen to be and Return Call, which allows people who missed calls to return them even if they have no idea who was trying to reach them.


Volunteers Sift Through Archives
YENI NEGIN came across the handiwork of George D. Hine quite by accident.
She was going through old County Court records recently when a small piece of paper fell out.
Upon closer inspection, the beautifully handwritten bank note turned out to be a $3 note drawn on the Chemical Bank of New York.
The warrant that had accompanied the bill, dated May 24, 1831, accused Mr.
Hine of counterfeiting the money.
It is unclear if the warrant was ever served or if Mr.
Hine was brought to justice, but for Mrs.
Negin, a Yonkers resident, the discovery came as part of her new career as a historian.


Parents Recall Ordeal of Prosecuting In Artificial-Insemination Fraud Case
Last spring, a young mother sat nervously in a drab United States Attorney's office, stared at the lawyer and Government investigator who had been carefully questioning her and was suddenly seized with a frightening thought: "They know, they know."
Looking back now, she remembers the shock spreading slowly as she realized that these strangers had found her family's biggest secret -- that her young daughter was born after she had been artificially inseminated with sperm from an anonymous donor.


New Yorkers, etc.
At this very moment, there are thousands of engaged and soon-to-be-engaged couples who think their future mates are just about perfect -- just about.
Sure, there are a few small things that grate a little, that could be changed; but they're nothing that can't be dealt with.
Sometimes these matters are brought up before marriage, but more often they're not.
The reason is that there is a fairly general belief that once the vows have been taken, there will be plenty of time to work on the odd habit that irritates.


Perspectives: West Orange; Home Builders Step Up Construction
OTHER builders around New Jersey may differ, but Sam M. Gershwin is betting on a pick-up in the home-buying market.
He says the evidence is already in hand.
It's nothing dramatic, but it's enough to lead the building company in which he is a partner to accelerate production.
Mr.
Gershwin is in charge of a town-house development here called The Highlands at West Essex, in rolling country off Oval Road, near the borough of Essex Fells.
It is one of several New Jersey projects of Garden Homes Development of Short Hills.
Eventually, there are to be 300 houses on the 65-acre site.


Liesl Corbin Has Wedding
Elizabeth Merrick Corbin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace Kellogg Corbin 3d of New Vernon, N.J., was married there yesterday to Stephen Chandler Rexford Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rexford of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
George E. Chorba performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Rexford, who is 22 years old and is known as Liesl, is a computer consultant for John Ehlers Associates in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a private banking officer with Midlantic National Bank in Edison, N.J.


Pamela Bresnahan, Lawyer, Marries
Pamela Anne Bresnahan and Peter Frederick Axelrad, both lawyers, were married yesterday at Gary's Restaurant in Washington.
Judge Frank A. Kaufman of the United States District Court for the district of Maryland officiated.
Ms.
Bresnahan, 37 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a partner in the Washington office of Semmes, Bowen &amp; Semmes, a Baltimore law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Maryland, from which she received a law degree.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Bresnahan of Silver Spring, Md., both retired.


Forging Ahead With Giacometti
The Whimsical furniture created by the Swiss sculptor Diego Giacometti -- brother of the celebrated artist Alberto -- has become so popular that prices have soared over the last few years.
So have the number of fakes that have surfaced on the international art market.
Last December, 25 people, including several art dealers, were found guilty in a French court of participating in a multimillion-dollar fraud.


LAWMAKERS ASKED ABOUT OVERDRAFTS
The New York region's Congressional representatives came home from Washington this weekend braced to be asked a dread election-year question: Are the members of Congress crooks or merely incompetents?
But in church basements, on Y.M.C.A. basketball courts and at early St.
Patrick's Day parades, the representatives encountered more shrugs than scorn yesterday.
While they had set out to control the damage from the House Bank checking account scandal that rocked Capitol Hill last week, most of their constituents just did not seem to care.


Why Men Hate to Dress
A young man laces up a pair of brown suede bucks by Gianni Versace in Barneys New York's shoe department.
He stands up, wiggles his toes, bounces up and down, walks about a bit, looks in the mirror, looks at the bottom of one shoe, then turns to his female companion and says, "It's up to you. What do you think?"
The difference between men's relationship to clothing and women's relationship to clothing is simple:
Most women get dressed to look and feel beautiful.


Rangers Face the Blues and Other Woes
Coach Roger Neilson had a lot on his mind tonight, beginning but not ending with Brett Hull.
Hull would have to be stopped, or at least slowed, if the Rangers were to have a chance against the Blues in St.
Louis.


So Young, So Good, So Popular
EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY: SELECTED POEMS
The Centenary Edition.
Edited by Colin Falck.  162 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $18.


Review/Dance; 'Typhoon,' A Dutch Premiere
There was a mad, obsessive grandeur to Krisztina de Chatel's "Typhoon," presented on Friday night at the Kitchen -- and a mad, obsessive imagination at work.
For about 45 minutes, five members of Miss de Chatel's Amsterdam-based modern dance company strode toward and away from three industrial fans along straight paths in repeated permutations of steps and gestures performed at the same time, in staggered sequences and at varying distances between one dancer and another.
The overall look of the movement was of slowed-down and ornamented goose-stepping.
Legs and arms pushed, stretching, slowly out and back.
The dancers tilted as if blown by wind, though the tilting was sometimes into the air, and for most of the piece the fans were still.
There was a certain fascination in watching the weave of bodies and movement change gradually and sometimes almost imperceptibly.
It was less fascinating than one might have expected, though, to see them react to an imaginary force than to an actual one.
The dancers had worked their way up to near-pivots by the time the fans kicked in.
Moving with and against the air, the dancers grew interestingly frantic.
At the end, the fans stopped and started almost teasingly, as if to suggest that the dancers were mere puppets in their breeze.
But the mind did wander.
Would the perspiring dancers get pneumonia from the sudden wind?
Did their parents regret all that money spent on dance classes?


The State of the Manhattan Commute
A SALESMAN who is a half-hour late for a power breakfast with his biggest customer, or a lawyer who misses most of her daughter's first piano recital, might find it hard to believe.
But the daily journey of New Jersey's half-million commuters to and from Manhattan, transportation experts say, has been improving in terms of congestion and delays.
In part, that reflects some substantial investments by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey in ramp repair and track maintenance.
More significant, though, is the fact that the ranks of New Jersey commuters have been dwindling of late.
Last year, the total number of individual trips under and over the river, most of them by commuters, was 406.6 million, down about 8 million from 1990.


On the Street; Faces in a Crowd Look to Jazz Age
There's a coat walking around town that looks like a 1920's poster.
It's a pile coat, dramatically printed with large black and white faces from the Jazz Age, and it's certainly a novelty in a sea of somber, solid-color coats.


ART
Today
BRICE MARDEN, Dia Center for the Arts, 548 West 22d Street, Manhattan.
After one of the longer transitional phases on record, the young painting star of the early 1970's is evolving into the eminence grise of the 90's.
The elegant linear networks Mr.
Marden has nurtured over the last decade come to fruition in the paintings and drawings of his recent "Cold Mountain" series, perhaps his strongest work so far.
Through May 31.
Hours: Thursday to Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3.
Information: (212) 989-5912.


Ann Czerwonka To Wed in May
Mrs.
Henry V. Czerwonka of Glastonbury, Conn., has announced May wedding plans for her daughter Ann Cassidy Czerwonka and Thomas Moore Heller, a son of Frederick Heller of Sonoita, Ariz., and the late Catherine Flynn.
Miss Czerwonka is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Czerwonka.
Miss Czerwonka, 34 years old, is a senior associate with Industrial Economics, an environmental economics consulting concern in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father was a group manager with Unisys in its Hartford office.
Her mother, Margaret Czerwonka, is the nurse coordinator for the Coventry, Conn., school system and the nurse at Coventry High School.


Will Aerospace Be the Next Casualty?
At least once a day, the giant doors open at one of the Boeing Company's plants here and another plane rolls off the line, helping the company maintain its position as the undisputed worldwide leader in commercial aircraft.
But if Boeing today is an example of American business at its strongest, the company also faces a future in which its dominance -- and that of the entire American aerospace industry -- will be slowly eaten away by foreign competition.
That erosion, in fact, is already under way, putting at risk jobs, a huge trade surplus and control of vital commercial and military technologies.
And as it accelerates, it is raising questions not just about Boeing's prospects, but about the proper way for the United States to manage its future.


California Republicans Ready for Civil War
Barring a political miracle, President Bush will have long since nailed down the Republican Presidential nomination by the time the big California primary rolls around on June 2.
Nevertheless, the primary promises an emotional battle for the heart and soul of Republicanism in the largest state.
It could also bring an early preview of the 1996 Republican Presidential sweepstakes.
The reason is that Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr.
Bush's challenger on the political right, has vowed to turn the primary into purgatory for Gov.
Pete Wilson, a middle-of-the-road Republican considered something of a traitor by the party's right wing.
Mr.
Buchanan, with bloody historical allegory, promised to stage the "Antietam of the Republican Party" on primary day, to bring retribution for the conservatives who "have had their noses rubbed in the dirt" by Mr.
Wilson and Mr.
Bush.
He told a television interviewer in Michigan that California voters "have begged us virtually to come out and make the case against Pete Wilson Republicanism and George Bush Republicanism for the conservative cause."


New Reflections Abound in Glass Art
SPOTLIGHTS penetrate the translucent interiors and set off sparklike reflections on the surfaces of the art glass on display at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts.
"Contemporary Glass Sculpture: Innovative Form and Expression" is one of the most stunning craft exhibitions in this state in recent years.
Pat Kettenring, a curator of the show, said she had tried to include a broad range of glass techniques.
The work shown demonstrates not only the intrinsic appeal of glass but also its value as a medium for expressing ideas.
Ms.
Kettenring and Kiku Fukui, the other curator, selected 42 pieces by nine American, three Japanese, one Swedish and two Czech artists.


Keep the Fancy Service And Give Me Low Fares
Your reporter misses the point in her coverage of Braniff's service from Islip MacArthur to points south.
I don't fly Braniff because I want china service and filet mignon.
I fly Braniff because I want the cheapest fares possible, with a schedule that works for me on an airline that is safe.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 205,000
106 Mount Pleasant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; 2-zone heat, full basement; taxes $3,224.
Glen Rock 153,000
106 Ellsworth Terrace  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; large backyard, close to transportation, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,616.
Mount Laurel 220,500
2 Bridle Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; Jacuzzi, skylights, large entrance foyer; taxes $4,318.
North Haledon 325,000
8 Hartwig Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; multilevel deck, pool, fireplace; taxes $5,883.
Waldwick 168,000
57 Stuart Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 46-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen and stove, screened porch; taxes $4,026.
Wanaque 180,000
28 Wilson Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; new kitchen, large rooms, deck; taxes $5,071.
OTHER AREAS Weston, Conn. 512,500  91 Eleven O'Clock Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 51-year-old French country home; stone facade, pond, 3 acres; taxes $5,762.
Armonk, N.Y. 600,000
4 Devoe Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; sun room, eat-in kitchen, family room, playroom, 1 acre; taxes $7,356.
Commack, L.I. 169,000
12 Cobb Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800.


Coins
Tokens In Lieu of Change  Among a host of coins being auctioned later this month is a rare and interesting example of the "Hard Luck" tokens of the early-19th century.
This particular one is called the "Am I Not a Man &amp; a Brother" token, a title taken from the inscription on the obverse.


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple; A Proposal to Ban Campus Beer Ads To Reduce Abuse
Seeking to reduce alcohol abuse by college students, the president of Temple University has called for a ban on beer advertising on campus.
The president, Peter J. Liacouras, proposed the ban in mid-February, following the recommendation of a statewide task force on alcohol abuse, of which he is vice chairman.
The task force is made up of health and education professionals and was formed two years ago by the Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Universities to study alcohol abuse on college campuses.


Despite Foes, New York Presses Its Plan for Sludge
Compelled to stop dumping sewage sludge in the ocean by June 30, New York City is proceeding with a bitterly disputed, billion-dollar plan to build eight plants to convert the foul residue to fertilizer and similar products.
Residents and business people in neighborhoods in Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island where most of the plants would be built vehemently oppose them.


The Parade Seems Set; After That, All Bets Off
The recommendation on Friday by a New York City human rights commission judge to allow the St.
Patrick's Day parade sponsors to ban a gay group removed most of the doubt over whether there will be a parade this year.
But beyond that, it settled almost nothing.
The judge's opinion prompted a range of reactions, including an unusual disagreement among legal experts.
But it still is not certain that the gay group will not march.
Further, it is unclear who is actually running the parade.
No one knows quite what to expect when the procession heads up Fifth Avenue at 11 A.M. on Tuesday.


Mattingly Vows to Do Things His Way
Through all the annual makeovers, through all the managerial changes and front-office hysteria, there is one constant and unchanging component with the Yankees: Don Mattingly.
Hard to believe, but Mattingly has been around since 1982, the season he earned a September promotion to the major leagues and his career began its ascent.
This is his 13th spring camp, and he is about to start his 10th season in New York, seemingly more driven than ever before.


As the World Turns, U.S. Policy Stands Still
It is hard to put an exact date on it but sometime over the summer, foreign policy just vanished from the American political debate, as though it were some fad that went out of style.
Robert S. Strauss, the American Ambassador to Russia and former Democratic national chairman, came home last week, read the newspapers, then told Congress that the absence of any serious debate on the question of aid to Russia was "just shocking."


Pirates in Disarray
One is staying.
The other is going.
The one who is staying doesn't question the other's loyalty.
The one who is going doesn't question the other's sanity.
They support each other's decision.
Barring a trade, which becomes less likely as each day passes, Jim Leyland and Barry Bonds will wear the same Pittsburgh uniform and fight for the same third successive division championship this season.
When it is over, just as the manager and Bobby Bonilla did last year, Leyland and Bonds will, in all likelihood, end their association but not their relationship.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TALKING TO HIGH MONKS IN THE SNOW An Asian American Odyssey.
By Lydia Yuri Minatoya.
HarperCollins, $20.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; More Home Builders Sparing the Trees
FOR decades, the American Forestry Association and the National Association of Homebuilders have been perceived as mortal enemies, with the foresters urging tree conservation and the home builders clear-cutting the land for easier and cheaper construction.
But two years ago, in response to environmental concerns, a program was developed in a joint effort by the two adversaries.
It is called Global Releaf, and it seeks to teach developers how to achieve more tree preservation, thereby reducing energy costs, absorbing carbon dioxide, slowing erosion, and making properties more salable.
Participation is voluntary, and information is distributed through the National Homebuilders Association in Washington.


THEATER
March
"CONVERSATIONS WITH MY FATHER." Herb Gardner's new play chronicles 40 years in the life of the Goldbergs, a Jewish immigrant family not unlike the playwright's own, on the Lower East Side.
Judd Hirsch stars.
Previews began March 3; opens March 22.
Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Events Calendar In the Caribbean
Windsurfers from many countries are expected to take part in the sixth annual ARUBA Hi-Winds Pro-Am Windsurfing Competition on Eagle Beach in Aruba from May 26 to June 6.
A total of $100,000 in prizes will be awarded during the event, in which amateurs will compete the first week and professionals the second.
The winner of a Round the Isle race will collect $20,000.
Information: (800) 862-7822.
PUERTO RICO will welcome about 300 sailing ships from around the world, including 26 tall ships, June 10 to 14.
The ships will arrive in San Juan after a monthlong trans-Atlantic race from Spain retracing the route of the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria in honor of Columbus's voyage.
A roster of activities on land, including concerts and fireworks, are promised, along with a parade of sail in the harbor as the regatta heads for New York.


Money Troubles


AIDS Patients, Facing TB, Now Fear Even the Hospital
In the last three weeks, Felipe Hernandez has rarely left his hospital room.
If he must walk in the hallways to reach the location of a test or medical procedure, he insists on wearing a mask.
He takes sponge baths rather than using communal showers.
Hospitalized for an AIDS-related infection, Mr.
Hernandez, 29 years old, says he is more afraid of another scourge: tuberculosis.
Though his condition is serious, he has asked his doctor to discharge him early.


Even in His Still Lifes, Picasso Packs a Wallop
He is the most familiar artist of the century.
Has any aspect of Picasso's achievement not been endlessly scrutinized?
Yes, it turns out, and it is no small matter: until now, no study has been devoted specifically to his output as a still life painter.
In his recent biography of the artist's early years, John Richardson claims that Picasso explored this genre more exhaustively and developed it more imaginatively than any other artist in history.
After seeing the stunning, if infelicitously titled exhibition, "Picasso &amp; Things," here at the Cleveland Museum of Art, it is hard to disagree with Mr.
Richardson.
The show is especially remarkable because its originality is so unexpected.
The artist's work is so well known that it is easy to take him for granted.
This show rekindles a sense of awe at what he accomplished by turning a spotlight on a body of paintings, drawings and sculptures that has tended to be overlooked in favor of works devoted to the human figure.


Dr. Parks Wed to Dr. T. A. Graubert
Dr.
Becky Jo Parks, a neurology resident, and Dr.
Timothy Aaron Graubert, a hematology fellow, both at the Yale-New Haven Hospital, were married yesterday.
Judge Kenneth D. Molloy of New York State Supreme Court officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Greene, the bridegroom's mother and stepfather, in Manhasset, L.I.
Dr.
Parks, 30 years 0ld, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Pacific Union College and received a medical degree from Loma Linda University.
She is a daughter of Richard and Reta Parks of Loma Linda, Calif.
Her father retired as the manager of real-estate operations at Loma Linda University.


Kenya Visitors Warned of Peril In Masai Mara
Americans visiting Kenya have been advised by the State Department to avoid the Masai Mara National Reserve, until security improves, because of attacks on tourists, including the recent abduction of six Americans who were traveling in a single tour van.
Travelers who do visit the Masai Mara should do so in multivehicle safaris under the direction of reputable tour operators, the department says.
Most incidents in the last year have involved single vehicles, the department adds in a travel advisory issued March 4.
Robbery was the main motive, it says.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues; The New, Volatile Politics of Welfare
Sixteen years after Ronald Reagan transformed the "welfare queen" into a weapon of class warfare in his first try at the Presidency, candidates of both parties have been emboldened by the recession to make welfare a seminal political issue.
Because of its delicate relationship to issues of class and race, welfare has long been a ticklish subject for political discourse.
But elected officials and political strategists agree that any reluctance to exploit welfare as an issue has dissolved in the last year as politicians have searched for ways to tap the electorate's economic discontent.


The Trouble With Ice
To the Editor:
Your article about de-icing aircraft characterized in-flight icing as a threat because the weight of the ice can bring a plane down (Tech Notes, March 1).
Not entirely true.


Three Suitcases: Gianni Versace


Making a Difference; Round Two for Fujitsu: Time for a Heavyweight
If Japanese supercomputers are ever to be accepted by United States companies, they will have to come with more of the specialized applications software that the fastest American machines are known for.
These programs make it possible to perform such highly sophisticated tasks as designing computer chips and simulating car crashes.
Fujitsu Ltd., the world's second-largest supercomputer maker after Cray Research Inc., says it has finally learned that lesson.


Beth Tersteeg To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Tersteeg of Honeoye Falls, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Beth Ann Tersteeg to Jonathan Orlans Mayer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney A. Mayer of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tersteeg, 25 years old, is an account manager at Segrets Inc., a women's sportswear manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father recently retired as a manager of manufacturing development at Eastman Kodak in Rochester.
Her mother, Judy Ann Tersteeg, is an office manager at a family medicine practice in Honeoye Falls.


Jane W. Riley to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Edward D. Riley of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Wilson Riley to Richard Cristiano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nick Cristiano of the Bronx.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Riley graduated magna cum laude from Villanova University and is an assistant secretary at the United States Trust Company of New York.
Her fiance, a graduate of Fordham University, is a vice president of United States Trust.


HOLIDAYS
Here is a sampling of holiday celebrations this spring in New York City, including events for St.
Patrick's Day, Easter, Passover, Purim, May Day, Mother's Day and Memorial Day.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


CORRECTION
The Streetscapes column last week about resheathing the facade of the Vermeer at 77 Seventh Avenue in Manhattan misstated the number of bricks involved in the project.
It is 350,000, not 260,000.


Funeral For Slain Journalist Is Held in Puerto Rico


Fiscal Remedies Via Electronics
To the Editor:
F.
Murray Abraham's prescription for curing the fiscal ills of Broadway  [ "An Actor's Modest Proposals for New York's Ailing Theater," March 1 ]  is excellent, but there are two far more financially rewarding fixes within reach: selling last-minute tickets at fractional prices via automated teller machines, and videotaping every play for sale to cable and network TV and to video stores.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday with articles about overdrafts at the House bank misidentified Representative Gerry Sikorski's home state in some copies.
He is from Minnesota.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PORTRAIT OF AN EYE Three Novels. By Kathy Acker. Pantheon, Paper, $15.


525 Students Playing Mind Games
Ahush fell over the crowd assembled in the Bernards High School gym.
In the center of the room was a fragile-looking tower made of thin pieces of balsa wood, and about the size and weight of an empty quart container of milk.
Max Robins, 13 years old, crouched in front of the tower on his hands and knees.
Alan Drosdick, 13, and Aaron Wyse, 14, gingerly lowered a 45-pound steel plate onto the top of the tiny structure.
"Slowly, go slowly," Max urged.


Is Japan Out to Get Us?
To the Editor:
Robert B. Reich's essay "Is Japan Really Out to Get Us?" (Feb. 9) says there must be hidden motives behind criticism of Japanese economic policies, since the stated motive simply can't be true.
"There are several possible explanations for this outpouring, but Japan's recent behavior is not one," he says.


FILM
March
"BASIC INSTINCT." A twisty sex-filled murder mystery with Michael Douglas as a detective who falls for a wealthy, bisexual blonde (Sharon Stone).
Is she a serial killer?
And is he too love-struck to care?
Directed by Paul Verhoeven ("Total Recall"), it's likely to make the first big commercial splash of the spring season.
Opens March 20.


CAMPUS LIFE: Denver; A Composer's Music Is a Message to Students
To the music world, David Amram is a prolific American composer, but to music and dance students at the University of Denver here, he is known as the encourager in residence.
Mr.
Amram, whose work ranges from orchestral music and jazz to operas and film scores, is spending this year in Denver as a visiting professor and the recipient of the university's Leo Block Chair in the Humanities.
In addition to classwork and public performances, Mr.
Amram presented his Shakespearean opera "Twelfth Night" recently in tribute to the late Joseph Papp, the theater impresario, who wrote the libretto to the opera.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions: Magazine Part 2  Reports in this issue include:
* Why men hate to dress.
* Three designers pack suitcases.
* 100 things fashionable men should know and have.
* Bangles, no beads -- men's jewelry.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Road; Brown's Campaign Is Using Volunteers to Put Chaos in Motion
Like the White Rabbit in "Alice in Wonderland," Edmund G. Brown Jr. and his campaign were behind schedule in Miami recently.
But Mr.
Brown was not crying, "I'm late, I'm late." Instead, he was chanting to the volunteer who was driving him: "Go. Go. Go. Get in there. Get in there."
Mr.
Brown had spotted the smooth operation of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas leaving the airport.
With its police and Secret Service escort, the Clinton caravan was heading into the traffic en route to a health conference where all the Democratic Presidential candidates were to appear.


Arms-Export Reports Further Strain U.S.-Israeli Ties
A series of charges this week that Israel has improperly re-exported American arms technologies to countries such as China and South Africa have rocked the already tense relations between the United States and Israel.
Administration officials have confirmed a detailed report by The Wall Street Journal, which said this week that the State Department's Inspector General, Sherman Funk, had determined in a draft report that Israel has re-exported certain advanced American arms technologies to third countries without American permission.
Israel has denied doing anything illegal.


Suzanne Ellen Feldstein to Wed Roger Frankel
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Feldstein of New City, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Ellen Feldstein, and Roger H. Frankel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Frankel of Forest Hills, Queens.
Ms.
Feldstein, 25 years old years old, graduated from Brandeis University, has a master's degree in special education from Lesley College and is a special education resource room teacher at New City Elementary School.


After Theft of Kennedy Bust, an Unexpected History Lesson
IN the hallways, classrooms and offices of John F. Kennedy High School, there is a mystery in the air.
Of course, this is not a mystery involving conspiracy theories or the C.I.A. -- at least not directly.
In this gritty inner-city learning institution, as well known for its tenacity in nurturing educational standards and high aspirations amid poverty as it is for its security guards and fortresslike facade, an ongoing history lesson has been born from a symbolic namesake and a theft.


Towns Wary of Joining '911' Emergency System
A LAW signed by Thomas H. Kean as Governor in January 1989 called for the completion of a statewide emergency 911 telephone system by January 1992.
It did not happen.
Part of the problem has been technical, said Joseph C. Saiia, director of the state's Office of Emergency Telecommunication Services.
But the delay also grows out of the reluctance of some communities to hook into the system, some because they like their own systems, more because they don't want to spend the money.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Unions Are Split on Backing Clinton
Workers in Michigan and Illinois, two big-labor states whose primaries on Tuesday may well decide the Democratic Presidential nomination, will find no definitive reading on Gov.
Bill Clinton's labor record if they look toward his home state of Arkansas.
Here, he is either effusively praised or sharply damned, with little neutrality in between.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Named Pat Perles assistant coach.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Joe Fishback, safety. Re-signed Blaise Bryant, running back.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van and foot that are scheduled during the spring in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


Rates Are Up, And Bonds Look Good
The economy is growing, and bond prices always fall when that happens. So sell bonds.
That is the current conventional wisdom on Wall Street.
Investors who loved long Treasuries at 7.4 percent as 1991 ended now scorn them at yields above 8 percent.
Those who had bought bonds then have lost money, and that is always painful.


CAMPUS LIFE: Vassar; 'Happy Birthday To Vincent' -- Millay, of Course
Students at Vassar College not only study the poetry of one of the college's most famous graduates, they also celebrate her birthday as well.
Edna St.
Vincent Millay, class of 1917, was remembered with the play "Happy Birthday Vincent" for her 100th birthday.


Jan T. Wilson Plans to Wed
Joan Wilson of Lauderhill, Pa., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Jan Taylor Wilson, to Jerome Drew Abernathy, a son of Marie Abernathy of Oakland, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Wilson, 26 years old, is the investor-relations associate at Dow Jones in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father, the late Herman B. Wilson, a lawyer, was the president of the Cooperative Assistance Fund in Washington, which helps minority-owned businesses.
Her mother owns two clothing stores, A Woman's World in Merritt Island, Fla., and Wendy's Place in Lauderdale Lakes, Fla.


Koreas Reach A-Pact; Effect Is in Doubt
North and South Korea today agreed to inspect suspected nuclear weapons sites on each other's soil by mid-June, but the accord appeared to fall far short of the kind of specific assurances that Washington and Seoul have sought in trying to stem the North's nuclear ambitions.
The agreement seems likely to intensify the argument over whether continuing talks between North and South are really making progress, or are being strung along by Pyongyang's Communist Government as an elaborate delaying tactic.


'Basic Instinct': The Suspect Is Attractive, and May Be Fatal
In the 1987 film "Fatal Attraction," Michael Douglas played a happily married man who has a weekend fling with a woman who turns out to be psychopathic and violent.
If "Fatal Attraction" served as a metaphor for the 1980's, with its theme of the dangers of extramarital sex and one-night stands, then "Basic Instinct," to be released Friday, is a movie of the 1990's.
Its underlying theme seems to be the dangers of sex, period.
In the new film, a troubled San Francisco police detective, played by Mr.
Douglas, investigates the savage murder of a onetime rock star.
The evidence: a blood-soaked ice pick, a woman's white scarf tied to the bedpost and the residue of sex.
The detective embarks on a sensual, violent journey in which he confronts Catherine Tramell, an alluring suspect, played by Sharon Stone, who keeps ice picks around the house, writes books about fictional murders that are too true for comfort, and seduces women as well as men, including the detective, Nick Curran.
Every time Nick (Mr. Douglas) rolls into bed with Catherine, the threat of death by ice pick looms.
But the provocative author is not the only suspect.


Hollywood Law: Whose Idea Is It, Anyway?
In the latest skirmish of the Hollywood plagiarism wars, a lawsuit filed in state court here alleges that the television producer Aaron Spelling stole an idea that H. W. Broido Jr., a merchandise marketer, pitched to him.
Mr.
Broido charges that Mr.
Spelling used his idea as the basis for the hit Fox series "Beverly Hills, 90210."
Damages are not specified.
Not yet, anyway.
But stay tuned: "A large amount is required," the lawsuit says, "to teach the Spellings a lesson that they cannot continue their exploitive, mercenary, nefarious and corrupt practice of conspiring to take advantage of individuals and their ideas and projects."


Alvin Schwartz, 64, Wrote Books Filled With Folklore for Children
Alvin Schwartz, a best-selling author of children's books -- many widely praised for their wit and folklore but some criticized as unduly scary for young readers -- died yesterday at Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 64 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


Brains Still Count On the Courts
To the Sports Editor:
How ironic that on the day Robin Finn's fine article on power in men's tennis appeared ("Boom! Does Power Tennis Make Poor Tennis?," The Times, March 8), two of the game's best counterpunchers, Michael Chang and Andrei Chesnokov, met in the final on hard courts at Indian Wells, Calif.
Professional tennis has indeed grown more boring as power has assumed a dominant role.
But it still takes brains as well as brawn to be a consistent winner.


Adult Children
To the Editor: I thought I was going to save writing the book "Travels With My Adult Children" for my retirement, but by Margot Slade's article entitled "Travels With Mom and Dad" (Travel, Jan. 19) required an immediate reply.
We returned recently from a 20-day trip to Paris and Morocco with our 23- and 25-year-old sons, who are in their first and third year of medical school.
Our Christmas-break travels continue to be the highlights of our lives.
Relationships between parents and children and between brothers are revitalized.
Choosing countries that are not English speaking and don't have ready access to English-language television encourages communication.


Judging the Best in Children's Literature
ONCE there was a little girl who wrote down all the things she didn't like about grown-ups.
"Remember this!" she said in notes to her future self.
And when she became a grown-up, she did remember and was a great friend to children.
"Having observed some adults and their insensitivities, I swore not to be like that," said Judith Rovenger, who grew up to be a librarian specializing in children's literature.
"Not to go to sleep, to forget what it is to feel and be so alive."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about music festivals in Europe misidentified the composer being honored at the Ottorino Respighi Festival in Umbria, Italy, on the 100th anniversary of his death.
He is Edouard Lalo, not Respighi.


Brazil's Pristine Playground
PAMPERED by the luxury of choosing among 4,600 miles of South Atlantic coastline, Brazilian beach connoisseurs increasingly choose Praia do Forte, a pastoral, seven-mile stretch of white sand, blue water and coconut palms.
While much of Brazil's coast rapidly succumbs to American-style strip development, this fishing village 800 miles north of Rio de Janeiro survives undisturbed, cocooned in a national park and protected by tough zoning laws.
In addition to the primeval pleasure of walking for half an hour without crossing a single footprint in the sand, Praia do Forte offers comfortable lodging, excellent seafood and some intriguing birds, sea turtles and other wildlife.


GARDENS
Here is a sampling of gardens in New York City. Dates and times are subject to change.
ABIGAIL ADAMS SMITH MUSEUM GARDEN, 421 East 61st Street, Manhattan.
A garden re-created in the 18th-century style, with period plants that include perennials, bulbs and lilacs.
Free with museum admission: $2 ($1 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 838-6878.
ALICE AUSTEN HOUSE GARDEN, 2 Hylan Boulevard, at Edgewater Street, Rosebank, S.I.
A Victorian garden beside the Narrows that was restored using photographs taken by Alice Austen, a noted 19th-century photographer.
Hours: Thursday to Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $2.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
BARTOW-PELL MANSION MUSEUM, 895 Shore Road North, Pelham Bay Park, northeastern Bronx.
A formal garden with reflecting pool as well as an herb garden and wooded trails.
Hours: Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $2.
Information: (212) 885-1461.
BIBLICAL GARDEN, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Situated on the southeast side of the cathedral, the garden is one of the largest of its kind, featuring plants that have biblical references.
Hours: daily, 7 A.M. to sunset.
Free.
Information: (212) 316-7540.
BROOKLYN BOTANIC GARDEN, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
Free events include "Ireland: The Emerald Isle?," a tour that examines the influence of climate and geography on the growth and development of plants in Ireland (today at 1 P.M.); "Plants for Fabrics and Dyes" (March 29 at 1 P.M.).
Other special events include the annual "Sakura Matsuri"("Cherry Blossom Festival"), April 25 and 26, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Earth Day (May 3); a spring plant sale (May 6 to 7); "Rose Day" (June 3); "Fence Art Show" (June 6 to 7); "Welcome Back to Brooklyn Day" (June 14).
Tours are given every Saturday and Sunday at 1 P.M.
Conservatory hours: 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 ($1 for students, the elderly and children 3 to 12 years old).
Information: (718) 622-4433.
BRYANT PARK, Avenue of the Americas at 42d Street, Manhattan.
The construction fence that has surrounded the park since its closing in 1988 will be removed during the first two weeks of April and the reopening celebration is scheduled for mid-April.
The newly created garden will feature two 300-foot borders planted with shrubs, perennials and tulips.
Free. (212) 983-4142.
CHANNEL GARDEN, Rockefeller Center, between the sunken plaza and Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Yellow and purple crocuses will highlight seasonal floral displays at the Channel Garden (March 19 to April 1), followed by jonquils and forsythia (April 2 to 16), Easter lilies and purple rhododendrons (April 16 to 29), blue hydrangeas (April 30 to May 12), late spring perennials (May 14 to June 17) and tropical foliage (June 18 through summer).
Information: (212) 664-4000.
CONSERVATORY GARDEN, Fifth Avenue at 105th Street, Manhattan.
A garden filled with crab apple-lined walks and beds of tulips bordered with lilacs.
A tour on May 3 at 2 P.M. will meet at the Vanderbilt Gate on Fifth Avenue.
Free.
Hours: daily, 8 A.M. to dusk.
Information: (212) 794-6546.
HEATHER GARDEN AT FORT TRYON PARK, Washington Heights, upper Manhattan.
Restored in 1985 to resemble the original designs of Frederick Law Olmstead, the garden features two different styles of planting: an intricate perennial border running the entire length of the garden and a naturalistic shrub landscape including heathers and heaths.
Free.
Information: (212) 795-1388.
HERB GARDEN AT THE CLOISTERS, Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, upper Manhattan.
A re-creation of a typical monastery garden with more than 250 species of plants known to have been cultivated during the Middle Ages.
Free with suggested museum admission: $6 ($3 for students or elderly).
Information: (212) 923-3700.
NEW YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Fordham, the Bronx.
The grounds include a 40-acre forest, the last remnant of the forest that once covered all of New York City.
Forest tours: Thursday, Saturday, Sunday and holidays that fall on a Monday.
Garden hours: Tuesday to Sunday and Monday holidays from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3 ($2 for students and the elderly; children under 6, free).
Parking: $4.
Information: (212) 220-8777.
QUEENS BOTANICAL GARDEN, 43-50 Main Street, Flushing.
More than 35 acres devoted to woodland, bees, birds, herbs and flowers.
Special events include "Depression Glass Collectibles Show," (March 21, 10 A.M.to 4 P.M.); "Third Annual Cherry Blossom Festival," (May 2, 1 to 4 P.M.); a "Rose Show," sponsored by the Queens Rose Society (June 7, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.).
Hours: Tuesday to Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $1 (50 cents for those 5 to 12 years old; free for the elderly and those under 5).
Information: (718) 886-3800.
SHAKESPEARE GARDEN, Central Park, west of Belvedere Castle at 79th Street, Manhattan.
Features a half acre with plants mentioned in Shakespeare's works.
Free.
Information: (212) 794-6564.
STATEN ISLAND BOTANICAL GARDEN, 914 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Evergreens and pine trees are in abundance.
Special events include a workshop on landscape design (March 22, 2 to 4 P.M.; fee: $30); an Easter Plant Sale (April 15 to 18, noon); a workshop in designing your own perennial garden (April 3 at 1 P.M.; fee: $30); a spring plant sale (May 9, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. and May 10, noon to 2 P.M.).
Tours every Sunday at 1 P.M.
Open daily, dawn to dusk.
Free.
Information: (718) 273-8200.
WAVE HILL, 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A residence of Mark Twain (1900-03) and the Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini (1942-45) has 28 acres of gardens, nature walks, plants and manicured lawns.
Special events include "An Evening With New York Gardeners," with seven city gardeners discussing their favorite plants for urban areas (May 6, 7 P.M.; admission: $10, or $8 for the elderly and students) and "Images of Cotswold Gardens," an exhibition of drawings and paintings by Simon Dorrell (May 29 to Aug. 3).
In the galleries are "The Watercolors of Edwin B. Olsen" (through May 1).
Hours: Wednesday to Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; closed holidays.
Beginning April 17, open Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Beginning May 15, open Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Wednesday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. and Sunday, 10 A.M to dusk; closed Monday.
Admission: free on weekdays; weekends and holidays, $4 ($2 for the elderly and students; free under age 6).
Concert tickets: $10 ($8 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 549-3200.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Administrators Give Assistance To Safety Program
When University of Washington students participated in the second Nightwalk campus-safety program of the school year recently, the tour coincided with a new phase in the program's six-year history: for the first time since it began, the university administration had acted on the program's recommendations for improving safety.
Nightwalk, which is sponsored by the student government's crime-prevention committee, invites students to walk over the 680-acre university campus to note areas where lighting is insufficient and where shrubbery is overgrown -- providing spaces for criminals to hide.
Group members also note where emergency phones could be installed for direct access to campus police.


A Father Figure Leads Nine Children Into 'Four Baboons'
Sir Peter Hall has spent a lifetime in the theater directing legendary actors.
So who could top Gielgud, Richardson and Redgrave?
How about the nine "freewheeling" children in John Guare's "Four Baboons Adoring the Sun," opening Wednesday at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center?
"For most of them," Sir Peter says of the lot, who range in age from 7 to not quite 14, "this is a fun thing to do, and much of our time is spent making sure the fun doesn't get out of hand."


The Standard Coming-of-Age Party Comes of Age in Elegance and Cost
What Aaron Fisher remembers most about the event is the honey cake, the rugelach, the fact that his parents let him stay home from school that day and the gifts he received, including copies of "War and Peace" and "Moby-Dick" (illustrated), two globes (one worked as a night light) and four pen-and-pencil sets (all the same).
It was, after all, his bar mitzvah.
"Back then our family wasn't well off and I was shy about speaking in public -- especially in Hebrew -- so we did the best we could with a weekday bar mitzvah," Mr.
Fisher, a retired accountant, recalled last Sunday afternoon at the Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.
He was attending a free, informative event billed as Teen Celebrations Expo '92 where, the flier said, "In one painless afternoon, parents and their teen-ager can find out everything they want to know in planning for their Bar/Bat Mitzvah and Sweet Sixteen Party Celebrations."


Festive Days in Assisi, Town of St. Francis
"BREATHE the air of Assisi deeply," a Jesuit astronomer had said to me on a hot day south of Rome, when I told him where I was going for four days in early August.
There was a hint of envy in his voice, and he left it to me to find out what he meant.
I arrived late on Aug. 1, the first day of the annual two-day Feast of Forgiveness (Festa del Perdono), and as the taxi climbed the hill toward the medieval town, a steady stream of pilgrims was making its way down to the great basilica beyond the railroad station, the Santa Maria degli Angeli.
This massive 16th-century church, one of the six papal cathedrals of Italy, is built around the humble hermitage of St.
Francis called the Porziuncola.
The next day I would join the pilgrims at this basilica, at a Mass celebrated by Pio Cardinal Laghi, who a few years ago was the Papal Nuncio to the United States.
There, the simple stone chapel rests awkwardly in the apse of the great cathedral, making it difficult to witness a Mass when there is a big congregation.
In 1212, it is said, St.
Francis consecrated St.
Clare in the chapel as the bride of Christ, before she established the Second Order of St.
Francis, the nuns known as the Poor Clares.


Hawks at Home
It may not have occurred to New Yorkers, but the recent news that the peregrine falcon may no longer be endangered as a species should be a matter of local pride.
For years the peregrine has been our particular hawk; indeed, the city provided a sanctuary during its comeback.
Peregrines were among the earliest tenants of Rockefeller Center, taking space on the heights of the RCA building shortly after it was built.
Peregrines also found the hunting -- for pigeons, sparrows, starlings -- as good as it was out in the country or on the Palisades cliffs.


Is Japan Out to Get Us?
To the Editor:
I must respond to Robert B. Reich's attack on my book, "The Japanese Power Game," and on other books that have attempted to shed light on relations between the United States and Japan.
To put it bluntly, Mr.
Reich is on very thin intellectual ground, and he makes a number of basic errors in assessing Japan's competitive challenge.


Game, Suit, Match
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA said the high costs of battling JUDY NELSON in a palimony lawsuit finally forced her to settle the matter out of court.
Navratilova, a nine-time Wimbledon champion, and Nelson signed a settlement on Friday that apparently ends eight months of legal wrangling that began shortly after their breakup last April.


U.S. Parks: Ever More Popular
ONE of the best travel bargains in the United States is the national parks, with their scenery, wildlife and opportunities for outdoor recreation.
When money is tight, there is the added incentive of inexpensive camping.
Not surprisingly, last year the 50 national parks set a record: 57.4 million visitors, an increase of 6 percent over 1990.
A further increase of 3.5 percent is expected this year.
Things have gotten so bad in Yosemite on Memorial Day weekends that only visitors with confirmed reservations for accommodations are allowed to drive to the eastern end of Yosemite Valley, and over the long Washington's Birthday weekend this year, people heading to the Hurricane Ridge ski area in Olympic National Park had to wait up to 30 minutes for someone to leave the parking area before they could find a spot.


Making a Difference; Hearing the Wake-Up Call
The economic downturn in Massachusetts definitely has a silver lining, says State Treasurer Joseph D. Malone: "It will serve as a wake-up call for all state governments that they must become efficient, effective and agile."
For his part, Mr.
Malone, who has been in office a little more than a year, has answered the call with a couple of innovative projects backed by money from the state teachers' and employees' pension fund.


For PATH, On-Time Record of 90 Percent
AT 5:48 A.M. on Jan. 14, a PATH track maintenance crew, riding a flatcar in a tunnel under the Hudson River, spotted smoke coming from a section of the electrified third rail.
The crew immediately contacted the system control center in Jersey City by radio, asking that the power to the rail be shut down.
In the control center, a dimly lighted, cavernous room beneath PATH headquarters in Journal Square, blood pressures mounted and pulses began to race.
In less than an hour, tens of thousands of commuters would begin boarding trains for their daily trek into Manhattan.


Ms. Winters To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick P. Winters of Bridgewater, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Carol Winters, to Eric David Price, a son of Donald C. Price of Aurora, Ohio, and Dr.
Roslyn M. Price of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Winters, 28 years old, is a legal assistant at the Interpublic Group of Companies, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father retired as a vice president and the treasurer of Mutual of New York.
Her mother, Joan H. Winters, retired as an assistant vice president of City Federal Savings Bank in Somerset, N.J.


Ms. MacKrell and Jim-David Gaglione to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Thaddeus E. MacKrell of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter, Margaret Ellen MacKrell, to Dr.
Jim-David Gaglione, a son of Dr.
Anthony and Dr.
Beverly Gaglione of Stroudsburg, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.


Construction Ahead


Active Leadership? You Better Believe It.
The history of American defense teaches that the decisions we make when conflicts end are as important as any in the heat of battle.
After World Wars I and II, and most recently after Vietnam, we dismantled our military, believing that the threat had gone away.
When we needed our military again to deal with threats that could have been prevented had we stayed engaged, like the expansion of Hitler's empire or the invasion of Korea, it was not ready.
In the end, we paid with American lives and resources to turn the threats around.


Hispanic Youth Slain Aboard Bronx Bus
A Hispanic teen-ager bound for home after school was fatally stabbed during a fight involving six youths aboard a New York City bus in the Bronx Friday afternoon, and a black teen-ager was later arrested in what the police called a bias-related homicide.
The murder was the first major bias-related incident in the Bronx since a series of ugly racial attacks on children was reported there in January.
The unsolved attacks -- in which blacks told of being smeared with white dye and others may have been attacked in retaliation -- shook the city and prompted Mayor David N. Dinkins to ask: "Who taught our children to hate so thoroughly and so mercilessly?"


Gail D. Herman, Physician, Wed
Dr.
Gail Diane Herman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Herman of Skokie, Ill., was married last evening to Dr.
Evan J. Samett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Samett of Tappan, N.Y.
Rabbi Gerald Schuster officiated at the Swissotel in Chicago.
Dr.
Herman, 30 years old, is an internist in Chicago.
She is keeping her name professionally.
She graduated from Drake University and received her M.D. from the University of Illinois.
Her father is a pharmacist at Naval Hospital Great Lakes in Great Lakes, Ill.


What's Inside Those Police Trucks, and Why
They look like fire trucks, but in blue and white and with a crew of only two.
They've been mistaken for police mechanics rushing to fix a radio car, mislabeled Con Ed trucks, rolling morgues and coffee and doughnut wagons for major demonstrations.
In truth, they belong to the 10 squads of the police Emergency Services Unit, and they're giant toolboxes for a very specialized team.
They cost $160,000 -- plus the tools, which easily double that -- and the unit's existence shows just how many things can go wrong in New York.
Other cities have SWAT teams and scuba teams.
Other cities have truck accidents or loose orangutans, but those may be jobs for the fire department or the A.S.P.C.A.
The police in other cities may not be able to lift subway cars or saw open jetliners, but the E.S.U. is expected to.
Its 342 members answered 103,000 calls last year, sometimes to smash into drug dens ahead of detectives and sometimes to cut a washer off a child's finger.


9 Theaters to Share $3.4 Million Grant
Nine theaters that serve culturally specific groups will share $3.4 million dollars awarded by the Lila Wallace/ Reader's Digest Fund under its Theaters for New Audiences Program.
The organizations provide theater for the deaf, the geographically isolated, culturally mixed audiences and others.
They were chosen for the quality of artistic accomplishments and on the basis of their proposals.


Elizabeth Crane To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Dwight B. Crane of Cambridge, Mass., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Gerard Crane and Robert Stephen Swartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Swartz of Westwood, Mass.
Ms.
Crane, 23 years old, is the fashion credit coordinator at GQ magazine in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College, as did her fiance.
Her father is the George Gund Professor of Finance and Banking, and her mother, Loretto Ford Crane, is the director of communications, both at the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration.


Canada Braces for a Spring Without Zing
It has been 52 years since the New York Rangers last won the Stanley Cup and they can easily dredge up at least that many excuses.
Now, much to their everlasting chagrin, they could end up with one more.
And what a beauty.
The National Hockey League may be on the verge of its first full-scale players' strike.
The N.H.L.
Players' Association has been without a contract and in a legal strike position since last Sept. 15.
The players say they won't finish this year -- the 1991-92 regular season ends three weeks from today -- without a new collective bargaining agreement.
Since the players and owners are far apart on the major issues and both are taking the hard line, there is legitimate fear that a strike could end the 1992 Stanley Cup playoffs before they begin.


Ms. Reedy Engaged
Dr.
Edouard P. Beaugard and Dr.
Carol Reedy Beaugard of River Edge, N.J., have announced 1993 wedding plans for their daughter Erica Kay Reedy and Christopher Royer Donoho 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donoho Jr. of Wilmington, Del.
Ms.
Reedy graduated from Barnard College and is in her final year of law school at Vanderbilt University, where Mr.
Donoho, a Brown University graduate, is a first-year law student.


OUTINGS
Here is a sampling of outings in the New York metropolitan region during the spring season.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


Trade and the Environment
To the Editor:
The articles "In Poor Regions, Environmental Law . . . Should Be Appropriate" (Forum, March 1) do not fairly represent the environmental threats of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Style Makers; Duntori &amp; Company, Image Consultants
In 1985 three sisters, Robin, Greta, and Desiree Dunn, began an artist management agency in a tiny apartment with an ironing board for a desk.
Today they have an office and dance studio with 10 employees and services to enhance clients' images or performances.
Janet Jackson, Taylor Dane, Diana Ross, New Kids on the Block and L. L. Cool J. are past clients.
"We do what Motown used to by offering everything an artist needs," said Desiree Dunn, the president of Duntori and Company, referring to the recording company.


ANTIQUES
Here is a sampling of antique shows in the New York metropolitan region this spring.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


Best Sellers For Spring: Long Skirts And Pants
Spring may be just around the corner, but spring clothes have been in the stores for several weeks.
In some cases, in and out of the stores.
Sales are picking up, several retailers say, at least among women who are interested in fashion.
These dedicated shoppers have been snapping up examples of the latest trends, things like long skirts, vests, skinny pants, men's wear suits and shirts, poor boy sweaters and anything that s-t-r-e-t-c-h-e-s.


50 YEARS OF CROSSWORDS
As an occupational therapist, I have in the past used crossword puzzles for cognitive-skill training, but far more important, puzzles have proved to be a great learning tool for my children.
While my two little ones look on, my 8-year-old son rips out the puzzle each week and dashes across the street to our pensioner neighbor, who anxiously waits for the puzzle and the welcome visit from my son.
The puzzle provides a great way of learning the importance of sharing, while also stimulating their interest in a very worthwhile activity.
VIVIEN LOBELL
Long Beach, L.I.


Potent Chemical To Fight Cancer Seen in Broccoli
Revile it though President Bush may, broccoli harbors what could be the most powerful anti-cancer compound ever detected, scientists say.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine have isolated an ingredient in broccoli that kindles the activity of critical enzymes in the cell known to help gird against tumors.
Many natural and synthetic compounds have been identified that stimulate these protective enzymes, but the newly discovered chemical in broccoli is by far the most powerful inciter.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE HOUDINI BOX.
Written and illustrated by Brian Selznick.
Knopf. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Did Harry Houdini, the great magician, have a box of secrets that he left to a boy named Victor?
There's a plot spin to this charming story that might tempt a parent to brush up on a trick or two.


Tommy Tune in Revival of 'Birdie'
TO find out why musical comedies were once a necessity of life for a lot of otherwise clear-headed people, go to the Shubert Theater in New Haven this week.
"Bye Bye Birdie," in a jumpy, expertly coordinated revival, will very likely prove the point.
The show is not musical theater art, but what a super artifact it is.
And though it is not one of the great musicals, it is a very good one, a very happy one.


Q and A
Reduction of Shares Question: I bought a co-op apartment in 1983.
At the closing I learned that I was acquiring 149 shares instead of the 153 shares listed in the prospectus.
The reason for the discrepancy was that the apartment's former tenant shareholder, who also owned a neighboring unit, had moved a dividing wall, thereby reducing my space by about 24 square feet.
This change was noted in a resolution voted on by the co-op's board of directors.
I was issued a revised proprietary lease stating that 149 shares were assigned to my apartment.


Karen Becker to Marry Andrew Yarosh in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Gary Becker of Madison, Wis., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Karen Elaine Becker, and Andrew Yarosh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Stanley Jarosz of Kinnelon, N.J.


Dollar Is Up Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
133.67
131.85
137.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6697
1.6675
1.6068
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1973
1.1917
1.1561
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7075
1.7187
1.8210
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$346.75
$349.25
$364.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple; A Proposal to Ban Campus Beer Ads To Reduce Abuse
Seeking to reduce alcohol abuse by college students, the president of Temple University has called for a ban on beer advertising on campus.
The president, Peter J. Liacouras, proposed the ban in mid-February, following the recommendation of a statewide task force on alcohol abuse, of which he is vice chairman.
The task force is made up of health and education professionals and was formed two years ago by the Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Universities to study alcohol abuse on college campuses.


Cycle of Seasons Brings Back Season for Cycling
LIKE all seasons, spring brings special pleasures to New York: Flower boxes.
Allergies.
And the renewed opportunity for scores of cyclists to be driven from the road by lethally crazed cabdrivers looking for a good time between fares.
You have to be, well, a real New Yorker, to fully enjoy riding a bike here.
For many visitors -- and for the meekest of residents -- cycling in New York City compares with normal cycling in about the same way that gardening on a fire escape compares with owning a farm.


A Familiar Final: Georgetown Plays Syracuse
After weeks of unimaginable peaks and valleys, after the finish of a St.
John's-Georgetown semifinal that seemed as if it would never end, the Big East's madcap 13th season has at long last been distilled to. . . .
Georgetown and Syracuse?


Wendy Pepper To Wed in Fall
Anne E. McLucas of Washington and Charles W. Pepper of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Eustis Pepper to John Gardner Stewart, a son of Martha Stewart and David C. Stewart, both of Washington.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Pepper, who is 27 years old and is known as Wendy, is a fashion designer in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Washington.
Her father is an agent with Patricia Watts-Wearn Real Estate in Palm Beach.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
As a practitioner who has treated battered women and batterers since 1976, I am very familiar with the Duluth program and was pleased to see an article devoted to it and the pervasive problem of family abuse.


Congressional Officials Disclose 21 Names in House Bank Affair
Capping a furious week of disclosure and denial, rumors and confessions, Congressional officials tonight released the names of 21 of the 24 members and former members of the House of Representatives who most often overdrew their accounts at the House Bank.
All 21 are Democrats, and among the names are some of the House's most prominent members, including John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, chairman of the Government Operations Committee; Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, an influential member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, and Robert J. Mrazek of Long Island, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for the Senate in New York.
The names of the other 3 members have not been disclosed.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 169,000
12 Cobb Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800.
East Northport 220,000
7 Franconia Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Lake Ronkonkoma 129,000
16 Holly Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; family room, eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck; taxes $3,000.
Locust Valley 395,000
75 Cocks Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; dining room, family room w/fireplace, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,500.
Mineola 185,000
357 Foch Boulevard  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage, balcony; taxes $2,900.
Upper Brookville 1.3 million
Quail Path  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, new contemporary; family room, maid's quarters, 2 acres; taxes $15,000.
OTHER AREAS Weston, Conn. 512,500  91 Eleven O'Clock Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 51-year-old French country home; stone facade, pond, 3 acres; taxes $5,762.
Armonk, N.Y. 600,000
4 Devoe Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; sun room, eat-in kitchen, family room, playroom, 1 acre; taxes $7,356.
Edison, N.J. 205,000
106 Mount Pleasant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; 2-zone heat, full basement; taxes $3,224.


Jobs and Protectionism Test Candidates' Creativity
Richard M. Nixon to the contrary notwithstanding, there is one foreign-policy issue that has caught the attention of candidates and voters this winter.
Not aid to Russia or the future of NATO or relations with China, though; the issue is foreign trade, and what it does to jobs at home.
It has made the agenda while the others have not because the nation is in a selfish mood (or at least the candidates think it is), and only on trade have the voters sensed how far-off events influence their own well-being.


The Thin Man
Giving a thumbs-up sign and saying he felt "terrific," Mayor David Dinkins walked out of New York Hospital Saturday, accompanied by his doctor, Adrian L. Edwards, and wife, Joyce.
Chills and a fever first sent the 64-year-old Mayor to the hospital last Sunday.
He was released Monday but re-hospitalized after the symptoms worsened.
The trouble: diverticulitis, an inflammation of the large intestine that caused sacs to form, then abscess, sending bacteria into the bloodstream.
Tests showed the bacteria were clostridium perfringens, not clostridium bovis, the only type that's a possible indicator for colon cancer, doctors said.
The Mayor plans to return to City Hall at least part time early this week.
He'll receive antibiotics intravenously several times a day for several days.
If the treatment doesn't work, surgery could be necessary, doctors said.
The Mayor has been advised to cut back on certain foods, including nuts.
In the hospital, he lost five pounds on a liquid diet.


A June Wedding For Ms. Pitcher
Nina Pitcher of Castleton, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Stephanie Margaret Pitcher to Daniel Martin Cohen, the son of Sue T. Cohen and Dr.
Arnold R. Cohen of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pitcher is an administrative assistant at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She and Mr.
Cohen, who are both 24 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
Her late father, Stuart Pitcher, was a teacher and athletic coach at Columbia High School in East Greenbush, N.Y.
Her mother is a partner in Professional Personnel Associates, an insurance and investment company in East Greenbush.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; Facing Elimination, Men's Soccer Team Is Saved for Now
The men's soccer team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst faced sudden death from budget cuts this winter, but a last-minute rescue from a soccer camp has put the team back on the playing field.
The soccer coaching camp, run by a 1982 graduate of the University of Massachusetts, announced on Jan. 28 that it will donate $780,000 over the next five years to save the team.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Topics of The Times; Treasure in Texas
In April 1945 a soldier named Joe T. Meador sneaked into a guarded mine shaft in Quedlinburg, Germany, and emerged with an extraordinary trove of medieval artworks and manuscripts hidden under his coat.
Last week, his acquisitions went on display at the Dallas Museum of Art.
The show's catalogue is a model of discretion.
The name Quedlinburg, the introduction states, had provoked "an intense debate about the ownership of works of art, about war 'booty,' and about cultural patrimony." In fact, there never has been any debate about who "owned" the Quedlinburg treasures.
Suffice it to say it wasn't Joe T. Meador.


Officers Feel Besieged After Shooting
After a precinct house just north of downtown was peppered with gunfire last week, the police officers here who vowed to "protect and serve" were left wondering just how much authority they had left.
"This is real crazy," said Officer Vernon Beaty, who is assigned to the precinct and station, which was hit in a drive-by shooting late Thursday night.
"It's different now. People don't have respect for authority anymore."


Terra Ceia Island Journal; 'Not Enough Fish' in Florida Waters
As pelicans twisted and dived into shallow waters, James Cook steered his flat-bottomed boat through a tangle of mangrove islands that dot this part of Florida's Gulf Coast.
Mr.
Cook, a burly, bearded man who runs a fishing service for tourists, recalled a recent fishing trip that was almost fishless: "Two days, and all we ever caught was four spotted trout."


Strachan McDuffie In Ayer Agreement
Ayer U.S.A. has announced a joint venture with the Strachan McDuffie Communications Group in New York, an agency specializing in advertising, marketing and promotions aimed at black consumers.
Under the agreement, terms of which were not disclosed, Strachan McDuffie will move into Ayer's Manhattan office.
Strachan McDuffie's operations include a production company and a marketing and sponsorship consulting firm.


Rally and a Banned Congress Vex Yeltsin From Left and Right
Plans by a motley coalition of disgruntled right- and left-wing forces to regroup the defunct Congress of People's Deputies and to hold a mass rally on Tuesday have generated unusual alarm in Moscow.
The demonstrations will hardly be the first against President Boris N. Yeltsin and his reforms, and neither officials nor Mr.
Yeltsin's many supporters expect that a congress, even if it is convened in defiance of an official ban, has any chance of reviving the old Soviet Union.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
America Online Inc., two million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Ameriserv Food Co., 5.1 million shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Applebee's International Inc., 2.8 million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.
ARB Group Inc., 2.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Bertucci's Inc., one million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Bisys Group Inc., 5.5 million shares, Lehman Brothers.
Burlington Industries Equity Inc., 57 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Calgene Inc., two million shares. Paine Webber
Chronimed Inc., 2.35 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Criticare Systems Inc., two million shares. Dain Bosworth.
Curaflex Health Services Inc., 2.5 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Damark International Inc., 2.7 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Davstar Industry, one million units (two class A shares and one warrant).
Paulson Investment Co.
Ezcorp, 1.5 million class A non-voting shares. Kidder, Peabody.
First Western Corp., 1.75 million shares. Prudential Securities.
Fleer Corp., 3.6 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Fred's Inc., 3.3 million shares. Robinson-Humphrey.
Health O Meter Products Inc, 2.5 million shares. First Boston.
Lincare Holdings Inc., 3.5 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
Liposome Technology Inc., two million shares. Oppenheimer.
Network General Corp., 2.2 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Nuveen Select Tax-Free Income Portfolio, 10 million shares, Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons; John Nuveen &amp; Co.
Production Operators Corp., one million shares. Tucker Anthony.
Protocol Systems Inc., 2.75 million shares. First Boston.
Regency Health Services Inc., 2.4 million shares. Paine Webber.
Ryland Group, 2.5 million shares. Kidder, Peabody.
Schuler Homes Inc., 3.85 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Sciclone Pharmaceuticals Inc., 2.6 million shares and 2.6 million warrants. Josephthal.
E. W. Scripps Company, five million class A shares. First Boston.
Serving Software Inc., 1.15 million shares. John G. Kinnard.
Sierra On-Line Inc., 1.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Singer Company N.V., seven million shares, with 5.25 million to be offered in the United States.
Merrill Lynch.
Standard Pacific Corp., three million shares. Prudential Securities.
Summit Care Corp., 2.1 million shares. Dillon, Read.
Telios Pharmaceuticals Inc., three million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Triconex Corp., two million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
USA Truck Inc., 1.05 million shares. Stephens. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


Biospherics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Rumors Pause as Gooden Dazzles
People, three deep at a remote field at Dodgertown, stared.
Photographers clicked away madly.
Television cameras tracked his every move.
A radar gun appeared behind the plate.
Reporters filled notebooks.
Coaches compiled charts.
Medical officials studied his mechanics.
There was a lot today to document concerning Dwight Gooden: his first formal start of the spring, his first pitch of that start, his first public appearance of significance since it became known that he was one of three Mets named in a rape complaint currently under investigation by the Port St.
Lucie Police Department.


Israelis Step Up Skirmish With U.S.
Israeli officials stepped up their attacks on the United States today over allegations that Israel had illegally resold American weapons technology to China, South Africa and other countries.
At the same time, military experts here said the arms-sale charges suggest that the longstanding strategic relationship between the United States and Israel might be at an important turning point.


Review/Jazz; A Visit Back to the Big-Band Era
Except for the flood of work by Duke Ellington, which was ignored at the time, the 1960's produced virtually no important orchestral jazz pieces.
John Coltrane managed with "Africa Brass," Charlie Haden and Carla Bley produced "Liberation Music Orchestra," and Charles Mingus came up with "Mingus Mingus Mingus."
But everything conspired against them.
Big bands need money, and rock's economic surge had crushed jazz.
The public that might have supported the music 20 years before had long vanished.
And musicians were translating the political notion of freedom into music.
The big band's authoritarian, disciplined nature was anything but free.


Associated Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caller, Identify Yourself
The same technology that lets telephone users identify their callers also exposes callers to identification they may not want.
An obvious case is the rape victim who wishes to call a counseling service without first divulging her name.
This technology now advances from state to state, raising privacy problems that cut in all directions.
New York, the latest state to approve a service named Caller ID, has adopted some wise safeguards for privacy that might serve as a guide to others.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None Tuesday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Feb.
Housing Starts . . .
Feb.
Industrial Production . . .
Feb.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Merchandise Trade . . .Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Dance in Review
Demetrius Klein Dance Company Movement Research 179 Varick Street Manhattan Through tonight
The fascination of Demetrius A. Klein's work lay more in its vocabulary and idiom than in any single dance on the program presented by his Florida-based company on Saturday night.
The young choreographer dances with his wife, Kathleen Johnson-Klein, and with performers, some of whom are students from their dance school.


Co-Enerco reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Another gospel of American life is traveling to Russia: the principles of physical fitness.
MARAT VOLKOV, manager of the fitness center at the Radisson Slavyanskaya Hotel and Business Center in Moscow, returned home Saturday after a month of touring American health clubs, and he intends to bring back some new ideas.
"I was surprised by people's attitude to fitness," he said the other day.
"I have seen people running everywhere, anytime; it is very impressive. I was also surprised by the achievements of the fitness industry in the United States. We don't have those cardiovascular machines."


Shelby Bonus Weds Keith Newman
Rachele Ina Bonus, the daughter of Jean and Louis Bonus of New Providence, N.J., was married yesterday to Keith Harrison Newman, the son of Jeanette Newman Rosenfeld of New City, N.Y., and the late Edward Newman.
Rabbi William B. Horn officiated at the Richfield Regency Hotel in Verona, N.J.
Mrs.
Newman, 26 years old and known as Shelby, is a photographer with Xxcell's Studio in Matthews, N.C.
She graduated from the School of Visual Arts in New York.
Her father is a consultant for new drug applications for Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceutical Division in Summit, N.J.


Beijing Journal; Where Each Worker Is Yoked to a Personal File
Behind a locked metal grill door on the second floor of the Beijing Engineering Design Institute is a small room stacked with files from floor to ceiling.
There is a file here on each of the institute's 600 employees, and although they are never allowed to peek inside, they live all their lives with their file looming over them.
As part of China's complex system of social control and surveillance, the authorities keep a dangan, or file, on virtually everyone except peasants.
Indeed, most Chinese have two dangan: one at their workplace and another in their local police station.


Essay; The Major Indicator
If you were facing an election with unemployment high and not getting better; with opponents on the left moving centerward in hopes of at last winning a national election; and with former supporters accusing you of "dithering" and longing for the clarity of purpose of your strong-willed predecessor -- who would you be?
You would be either the post-Reagan President of the United States or the post-Thatcher Prime Minister of Britain.
Never before has the "special relationship" between our countries been more striking: the leaders of the Atlantic alliance are in the same political boat.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Staying Alive; How a Battered Clinton Has Stayed Alive
They call him the Terminator.
The robo-candidate.
A torpedoed battleship that is still afloat.
A Civil War soldier leaning against a tree, bleeding from a stomach wound.
Of all the issues raised in this scalding political season, one of the most interesting is this: How did Bill Clinton take so many shots and keep on coming?


Don't Favor Russia Among Ex-Soviet States
To the Editor:
In "Get Tough With Ukraine" (Op-Ed, March 4), Dimitri K. Simes again tries to blame the victim for the crime.
After 300 years of Russian occupation involving the attempted destruction of the Ukrainian langauge, culture and history, Ukraine knows that independence cannot be preserved with a foreign army on Ukrainian soil.
Dr.
Simes is disingenuous to criticize Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian President, for promising "to resettle thousands of Germans and Tatars in the Crimea." The Crimea did not belong to Russia, but to the Tatars, and it was Moscow that uprooted and scattered the Tatars and Germans in an effort to destroy their identity.
Ukraine, having suffered from that same Russification policy, is helping these nationalities rebuild their communities.


Turks Must Grieve Again for the Dead
When dawn came today, raw and frozen, the people's eyes were red-rimmed from the weeping, and their hands were calloused and soiled from the searching.
A quarter of the city, they said, had collapsed in the earthquake.
All that remains, said one volunteer rescuer, is to find the bodies.
And even that is not easy, for many of the dead lie trapped by concrete slabs.


Ground NASA and Start Again
Twenty-two years ago, in a maneuver widely blamed for banking NASA into the downward spiral it has flown ever since, a task group headed by Vice President Spiro Agnew charted a course for America's future in space based on three elements -- the space shuttle, a manned space station and, some time further in the future, a manned mission to Mars.
Now the White House has nominated a new NASA administrator, Daniel Goldin, an aerospace executive at TRW.
Vice President Dan Quayle, chairman of the National Space Council, reportedly pressed for a change in NASA leadership with the goal of setting a bold, fresh course for the nation's space program.
And what are the key elements of this new plan?
The same Big Three: the space shuttle, a space station and, some time further in the future, a manned mission to Mars.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Policy; Debate on Taxes and Trade Grows Intense in Rust Belt
In their television commercials, debates and stump speeches in Michigan and Illinois, the Democratic Presidential candidates degrade each others' economic platforms as the basis for disaster.
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas says Gov.
Bill Clinton has no interest in expanding the economic pie, only in distributing increasingly smaller slices more evenly.
Mr.
Clinton says that Mr.
Tsongas is a patsy for Wall Street and that former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. favors higher taxes for the middle class and deep tax cuts for the rich.


Ogilvy Chosen By Maidenform
After one of the most competitive reviews so far this year, Maidenform Inc. has awarded Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York its $6 million account.
Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver had produced many award-winning ads for Maidenform before it closed last year.


Prices Indicate Traders Expect Higher Growth
With the latest statistics showing surprising economic strength, credit market participants are challenging the view held by most economists that any recovery will be mild at most.
The reports, particularly the spurt in retail sales reported for January and February, have caused many economists to ratchet up their growth forecasts for the first half of the year.
It now appears, they say, that the economy is likely to expand slightly in the first quarter instead of contracting.
And the boost to consumption provided by the retail sales numbers suggests that second-quarter growth should be around 2 percent or perhaps a bit higher.


Press Notes; U.P.I. Seems to Be Nearing A Moment of Truth Again
Beleaguered United Press International seems once again to be approaching a moment of truth.
Earlier this month, Judge Francis G. Conrad of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan said that U.P.I. seemed to have enough cash to continue operating only through April, and he threw open the legal gates to allow anyone to make a bid to save the news agency.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON, BUILDING STRONG COALITION, LEADS IN MICHIGAN
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has built an imposing lead in Michigan's Presidential primary race by assembling a powerful coalition spanning the state's strongest Democratic constituencies -- trade unions, blacks and conservative whites, including ethnic voters who backed Republicans in the 1980's.
The main threat to Mr.
Clinton in Tuesday's voting here may turn out to be not former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, whose campaign has failed to generate a spark in this chronically depressed industrial state, but former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, who has transformed himself in recent days into the scourge of free trade and champion of the fearful.


FOR SOUTH AFRICA, A WATERSHED VOTE
South Africa's white minority will vote Tuesday in a referendum that could decide whether President F. W. de Klerk's plan to end apartheid continues or grinds to a halt.
It is an extraordinary risk for Mr. de Klerk and a milestone for South Africa, a referendum asking whites whether the President should continue down the path of abolishing the system that has for decades reserved the best of South Africa for them.


When Race Alters the Public's Perceptions
Forty-five years after Jackie Robinson, black players populate every team in the major leagues, lead lives of luxury and enjoy an acceptance in a predominantly white society the likes of which Robinson, the first black in the major leagues, could never have envisioned.
That doesn't mean that black players of today fully accept that the doors Robinson walked through in 1947 are open wide.
More and more are talking about a world that is at once very privileged but at times very uncomfortable because of race.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Friday about Alfred C. Sikes, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, and Andrew C. Barrett, a commissioner, misstated the date and subject of their meeting.
It was two years ago, not Thursday.
The subject was radio station ownership, not a deregulation matter.


Carrington Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Rural New York County Has Unlikely Manufacturing Revival
Something strange has happened in the lushly forested hills here, 30 miles southwest of Ithaca, where one of the highest concentrations of shuttered factories in the Northeast had come to resemble a rust-laden museum of heavy industry.
The museum has come to life.
Inspired first in the mid-1980's by a huge investment from Toshiba Inc., the Japanese conglomerate, plants have reopened, assembly lines have been automated, and machine shops are suddenly abuzz in a manufacturing revival.


American Biodynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Pavin Soars to Victory With Eagle and Birdie
Riding the momentum from a holed-out 8-iron shot for an electrifying eagle on the 72d hole, Corey Pavin drilled home a 15-foot birdie putt on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff today to defeat Fred Couples and win the Honda Classic.
Pavin's perfect shot from 136 yards -- which flew directly into the cup on the 585-yard par-5 18th hole -- totally changed a tournament that to that point had become a scramble between a half-dozen error-prone players in a losing battle with the difficult finishing holes at Weston Hills Country Club.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Is Talking About a Third Party for '96
Perhaps sensing that his chances of influencing Republican Party policy this year are slipping along with his Presidential candidacy, Patrick J. Buchanan has raised the specter of a third-party challenge in 1996.
Speaking to a group of voters in Midland, Mich., on Saturday night, Mr.
Buchanan said the "establishments" of both the Republican and Democratic Parties were fast losing touch with the average American voter.


Thinking About De Facto Apartheid
MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS rarely reads for enjoyment, but while recovering from diverticulitis last week he graciously selected an Ed McBain novel about legal injustice that was proffered from New York Hospital's library cart.
For his next literary indulgence, the Mayor should choose another book about injustice: "Two Nations," Andrew Hacker's unsanitized study of racial division.
Unfortunately, it's nonfiction.
Not that Mr.
Dinkins, after living in New York, New Jersey and Washington, will learn much more about what it means to be black in America.
What he might absorb from this analysis, though, are the emotional and intellectual underpinnings of white prejudice, presented non-judgmentally by a white who shows he can share a black perspective without being patronizing.
Most disturbing about Mr.
Hacker's book, as demonstrated by the quotations below, is how profoundly black and white perspectives can differ, even when race may be less valid as a characteristic than many people think.


It's Big East, but Hoyas Find Basket Is a Little Small
The buzzer sounded, the scoreboard read Syracuse 56, Georgetown 54, and the Orangemen raced to midcourt to hug one another and pump their fists in celebration of their Big East tournament championship.
But on the Georgetown bench, the Hoyas sat passively as Coach John Thompson walked down the line, shaking hands with each of his players.
All the Hoyas could do now was await the post-game awards ceremony where they would be congratulated as something they did not want to be: runners-up.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Chrysler's directors yielded to the wishes of Lee A. Iacocca and agreed to name a G.M. executive to succeed Mr.
Iacocca as chief executive, several people with knowledge of the board's deliberations said.
The announcement of Robert J. Eaton's appointment is expected today.
But if the news of a succession plan calms unhappy stockholders, the decision may well create enormous diviseness within Chrysler, where Robert A. Lutz, currently Mr.
Iacocca's No. 2, is extremely popular.  [ Page A1. ]


Baptist President's Support for Tyson Is Assailed Inside and Outside Church
For decades, the National Baptist Convention U.S.A.
Inc. has been a sleeping giant: With about eight million blacks, it is the nation's third-largest Protestant denomination, yet its voice in the national discourse on social policy and morality has often been muted.
And when its 73-year-old president, the Rev.
Dr.
Theodore J. Jemison, recently tried to bestir the giant by siding with Mike Tyson in the former heavyweight champion boxer's rape trial, he unleashed a torrent of criticism both from within the church and from theologians outside.


World Economies


Coeur d'Alene Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Politicians Taking Sides On Parade
With just two days to go before the St.
Patrick's Day parade, and one day before a Federal judge will rule on whether a banned gay group will be allowed to march, local politicians yesterday scurried to position themselves on their chosen sides of the dispute.
At a news conference on Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, where the parade will begin on Tuesday morning, two State Assemblymen, John C. Dearie of the Bronx and Joseph Crowley of Queens, and Representative Thomas J. Manton of Queens, announced that they would march in the parade on Tuesday no matter what the courts or other politicians decide.


CHRONICLE
SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY is planning to marry VICTORIA REGGIE, a Washington lawyer, later this year.
No date has been set.
Ms.
Reggie, 38 years old, is an old friend of the Kennedy family, the Senator's spokesman, Paul Donovan, said.
A partner with a Washington law firm, Ms.
Reggie has two children, Curran, 9, and Caroline, 6.
She was divorced in 1990.
"I love Vicki and her children very much," the 60-year-old Massachusetts Democrat said in a statement released on Saturday.
"I've known her for many years. We began dating last June, and she has brought enormous happiness into my life. I look forward to our marriage and our life together."
The Senator divorced his wife, Joan, in 1982, two years after his unsuccessful bid for the Presidency.
He has three children, Kara, Edward Jr., and Patrick.
Ms.
Reggie was raised in Louisiana and graduated from Newcomb College in New Orleans in 1976.
She graduated summa cum laude from Tulane Law School in 1979, said a statement released by the Senator's office.
She is a partner at the firm of Keck, Mahin &amp; Cate, specializing in banking.
She is the daughter of retired JUDGE EDMUND M. REGGIE of Crowley, La.
The family owns a vacation home on Nantucket Island.
"We love Ted," Judge Reggie said Saturday evening.
He said the two families met at the 1956 Democratic National Convention, when Judge Reggie led Louisiana to support John F. Kennedy for vice president.
He went on to run three Kennedy Presidential campaigns in his state, the judge said.
"We're dyed-in-the-wool Kennedy supporters," he said.
Senator Kennedy and Ms. Reggie could not be reached for comment.


Susan A. Levin, Student, Is Wed
Susan Ann Levin and William Dexter Paine 3d were married yesterday in Telluride, Colo.
Judge Sharon Shuteran of San Miguel County Court officiated at the Skyline Ranch.
Mrs.
Paine, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a second-year student at the Hastings College of Law of the University of California.
She is the daughter of Gary Levin, a real-estate investor in Telluride, and Judith J. Levin of Wyomissing, Pa., a supervisor for the CNA Insurance Company in Reading, Pa.


Sophia Friedman Weds M. I. Roslin
Sophia Rebekkah Friedman, a law student at Northwestern University, and Matthew Ira Roslin, a lawyer, both in Chicago, were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi David Silverman officiated.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Shari and Stanley J. Friedman of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Shereff, Friedman, Hoffman &amp; Goodman.
Her mother was until recently a special assistant to the chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York.


Dividend Meetings


Review/Pop; A Brazilian Impulse To Melody
Ivan Lins, a composer who straddles the line between bossa nova and jazz-fusion styles, probably has more American recordings of his work than any contemporary Brazilian songwriter except Antonio Carlos Jobim.
And in the best moments of his New York concert debut at Town Hall on Saturday evening, he demonstrated that all its takes to transcend the formulas of electrified pop-jazz music is a melodic impulse that refuses to be contained.
The 46-year-old composer, who is moving to the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street) tomorrow for two weeks, has written the music for at least two ballads that have become nightclub standards in this country.
Both "Love Dance," which has an American lyric by Paul Williams, and "The Island," to which Alan and Marilyn Bergman have set lyrics, are love songs whose silky melodies and rich pop-jazz harmonies recall Michel Legrand at his most romantic.
The lyrics for both songs carry sensuous imagery to the brink of soft-core explicitness.
Mr.
Lins offered buoyant performances of both songs on Saturday, singing in Portuguese and playing an electric keyboard equipped to deliver a full orchestral sound.


Stocks Fall Heavily In Tokyo
Anxieties over the faltering Japanese economy intensified early today, as the stock market reached its lowest level in five years, falling under the psychologically important 20,000 level on the Nikkei index.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 618.90 points, or 3 percent, to 19,837.16, after first slipping below the barrier in early afternoon trading.
The indicator fell amid extremely thin trading -- 200 million shares.


A Dangerous Gun Law Loophole
Federal law requires that gun purchasers reside in the state where they buy their guns -- unless they are federally licensed gun dealers.
That loophole allows a flood of illegal guns to hit city streets.
A huge majority of those Federal "dealers" don't operate gun shops, and many abuse special privileges the license confers.
Some 270,000 Americans are federally licensed to purchase guns across state lines, but only about 20 percent actually function from the storefront businesses most people envision when they think of a gun dealership.
Anyone with minimal qualifications who fills out a brief form and pays $30 may obtain a license.
Many use them to import guns for illegal resale in cities with strict gun laws.
The license even allows the smuggler to purchase guns out of state by mail or phone and arrange for delivery by United Parcel Service.


Chrysler's President Had Many Supporters
Robert A. Lutz had made no secret of wanting to run the Chrysler Corporation when Lee A. Iacocca stepped down.
And many employees and industry analysts said they thought he deserved the post.
The former Marine fighter pilot, who is 60 years old, has been given credit for Chrysler's newest products -- the Jeep Grand Cherokee and a sleek family of new midsize sedans.
Company bulletin boards in Detroit are plastered with the automotive press's positive reviews of the new vehicles.


With Nine New Attacks, Bias Crimes Far Outpace Last Year
At least nine bias-related incidents over the weekend, including the stabbing death of a Hispanic student, brought the total number of such incidents reported in New York City so far this year to 149, more than twice the number in the first two and a half months of 1991, the police said.
Three of the assaults -- motivated the police said by bias against Jewish, gay and Hispanic people -- occurred early yesterday, concluding a weekend of ugly incidents, one of the most active in bias-related incidents since January, when several black and Hispanic schoolchildren reported being smeared with white paint in separate attacks in the Bronx.
There have been no arrests in those cases.


San Diego St. Won't Hire Tarkanian
Jerry Tarkanian, who 12 days ago ended a turbulent coaching career at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, will not be hired as head coach at San Diego State, according to a person in the university's athletic department with knowledge of the school's plans.
Instead, the university is expected to hire Tom Asbury, the coach at Pepperdine, the person said.
Asbury has been at Pepperdine for four seasons, and this season led his team to a 24-6 record and a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, with a first-round game against Memphis State on Thursday.
Asbury, who would replace Jim Brandenburg, is expected to be named in the next several days.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SOLARZ FACES FIRE OVER BOUNCED CHECKS
Representative Stephen J. Solarz fears that his 24-year-old public career could be threatened by the scandal over bounced checks at the House bank.
In explaining what led him and his wife to write hundreds of overdrafts in 39 months, Mr.
Solarz sketches a financial portrait of a busy, well-to-do family with plenty of money but little time to pay attention to the small details of their personal finances: As bills came, they were paid and money was deposited into the account as needed.
He maintains that he did not believe he broke any rules.
A1.
BIAS ATTACKS ON THE RISE
The number of bias attacks in New York City has reached 149 this year, more than twice the number for the same period last year.
At least nine bias-related attacks were reported over the weekend, including the stabbing death of a 17-year-old young Hispanic student in the Bronx.
Reasons for the sharp increase are open to speculation.
But experts include copycat versions of attacks that gained notoriety, retaliation for those acts and a periodic combustion in the city's ethnic, racial and religious mix.
B3.
POLITICKING OVER THE PARADE
Local politicians scurried to position themselves in the dispute over the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, just one day before a Federal judge will rule on whether a banned gay group will be allowed to march.
Some declared they would march no matter what the judge decides; others pledged to stay away if the gay group was banned.
B3.
A LOSING BATTLE AGAINST DECAY
A neighborhood group in Brighton Beach is waging a failing war against what it sees as one of the last trouble spots in the otherwise reviving Brooklyn neighborhood: a cluster of 200 to 300 single-room-occupancy dwellings.
A few are neatly kept, but in many more, absentee landlords have let the houses fall apart, leaving them as magnets for crack dealers and prostitutes who slip in and out of the battered-looking buildings at night.
B3.
AN OLD ARMORY RETAINS ITS ROMANCE
The vaulted brick fortress of the 69th Regiment Armory was first the home of the "Fighting 69th," the National Guard unit made up of tough Irish soldiers who fought in a century's worth of wars.
Now the soldiers are mostly Hispanic, the rifle range has closed and the officers' mess hall is used as a women's shelter.
But the 69th is still firmly entrenched in New York.
Lexington Avenue Journal, B2.
EXAMINING THE RACIAL DIVIDE
In a disturbing book, an author takes a close look at the emotional and intellectual underpinnings of white prejudice.
In doing so, he distills statistics to deflate several misconceptions about those on welfare.
Metro Matters, B3.
REGION AN EX-DRUG USER AS COUNSELOR
Michael Rubenstein thought he had his life back on track: After struggling to break a drug habit and spending a year in prison, he landed a job in East Hampton, L.I., as a drug counselor.
But when the town learned of his past, he was fired.
Now, Mr.
Rubenstein is fighting to get his job back, arguing that his troubles make him especially qualified to counsel teen-agers about the dangers of drugs and alcohol.
B5.
AFTER GUNFIRE, POLICE FEEL BESIEGED
A precinct house in Buffalo was peppered with gunfire last week, and the police officers who vowed to "protect and serve" were left wondering just how much authority they had left.
No one was injured in the drive-by attack, although officers recovered 20 bullet casings.
The police speculate that the shooting may have been retaliation from drug dealers.
B5.
A TOWN SHUDDERS AFTER PRISON BREAK
Two 18-year-old inmates, one charged with killing his grandfather, escaped on Friday night from the stately, red-brick prison in Litchfield, Conn., after knocking a guard unconscious.
Many residents said they do not lock their doors at night, but that the escape -- from a prison that looks dignified but is severely overcrowded -- will probably change that.
Residents near the jail say that they are nervous and that they worry about escapes from the correctional center.
B5.
Cuomo denounces lawmakers for their inaction on the state budget.
B5.
The Traffic Map B6


Jailbreak Raises Alarm in Quiet Village
Except for the barbed wire across its backyard fence, the Litchfield Correctional Center could be just another stately old building in this Connecticut village's picturesque downtown.
It is red brick and flanked by tall white columns, and the year it went up -- 1812 -- is memorialized on the facade.
But it is definitely a jail, and an overcrowded one at that.
And the Friday night escape of two 18-year-old inmates, one of whom is charged with killing his grandfather, has sent a shudder through Litchfield, a place that had achieved a level of sophistication without becoming fearful about the world beyond.


Talks End on Show Using Ad Character
The Fox Children's Network and Frito-Lay Inc. have ended negotiations over a proposal to feature Chester Cheetah, a character that appears in advertising for Chee-tos snacks, in a television cartoon show.
The decision followed the filing of a complaint about the proposed show with the Federal Communications Commission.
But Margaret Loesch, the network's president, said the discussions ended for other reasons.


Nickelodeon Planning to Add Nick in Print and in Toys
For children who cannot get enough of the irreverent spirit of Nickelodeon, the cable television channel designed for them, the company is branching into books, toys and a new magazine.
In January, Grosset &amp; Dunlap, the publishing company in New York, brought out four Nickelodeon books, including "Don't Just Sit There: 50 Ways to Have a Nickelodeon Day" and "Hey Dude," which uses characters from a television series of the same name.


Citing Cost, Budget Office Blocks Workplace Health Proposal
In its latest attack on Federal environmental regulations, the White House budget office has blocked a major health proposal for workers, saying that carrying it out could be so expensive it could force companies to cut wages and jobs, thereby making workers' health worse.
"The positive effect of wealth on health has been established both theoretically and empirically," the budget office said in a letter last week to the Labor Department announcing its decision.


Topics of The Times; A Welcome Silence
"Are you tired of having your quiet family time in the evenings interrupted by phone calls from aggressive salesmen?" asks a Washington, D.C., radio commercial.
Who isn't?
But, hark!
The voice on the radio offers relief.
The voice belongs to George Ferris Jr., chairman of Ferris, Baker Watts Inc., the largest investment firm in the capital and its surrounding states.
In this commercial he flogs no sure-fire investment opportunity.
Rather, he scorns intrusive callers -- "some even from New York firms with whom you have no relationship" -- and assures listeners that his firm would never be so boorish.


Drug Counselor With a Past Fights Dismissal
After struggling to break a drug habit and spending a year in prison for selling cocaine, Michael Rubenstein, a former Manhattan psychologist, thought his life was back on trackwhen he was hired by the Town of East Hampton as a part-time drug counselor.
But when town officials learned of his past, Mr.
Rubenstein was dismissed after only five weeks on the job.


Dismal Section of Brighton Beach Resists Revival Efforts
Pat Singer marched down the Brighton Beach side street, her white spangled cowboy boots clicking, her voice tight with frustration as she performing triage on the row of Archie Bunker-style houses.
"There are still drugs over there," she said, throwing a hand toward a cluster of run-down homes.
"That one looks much better, but you never know," she said at another.
Ms.
Singer then stopped at a house at 3053 Brighton Fifth Street.
"It's going to go back the way it was," she said.
"Just look at it."


CRI Insured reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief article on the Credit Markets page on Friday about the debt of two Japanese banks misstated a rating change by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation on outstanding commercial paper issued by a subsidiary of the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan.
The rating was lowered to A-1, from A-1+.
The article also misstated a change in S.&amp; P.'s outlook on the Industrial Bank of Japan.
The ratings agency said it had shifted its assessment to negative, from stable.


Cuomo Criticizes Legislators As Talks Stall on Budget Plan
Amid an atmosphere of gathering tension here, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo tonight denounced lawmakers for inaction on the state budget due April 1, and legislative officials said they were delaying, for at least a week, their much-awaited proposal on Congressional reapportionment.
Both the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, a Republican, and the Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, a Democrat, said a few weeks ago that they believed they were "on track" for completing a budget by March 15.
But the date came and went with no such deal and no apparent shortage of hard feelings.


Danninger Medical Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Devils Know the Way Out of San Jose
The Devils completed a miserable trip by losing to the San Jose Sharks, 3-2, Saturday night, and can now concentrate on spending the rest of their regular season close to home.
Seven of their remaining 10 games will be played in the Meadowlands and the other three no farther away than Philadelphia.
Saturday night's game marked the Devils' fourth loss on a six-game trip, which began with a 5-4 victory over the Rangers on March 4 and included a 2-2 tie against the Edmonton Oilers last Wednesday.


Sikh Militants Kill 20 in India


Data Measurement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Business Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
For Celtics, It's Bird, Bird and More Bird  Larry Bird, a doubtful starter until hours before tipoff, scored 49 points yesterday as the Boston Celtics beat Portland, 152-148, in double overtime at the Boston Garden.
It was the most points for Bird since Feb. 15, 1988, when he scored 49 at Phoenix.
His career high of 60 came against Atlanta on March 12, 1985.(AP) N.H.L.
Sabres Earn Spot in Playoffs  Pat LaFontaine's second goal of the night and 40th of the season snapped a tie and gave the Buffalo Sabres a 6-4 victory over the Quebec Nordiques, clinching a playoff berth.(AP) SKIING  World Cup Breakthrough for Norwegian  Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway, an Olympic gold medalist, posted the first World Cup victory of his career yesterday, at the competition in Aspen, Colo.
A.
J.
Kitt of Rochester had his best super-G finish ever, taking 10th place. (AP) TENNIS  McEnroe Wins in Return to South Florida  John McEnroe, playing his first singles match in South Florida since 1981, swept Sandon Stolle, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday in the second round of the International Players Championships tournament in Key Biscayne.
Second-seeded Stefan Edberg, third-seeded Boris Becker and 39-year-old Jimmy Connors also advanced.
In women's play, top-seeded Monica Seles and fifth-seeded Jennifer Capriati moved into the third round. (AP) YACHT RACING  Japan Leads Challengers After Third Set  The challengers for the America's Cup ended their third set of trial races in San Diego yesterday with Japan leading overall.
The top four boats, which will begin a semifinal series March 29, are: Japan, 82 points; New Zealand, 74; Italy, 69, and France, 61.
Four other teams, the low-point scorers after two months of racing, were eliminated from further competition as part of the round-robin cup selection process.
They include Spain and Sweden, and two teams from Australia -- Spirit of Australia and Challenge Australia.
The cup defenders also completed their third round of racing.
Bill Koch's America3 leads the series with 44 points; second, Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes, with 19, and third, Koch's second-string yacht, Defiant, with 12.
TRACK AND FIELD  Brooklyn Girl Wins at 400 and 800 Meters  Jowanna McMullen, an eighth-grader from I.S. 324 in Brooklyn, turned in two outstanding performances yesterday at the Ninth Annual National Scholastic indoor championships in the Carrier Dome in Syracuse.
McMullen, 15 years old, won the 400-meter dash in 54.85 seconds, then defeated a strong field in the 800 meters with a late rush to the finish.
Her time of 2 minutes 12.60 seconds is the second-fastest in the country this year.
McMullen's time in the 400 is the fastest ever run by a New York eighth-grader and is also better than the high school freshman indoor mark.
Other New York metropolitan-area individual winners in girl's events yesterday were Quana Phillips of Spring Valley in the triple jump at 39 feet 5 1/4 inches and Malisa Baker of Shoreham-Wading River, L.I., in the one-mile walk at 7:17.24.
In boys' events, Jermaine Lewis of Lanham, Md., posted a national indoor record of 21.40 seconds in winning the 200-meter dash.
Bishop Ford of Brooklyn, with Chris Gonzalez registering a 4:20.5-second split on the mile anchor leg, took the distance medley in 10:17.38 and Bishop Ford won the 3,200-meter relay in 7:48.98.
Other New York area individual winners were Mike Schrorer of West Nyack in the 800 meters in 1:52.53; Thomas Thompson of East Islip, L.I., the long jump at 23 feet 8 1/4 inches, and James Spahr of Smithtown, L.I., the one-mile walk in 6:26.68.
Darius Pemberton of Hackensack, N.J., set a national junior-class record in winning the pentathlon with 3,801 points.


A Top G.M. Official Is Reported Chosen To Succeed Iacocca
Yielding to the wishes of Lee A. Iacocca, the directors of the Chrysler Corporation have agreed to name a General Motors executive to succeed him as chief executive, several people with knowledge of the board's deliberations said tonight.
After two days of meetings in New York, the board's 10 outside directors settled on Mr.
Iacocca's candidate, Robert J. Eaton, who currently heads G.M.'s highly profitable European operations.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Syracuse Banishes Just One of Its Clouds
PLAYING under one cloud is hard enough, but Syracuse was playing under two clouds yesterday when it won the Big East tournament.
Actually, make that three clouds.
Some people carry umbrellas.
Jim Boeheim carries his own personal cloud.


Corrections
A caption with a sports picture by Reuters in some copies Friday about the Milwaukee-Phoenix basketball game misidentified the Suns' player.
He was Dan Majerle, not Tom Chambers.


Impressive Record at G.M. Europe
Robert J. Eaton has been negotiating with the Chrysler Corporation from a position of strength.
His work in Europe, where he was handed the General Motors Corporation's leadership torch four years ago to carry on a revival-in-progress, gave G.M. a significant lift at a time when it desperately needed help.
G.M. had the worst financial year in its history last year, but the results would have been more dismal if not for G.M.
Europe's record sales of 1.6 million vehicles, contributing $1.79 billion in earnings.
The big G.M. operation was the most profitable of the European auto makers last year, when G.M. as a whole posted a loss of $4.5 billion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  DAY OF DECISION IN SOUTH AFRICA
The white minority will vote tomorrow in a referendum that asks whether President de Klerk should continue abolishing the system of apartheid.
A decisive mandate for Mr. de Klerk would mark the beginning of the end of white rule.
A rejection could bring new unrest and foreign isolation.
A1  PIECES OF THE EARHART PUZZLE
Investigators say they have found fragments of Amelia Earhart's plane on a deserted Pacific island, unlocking a central secret of the most tantalizing and enduring mystery in aviation history.
A1  ISRAEL VS.
U.S., CONTINUED
Israeli officials stepped up their attacks on the United States over assertions that Israel illegally sold American weapons technology to China, South Africa and other countries.
Some experts said the longstanding strategic relationship between the United States and Israel might be at a turning point.
A3  HELP THEM, CAPITOL HILL SAYS
Many Republicans in Congress are joining Democrats and former President Nixon in urging the Bush Administration to take the lead in pushing for more aid to the former Soviet republics.
They worry that economic desperation could transform the republics into dictatorships.
A8  TENSION IN MOSCOW OVER RALLY
Unusual alarm has been generated in the Russian capital by plans for a mass rally tomorrow by disgruntled right-wing and left-wing forces.
The coalition also wants to regroup the defunct Congress of People's Deputies.
The militancy of the opposition has raised fears of clashes.
A8  STILL IN CHARGE IN ALBANIA
President Alia, a former dictator who withstood the anti-Communist revolutions in Eastern Europe, said in interview that he had "come a long way." Many Albanians would not agree with him.
A7
Reports say nuclear weapons are missing from Kazakhstan.  A3  A BATTLE FOR PEACE BEGINS
A senior United Nations diplomat arrived in Cambodia to start the biggest and most costly peacekeeping operation ever attempted by the United Nations.
But reports from the countryside suggested that the civil war is far from over.
A5  Weeping survivors of Turkey's earthquake dig for bodies.
A6  Beijing Journal: A look at how China controls its citizens.
A4  National A10-15, B7  CLINTON'S POTENT COALITION
Heading into Tuesday's Presidential primary in Michigan, Governor Clinton has assembled a powerful coalition of the state's strongest Democratic constituencies -- trade unions, blacks and conservative whites.
A1  CLINTON'S SURPRISING STAMINA
Marital infidelity.
Avoiding the draft.
Questionable financial dealings.
One of the chief questions of the election is this: How has Clinton been hit by so many accusations and kept on coming?
A1  BUCHANAN TALKS ABOUT '96
As his prospects this year dim, Patrick Buchanan hinted he might mount a third-party bid for President in 1996.
A15  EMPHASIZING THE DIFFERENCES
Though the three Democratic candidates support an active Government role in guiding the economy, they are emphasizing their differences in Michigan, where the economy is the overarching issue.
A15  HEARING FROM THE LITTLE GUY
In Rockford, Ill., a much-sought-after group of voters, the little guys, are trying to read between the sound bites, looking for themselves in the candidates.
A14
A Brown-Clinton fight dominated the Democratic debate.
A14  SOLARZ TALKS ABOUT FINANCES
After being identified as one of 24 worst abusers of check-writing privileges in the House, Representative Solarz explained the complicated household expenses that led to his predicament.
A1
Public expresses wonder about the House banking scandal.  B7
Foley proposed replacing the House management system.  B7  CHRYSLER AFTER IACOCCA
Yielding to the chairman's wishes, Chrysler directors agreed to name a General Motors executive as his successor, people with knowledge of the board's deliberations said.
A1  PROFITS FROM HEAD INJURIES
Many health-care centers are being accused of preying on some of the most vulnerable of patients: people with severe brain injuries.
Critics say these rehabilitation centers are reaping millions of dollars in profits from insurance payments while often neglecting their patients.
A1  BAPTIST ROLE IN RAPE CASE
After the president of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A. gave his support to Mike Tyson during his rape trial, the denomination became the target of theologians' criticism and of a Federal inquiry.
A10  PAYING THE DO-GOODERS
The $463,000 salary that the United Way of America pays its president reflects the dissonance of the marriage between philanthropic traditions and business-school ethics of marketing and management.
A12  WORKPLACE PROPOSAL ATTACKED
The White House budget office has assailed a major workplace health proposal, saying that to carry it out could be so expensive it could force companies to cut wages and jobs, thereby making workers' health worse.
A13  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: The other news on Gooden.
C1  Dismal spring for Yanks' Taylor.
C8  Basketball: Syracuse prevails in Big East.
C1  Syracuse-Princeton a compelling matchup.
C6  Virginia among top-seeded women's teams.
C6  Tarkanian won't go to San Diego St.
C5  Column: Vecsey on Syracuse C7  Claire Smith on Baseball C8  Features: Sidelines C2  Question Box C5  Golf: Pavin takes Honda playoff.
C5  Hockey: Maine, St.
Lawrence wait.
C2  Devils complete miserable trip.
C3  Obituaries B8  C. V. Wood Jr., pioneer in development of theme parks  Alvin Schwartz, author  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Farm Aid in Texas.
C11  Scholars find what could be a recording of Walt Whitman.
C11  Dance: Dance Roundup C12  Music: Ivo Pogorelich, pianist.
C11  A jazz "Summit Meeting." C11  "House-rocking music" on tour.
C18  Ivan Lins from Brazil.
C18  Word and Image: "Alien Ink," on writers and the F.B.I.
C15  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Trading trade for votes.
Caller, identify yourself.
Gun law loophole.
Topics: Texas treasure.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Sleeper issue in '92.
A17  William Safire: The Major indicator.
A17  Timothy Ferris: Ground NASA and start again.
A17  James Chace: The Pentagon's superpower fantasy.
A17


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week includes only the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Late in the day on Friday, the three-month bills traded with a yield of 4.04 percent and the six-month bills were at 4.21 percent.
The following fixed-income issues are scheduled for this week: TAXABLE  THURSDAY
Florida Power and Light Co., $75 million or $125 million of $25 preferred.
Competitive.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Citicorp, six million shares of $25 cumulative preferred. Merrill Lynch.
Columbia Hospital Corp., $100 million senior subordinated notes, maturing 2002.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
EMC Corp., $50 million convertible subordinated debentures, due 2007. Salomon Brothers.
Epic Holdings, $140.7 million senior notes, maturing 2002.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Infinity Broadcasting Corp., $150 million in senior subordinated notes, due 2002.
Lehman Brothers.
Safeway Inc., $250 million in senior subordinated debentures, due 1999, and $150 million in senior subordinated debentures, due 2007.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Tosco Corp., $300 million first-mortgage bonds in two parts: $100 million in series A, due 1997, and $200 million in series B, due 2002.
Lehman Brothers.
Treasure Island Finance Corp. for Mirage Resorts, $300 million of first-mortgage notes in two parts: $150 million in serial A, due 1999, and $150 million in serial B, due 2000.
Salomon Brothers.
(Source: MCM CorporateWatch.) TAX EXEMPT  MONDAY
Florida State Board of Education, $311.5 million in series 1992 refunding. Competitive.
Florida Department of Natural Resources, $300 million in revenue bonds.
Competitive.
TUESDAY
Los Angeles Water and Power, $150 million in electricity revenue bonds. Competitive.
New Jersey Transit Authority, $275 million in revenue bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAY
North Carolina, $112 million general obligation bonds. Competitive.  THURSDAY
Milwaukee County, Wis., $84.4 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Gainesville, Fla., $133 million in utility system revenue bonds. Goldman, Sachs.
Idaho Student Loan Fund Marketing Association, $66.6 million of revenue refunding bonds.
A.
G.
Edwards Inc.
Illinois Housing Department Authority, $72 million. Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Illinois Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority, $175 million of serial and term bonds.
Kansas Transportation Department, $250 million in highway revenue bonds.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, $675 million in general revenue bonds, 1992 series A. Merrill Lynch.
Merrillville, Ind., Multi School Building Corp., $57.2 million of insured first-mortgage refunding bonds.
John Nuveen &amp; Co.
New Jersey Health Care Facility. $80 million bonds for Overlook Hospital, Summit, N.J.
Lazard Freres &amp; Co.
Oregon Housing Facility Authority, $80 million in bonds. Bear, Stearns.
Parsippany and Troy Hills, N.J., $50.3 million in general obligation bonds.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Phoenix, $258 million in general obligation bonds. Goldman, Sachs.
Puerto Rico Public Building Authority, $386.9 million in bonds. First Boston Corp.
Puerto Rico Commonwealth, $369 million in bonds. Goldman, Sachs.
Puyallup School District 3, Pierce County, Wash., $54 million of general obligation and refunding bonds.
Seattle-Northwest Securities Corp.
Redding, Calif., $60 million in electric system revenue bonds. Lehman Brothers.
Texas Municipal Power Agency, $450 million in revenue refunding bonds. Goldman, Sachs.
Wisconsin Housing Economic Development Authority, $96 million in bonds. Bear, Stearns.


The Pentagon's Superpower Fantasy
The United States is not a superpower.
There are no more superpowers, despite a new Pentagon document outlining a $1.2 trillion strategy to prevent any other nation from challenging this country's primacy.
If the Persian Gulf war proved anything, it proved that one nation can't dominate the world.
The war was paid for by our allies, mostly by Germany and Japan.
Superpowers can afford to pay for their own wars; we cannot.
We are in hock to foreigners for more than half a trillion dollars, mostly because of foreign holdings of U.S. real estate, Government paper, commercial bonds and notes and other assets.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown and Clinton Shout It Out in a Debate
A debate among the Democratic Presidential contenders degenerated into a bitter verbal brawl tonight as Edmund G. Brown Jr. accused Gov.
Bill Clinton of funneling his state's business to his wife's law firm and Mr.
Clinton shot back that it was "a lying accusation."
The accusations flew in the closing minutes end of an hourlong televised debate here after a questioner asked Mr.
Brown if Mr.
Clinton would have an "electability problem" in November if the Arkansas Governor was the Democratic nominee.


Savings Rate Falls in Japan
Japan's savings rate fell to a record low 6.5 percent in 1991, the Government has reported, fueling anxiety that the foundation of the nation's postwar economic boom is eroding.
The Bank of Japan said on Friday that it was the second consecutive year for a record low savings rate -- personal savings as a percentage of disposable income.
In 1990, savings grew by 7.7 percent.


Alliance Imaging Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


School Shooting Shows More Police Alone Won't Reduce Crime; Remove the Problems
To the Editor:
As a dean of special education in a New York City intermediate school, I am afraid that the public is missing the point about why there is a proliferation of weapons in our schools.
This situation is not a result of a lack of metal detectors.
It is a result of the Board of Education's inability (for a variety of reasons) to remove troublesome students from mainstream schools.
I do not advocate expulsion of students carrying weapons.


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The House Bank; Foley Proposes Using Outsider to Run House Services
Trying to control the damage from the House Bank scandal, Speaker Thomas S. Foley today proposed replacing the House's patronage-driven management system with a professional, nonpartisan administrator.
In an interview this morning, Mr.
Foley said the Democratic leadership would "move ahead with reorganization" this week by introducing an amendment to House rules to create an office of full-time administrator, appointed by the Speaker in consultation with the Republican leadership.
Since the Democrats control the House by a large margin, Mr.
Foley's support of the change would appear to assure its adoption.
Revelations and Confessions
The proposal did nothing to deflect Representative Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip, in his relentless attack on Mr.
Foley and the Democrats.
In an interview, the Georgia Republican called the institution "corrupt" and said the Democrats could no better reform it than could Leonid Brezhnev and his apparatchiks reform the old Soviet Union.


Question Box
Top Basketball States
Q.
On one of the radio sports shows recently, a caller challenged the hosts to name the states in which more than one Division I college has won an N.C.A.A. basketball championship.
Unfortunately, I missed the answer.
So how many states are there and which ones are they?


Market Place; 'No-Hype' VF Seems Suited To the 1990's
THE VF CORPORATION makes such staples of the American wardrobe as sweatsuits and no-frills underwear and is the nation's largest producer of blue jeans.
It is also one of those rare apparel companies about which no one has anything terribly bad to say.
Even competing clothing manufacturers sing its praises.


American Recreation Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Capitals Earn Berth By Sinking Islanders
The magic number that clinched a Patrick Division playoff berth for the Washington Capitals turned out to be 200.
Mike Ridley scored the 200th goal of his career, breaking a 2-2 tie early in the third period, and the Capitals went on to defeat the Islanders, 5-2, this afternoon.


Still in Power But a Convert, Albanian Says
"It's true, I've come a long way," said President Ramiz Alia.
"People progress, concepts change."
Mr.
Alia, 66 years old, was once the dictator of Albania, the most dogmatically Marxist-Leninist country in Europe.
Today, he is the great survivor of Communism in Eastern Europe, the only former leader who still holds the highest post in his country.


Nets Use Body Checks on Knicks
After all the pushing, the elbowing and the trash-talking was over at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night, one clear fact stood: The Nets got the victory, and the Knicks did not.
With their emotional 96-94 overtime triumph, the Nets (29-35) showed how determined they are to make the National Basketball Association playoffs for the first time since 1986.





Quotation of the Day
"It's like going through a car crash with no seat belts and then going through the window and hitting a wall and walking away. It's absolutely astounding." -- IAN WEINSCHEL, media consultant, on the resilience of Bill Clinton.  [ A1:5. ]


It Becomes a Waiting Game For Maine and St. Lawrence
Next comes the long wait for Maine and St.
Lawrence, the two Eastern college hockey champions, plus four other as-yet unknown teams from this region.
There is no college hockey to be played in the East this week, but there will be plenty of anticipation regarding the forthcoming selection of 12 teams for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament.
The N.C.A.A. selection committee, headed by the Cornell athletic director, Laing Kennedy, will announce its choices next Sunday.


American Educational Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mystery Matchups Enliven Bracket
No sooner had Syracuse scaled a mountain called Georgetown for the Big East championship, the Orangemen learned they would have to face Peter Carril, Princeton's wily professor of basketball, in what could be a treacherous first-round game.
Indeed, on a day of conference finales and tournament championships, the committee that determines brackets for the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament came up with some devilish matchups as it unveiled the map for this year's road to the Final Four.


A Worried Solarz Explains His Overdrafts
At the end of every week, Representative Stephen J. Solarz wrote a $290 check on his House of Representatives bank account to the housekeeper of his invalid mother-in-law.
When the roof of his house was repaired last year, he paid the $3,500 bill with another check drawn on that account.
Hundreds of checks were for more than what was in the account.
But it did not matter.
Mr.
Solarz knew they would not bounce because the House Bank would cover them.


Second-in-Command at Tenneco
Struggling to recover from a huge loss last year, Tenneco Inc. has again turned to a senior executive from another big manufacturing company to bolster its top management.
The diversified industrial company said today that Dana G. Mead, an executive vice president of the International Paper Company and a retired Army colonel who wrote several sections of the Pentagon Papers in the late 1960's, would become the chief operating officer and a director at Tenneco on April 1.
Mr.
Mead, 56 years old, will add the president's title in May.


Treating of Severe Brain Injuries Is Profitable, but Not for Patients
In a new and fast-growing field of rehabilitative medicine, many of the nation's health-care centers are being accused of preying on some of the most vulnerable of patients: people with severe brain injuries.
In the process, critics say, operators of the centers are reaping millions of dollars in profits from insurance payments.
Patients, former employees and state and Federal investigators accuse the centers of systematically directing sophisticated marketing efforts and offers of near-impossible cures to emotionally devastated families.
After the patients -- many of them young children -- are admitted, they are often neglected, the critics say.
Insurance companies are billed up to $30,000 a month, and the patients are discharged once their coverage runs out, these critics add.


Donald Lorimer, 46, An AIDS Researcher
Donald Lorimer, who worked in several agencies combating AIDS and became a specialist in the epidemic's demographic trends, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.
His companion, Charles Bolds, said he died of AIDS.


INSIDE
Heeding Nixon's Call
Many Republicans in Congress have joined the former President and Democrats in urging the Administration to push for more aid to the former Soviet republics.
Page A8.
Forward, March Madness
The field for college basketball's tournament is set.
Page C6.
Cost of a Cleaner Workplace


The House Bank; House Bank Overdrafts Add to Voters' Outrage
Drowning in a sea of overdrawn checks, exhausted members of Congress returned to their home districts this weekend only to be met at the door by a public shouting a giant collective "Gotcha!"
To be sure, not everyone joined the chorus, arguing that the outcry over the checks was much ado about nothing or that it took away from the real issues.
But overwhelmingly -- in more than 100 interviews around the nation, in editorials and call-in shows and jokes -- the voices spoke of scorn and outrage.
Many took the overdrafts as a personal insult, as a sign that Washington politicians thought they could put one over on the rubes back home.


School Shooting Shows More Police Alone Won't Reduce Crime
To the Editor:
One of the lessons to be learned from the tragedy at Brooklyn's Thomas Jefferson High School, where two teen-agers were shot to death Feb. 26 (front page, Feb. 27) is that a police presence alone will not prevent crime.
There was an unusual police presence at the school, awaiting a visit by Mayor David N. Dinkins, when the murders occurred.
I strongly support additional police personnel to keep our city safe.
But probation, courts, the District Attorney and Legal Aid must all also have adequate funds.


Helen Deutsch, 85, Author of Screenplay for 'Lili'
Helen Deutsch, the award-winning screenwriter for "Lili," "I'll Cry Tomorrow" and "The Unsinkable Molly Brown" and co-author of "National Velvet," died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 years old.
She had been under nursing care and died of natural causes, the medical examiner's office said.


Even in Book Awards, to Victors Go the Spoils
Clarion Books struck gold earlier this year when its book "Tuesday," by David Wiesner, won the Randolph Caldecott Medal for the year's best illustrated children's book.
Alfred A. Knopf had similar fortune when Norman Rush's "Mating" won the National Book Award for fiction.
Publishers are now waiting to see who will reap the profits when the Pulitzer Prizes are announced next month.
The prestige of such literary awards is immense for an author and for a publisher, but the awards drive up more than a book's stature: they drive up sales.


Chempower Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chief of U.N. Force Takes Up Cambodia Post
A senior United Nations diplomat arrived in Cambodia today to start the largest and most expensive peacekeeping operation ever attempted by the United Nations, even as reports from the Cambodian countryside suggested that the battered nation's long civil war might be far from over.
The diplomat, Yasushi Akashi of Japan, said on arrival in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, that the 22,000 troops and civilians he leads would seek "to end two decades of war and suffering."


Why Minivans Should Be Reclassified
To the Editor:
In "What's in a Name? About $5,000" (editorial, March 4), you oppose Senator Donald Riegle's proposal to reclassify imported minivans as trucks, instead of cars.
"Reclassification would be great for Chrysler," you state, "which is leading the legislative charge, but rotten for consumers."
In 1989, I acted as counsel to Chrysler, Ford and General Motors in connection with the Customs Service's tariff classification of minivans.
I believe you distort the facts and unfairly reverse the "political" influence.


Alvin Schwartz, 64, an Author Of Folklore Books for Children
Alvin Schwartz, a best-selling author of children's books -- many widely praised for their wit and folklore but some criticized as unduly scary for young readers -- died on Saturday at Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 64 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


Trading Trade for Votes, Fearfully
"Yeah, they'll create jobs. In Mexico." That sarcastic remark from a Detroit auto worker captured the anger directed last week at candidates Bill Clinton and Paul Tsongas for supporting the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The anger is undeserved.
The proposed agreement would eliminate most trade barriers between the U.S. and its neighbors.
The U.S. would benefit because the treaty would create more jobs than it would destroy, and lower consumer prices for everyone.


Joyce E. Feigel Has Wedding
Joyce Ellen Feigel, a systems analyst at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, and Dr.
Kenneth Scott Backman, an intern at the University of Chicago Medical Center, were married yesterday in Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Eli Pilchick officiated at Temple B'nai Jeshurun.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and has a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Harold and Nancy Feigel of Short Hills.
Her father owns Remington Industries, a Mountainside, N.J., design and engineering company.
Her mother is a partner in the Corporate Learning Institute, a communications consulting concern in Mountainside.


Transit Authority Switches Tracks
Even in a city notorious for dank, decrepit subway stations, there is nothing quite like the Franklin Avenue shuttle.
The five-station Brooklyn line, which links the D train in Crown Heights with the A train in Bedford-Stuyvesant, is a study in squalor.
At the Park Place station, planks on the elevated platform sag as people walk over them.
At the Botanic Garden stop, below street level in a dimly lighted culvert, the walls are completely covered with graffiti and the tracks overflow with trash.
"Obscene," is how one regular passenger, Steven Worsley, described conditions on the shuttle.
"Ridiculous," said another, Sandra Layne.
The stations on the Franklin Avenue line may be the worst in New York City, but they are hardly the only ones in dire need of repair.
Transit officials say that only 57 of the system's 459 stations are in good shape.


How to Help Overcharged Medicare Patients
To the Editor:
"Many on Medicare Are Overcharged Despite New Law" (front page, March 1) provides an excellent picture of how Medicare beneficiaries are being overcharged because of inaccurate information on the explanation of Medicare benefits form and lack of enforcement of limits on physician fees.
Unfortunately, the situation in New York State is even more confusing.
New York doctors are limited to charging up to 15 percent above Medicare's "reasonable charge" or "approved charge" for services involving a procedure.
However, physicians who evaluate a patient's condition without performing a procedure are allowed to charge up to the Federal limit -- 20 percent above Medicare's "reasonable charge."


Leslie K. Freed Is Wed in Texas
Leslie Karen Freed, a senior account executive at the public relations firm of Morgen-Walke Associates, and Jack Bradley Frishberg, a senior financial analyst at Consolidated Edison, both in New York, were married yesterday in Fort Worth.
Rabbi Ralph Mecklenberger officiated at Temple Beth-El.
The bride, 28 years old, is a daughter of Sandra and I. L. (Buddy) Freed of Fort Worth.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is the founder of Freed Appliance Distributors in Fort Worth; her mother is the company's treasurer.


A Lot of Confidence but No Success So Far for Yanks' Taylor
Wade Taylor's mouth has been moving better than his pitches this spring, and that is not a sweet sign for someone struggling to find a permanent home in the Yankees' starting rotation.
After he was pummeled for 10 earned runs in one and one-third innings against the Atlanta Braves five days ago, Taylor confidently said he was more talented then the competitors.
He predicted his talent would enable him to win the battle for one of the two available starting spots.


Beirut Official Expects Release of 2 Germans
A senior Government official said today that two German relief workers held hostage in Lebanon since 1989 would be freed soon.
Interior Minister Sami al-Khatib said during a visit to southern Lebanon that although last-minute problems had delayed the release of the two Germans, Thomas Kemptner and Heinrich Strubig, "a solution is near." He did not give details.


A Singer With a Voice Beyond His Years
Precociousness is a strange thing, and it made its appearance at a concert by Gods and Monsters, a new group led by the guitarist Gary Lucas and the singer Jeff Buckley.
Mr.
Buckley, 25 years old but looking closer to 18, is almost surreally gifted.
When he sings, it's as if his voice, and the melodies that come with it, were emanating from a far older person, somebody who has had the time to do all the studying it takes to learn as much has he has.
Mr.
Buckley was the focus of Friday night's show at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights, partly because he is immensely charismatic and partly because of his ability.
The band, made up of B-team musical celebrities, including the bassist Tony Maimone and the drummer Anton Fier, didn't have much to work with.
The group's songs, short on melody and barely arranged, with absolutely no dynamics, were plain rock, as gray as yesterday's potatoes.


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Music; The Provocateur Who Lurks Within the Pianist
It is ordinarily sufficient to cast just a casual glance at the program's biographical account of a performing artist.
But the case of Ivo Pogorelich has never been a typical one, and on Friday night in Avery Fisher Hall, in the second of two concerts in a month, it was impossible to ignore the bio note, presumably written with the pianist's approval.
It helped illuminate the striking and indulgent pianism that marked this sold-out recital, the sense of a strong talent testing his limits.
Mr.
Pogorelich's biography, in fact, has been inseparable from his playing.
When he lost the 1980 Warsaw International Chopin Competition, the pianist Martha Argerich was so upset she resigned from the jury in protest.
In succeeding years the Yugoslav musician, born in 1958, affected a manner of cool nonchalance, along with unconventional concert dress.
He was granted a Deutsche Grammophon contract in 1981 and has since become one of the best-selling classical artists.
Mr.
Pogorelich has seemed to know what balance to strike among iconoclasm, manipulation and seriousness.


Dance in Review
Edith Stephen Electric Currents
Ruth Currier Studio
The program note declared that Edith Stephen's "Paradise Lost and Found" concerned "the dark and foreboding contrast between beauty and horror in our lives." But horror was emphasized more than beauty in the multi-media event that Edith Stephen Electric Currents presented in SoHo Friday night.


Irish Accent Is Fading, But the 69th Perseveres
DEEP in the bowels of the 69th Regiment Armory, in rooms with bricked-up windows, the walls tell a visual history of a gallant New York combat unit.
A yellowed map with pushpins speaks of troop movements in World War I. Upstairs in the vestibule, Civil War battle flags, bloodied and bullet-holed, stand wrapped in oak cases.
Since 1904, this barrel-vaulted brick fortress has been headquarters to New York's "Fighting 69th." The regiment was founded in 1851 by men of Irish birth and descent, and last served America as a combat unit in World War II.


Bel Fuse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HoJo + Tartabull = No. 4 With a Bullet
As they prepare for the 1992 season, the Mets and Yankees appear to have baseball's best clean-up hitters.
According to a formula devised by JOHN DEWAN and DON ZMINDA , who put out the book "Stats 1992 Baseball Scoreboard."


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Biomet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Bush Is Urged to Speak Up for Russia
Worried that economic desperation could transform the former Soviet republics into hostile dictatorships, many Republicans in Congress have joined Democrats and former President Richard M. Nixon in urging the Bush Administration to take the lead in backing billions of dollars more in aid to the republics.
After Mr.
Nixon described the American aid granted so far as "pathetically inadequate" last week, several prominent Republican legislators began to echo remarks by some Democrats that strong Presidential leadership is needed on the issue.
Mr.
Bush's backing is necessary both to assure support in Congress and to reduce the political heat that lawmakers face in an election year over backing more foreign aid, those legislators have said.


School Shooting Shows More Police Alone Won't Reduce Crime; Reform Family Court
To the Editor:
In 1962 the New York State Legislature passed the Family Court Act, creating the Family Court.
The new court was designed to meet the needs of those unable to take care of themselves.
Yet by all accounts relating to juvenile crime, it is a failure.
Most of the juveniles brought into court face the same dispositional alternatives as those available in 1962.
Except for a few very serious offenses, nearly every felon before the Family Court faces an initial placement of as long as 18 months.
While that period may be renewed, overcrowding has forced the Division for Youth to release offenders after an average stay of four to five months.


Mrazek Faces New Setback For Campaign
Already facing formidable opposition in New York's race for the United States Senate, Representative Bob Mrazek appeared to have been dealt a serious setback over the weekend when his name surfaced prominently in the House Bank affair in Congress.
When Congressional officials released the names of 22 House members or former members who most often overdrew their accounts at the bank, Mr.
Mrazek, who is seeking the Democratic nomination in the Senate race, was said by the officials to have written the second-largest number of overdrafts.


An Ignored Democrat
To the Editor:
I was fortunate to find myself at the home of friends last New Year's Eve where among the invited guests was Larry Agran, candidate for President.
Mr.
Agran showed himself that night to be quite a good listener, but he had much to say as well.
Among the innovative ideas he talked about was a proposal to hold a national urban primary, where citizens of cities would get a chance to voice their choice and where candidates would be motivated to speak specifically to these voters about their own urban agenda.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Here Come the Little Guys, and, Boy, Are They Fed Up With the Big Guys
Forget the middle class.
Forget the working class.
There is a newly discovered and much-sought-after species of voter that spans class and party lines: the little guy.
Beaten up by the recession, this voter switches parties at will -- and this rough-around-the-edges industrial city 75 miles west of Chicago is full of them.


Bridge
It will surely be the most remarkable bridge event ever played in Hollywood.
Stars from the world of entertainment and sport will do battle there Wednesday against two teams from the world of business, for the benefit of charities that include the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, the National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse and the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Those who wish to attend the dinner, or simply to watch, should telephone Connie Fishbach, (310) 472-0733.
Among the celebrities who have said they intend to take part are 95-year-old George Burns, Don Adams of "Get Smart," Tom Snyder, the television talk-show host; Les Brown, the bandleader, and Leonard Pennario, concert pianist.
From the world of sport there will be Wes Parker of the Dodgers and two veteran tennis champions, Gene Mako, former partner of Don Budge, and Bob Falkenberg, 1948 Wimbledon winner.


Alfin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Clinical Homecare Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Earhart Searchers Report Finding Part of Plane, but Puzzle Remains
The most tantalizing and enduring mystery in aviation history, the fate of the pioneering pilot Amelia Earhart, has yielded one of its central secrets, according to investigators who say they found fragments of her plane on a deserted Pacific island.
Amid the coconut palms of Nikumaroro, an island about halfway between New Guinea and Hawaii, a search party from the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery found a sheet of metal that they say is from the plane's fuselage.


Michael Jackson's Latest In Shade of His Greatest
Michael Jackson's latest album, "Dangerous," will not be a "Thriller." But will it do as well as or better than "Bad," the album that preceded it?
Even the shrewdest record industry experts hedge their bets.
Getting the sales numbers is not easy.
Sony Music says that in the 15 weeks since the Jackson album was released it has sold roughly 12 million copies.
But other industry data put the figure at about 10.5 million so far, or about 3 million in the United States and 7.5 million overseas.


Mrazek Bid Hurt
Facing formidable opposition in New York's Senate race, Representative Bob Mrazek seems to face a serious setback in the House Bank affair.
Page B1.


Emphasizing the Differences
Though the three major Democratic candidates agree that Government should actively guide the economy, they are attacking one another on differences over free trade and tax policy.
Page A15.


Poem Is Whitman's. Is the Voice?
Two Walt Whitman scholars have found what they say could be a voice recording of the American poet, reading four lines of his 1888 poem "America."
The tape, part of an audiocassette collection of poetry readings, appears to be taken from an NBC radio broadcast from the early 1950's.
On the tape, the broadcaster Leon Pearson identifies himself and briefly introduces what he refers to as a wax cylinder recording of Whitman made in 1890.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats


Future Uncertain and Past Painful, for Syracuse It's Only Now
Syracuse's past, whenever Georgetown was the opponent with a Big East basketball tournament trophy at stake, consisted of memories ranging from disappointment to bitterness.
Syracuse's future holds a National Collegiate Athletic Association judgment on admitted rules violations, with all the potential damage that comes attached.
Which may help explain why yesterday Syracuse grabbed hold so tightly to all that remained: its present.
The fifth-seeded Orangemen won their third Big East conference tournament yesterday, defeating Georgetown, 56-54, on Dave Johnson's jump shot in the lane over Alonzo Mourning with five seconds to play.


Amonte Of Rangers Sees Stock Growing
The rookie had 33 goals, and that was a sound qualification right there.
But there were other reasons why Ranger right wing Tony Amonte picked up an endorsement this weekend for rookie of the year from linemate Mark Messier.
They had to do with the way Amonte skates, those huge shoulder pads flapping in the breeze, toward the goal.


Bridgford Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


At Madison Square Garden, the Best Ice May Come in Cups
After the Rangers-Canadiens game at Madison Square Garden tonight, the referee will fill out a report card.
No, it won't be to check off who's been naughty, but to tell Garden officials how bad, or good the ice was.
"We started it three games ago," said DAVE HUGHES , vice president of building operations for the Garden.
"We asked the referee to give us a report card after every game."


Crystal Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Long Shot Sends Big Shots Scrambling
Like political candidates changing their standing from one primary to another, candidates for horse racing's 1992 Triple Crown were changing their standing today after a 12-to-1 long shot, Technology, won the Florida Derby and scrambled the rankings one more time.
Technology, making only the fifth start of his career, outran the favored Dance Floor by 4 1/2 lengths Saturday afternoon and suddenly rose to the top of the class of candidates.


Daedalus Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Shea Sym-Phony; Al Davis at Adelphi
People who grew up in the 1950's will recall with nostalgia the Dodgers' Sym-Phony, a brassy atonal group that brought a singular cacophony to the Ebbets Field stands.
Little did they realize they were the forerunner of more legitimate music for their spiritual descendants, the Mets.
But on baseball's 1992 opening day in New York, April 10, about a dozen members of the brass section of the New York Philharmonic will serenade the Shea Stadium crowd.
It is not only the Mets' 30th anniversary, it is also the 150th anniversary of the Philharmonic, which bills itself as the oldest such assemblage in the United States. . . .
A Brooklynite who was active in the 1950's, AL DAVIS , returns to Adelphi University on April 3.
Forty years ago he coached football and baseball at the Garden City, L.I., school.
Now the managing general partner of the National Football League's Raiders, Davis will be inducted into Adelphi's Hall of Fame in a ceremony at the Garden City Hotel. . . .
MUHAMMAD ALI has been invited and may attend the annual dinner-dance of the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.
The event will be staged April 29 at the Hotel Pierre.
Ali has Parkinson's syndrome.


Pay for Charity Leaders Raises Uneasy Question
How much should someone be paid to run a charity?
The question, inevitable if somehow unseemly, is now squarely in the public eye as a result of revelations that the ousted president of the United Way of America makes $463,000 in salary and benefits.
The generosity of the United Way, the nation's largest network of local charity drives, extends to the top executives of its affiliates around the country.
A survey of United Ways in large cities across the nation shows that their presidents, while lagging behind some hospital executives and the heads of some national charities, routinely earn well over $100,000 a year -- tens of thousands of dollars more than the mayors in the same cities, nearly as much as university presidents, and more than twice as much as the median donor to United Way campaigns.


McDonnell May Build A Larger Jet
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation is considering a new and larger design for its proposed MD-12 jetliner in its scramble to remain competitive with the Boeing Company and the European Airbus consortium, according to a trade press report and company officials.
McDonnell Douglas may scrap its plan to make the MD-12 a three-engine 375-passenger plane, and is instead briefing some airlines on an alternative design for a four-engine plane with double-deck seating and greater passenger capacity, the trade magazine Aviation Week and Space Technology is reporting in its issue dated March 16.
New Generation of Jumbos
A four-engine plane with double-deck seating would resemble Boeing's 747 more than the tri-jet design of McDonnell Douglas's current MD-11 jumbo jet.
It is unclear whether the new design would be more expensive to develop and build than the previously announced tri-jet design.


Different Pulpits and Agendas, but Similar Images in Found in Sermons


The New Faces of Wall Street '92
A fresh crop of recruits has arrived on Wall Street, one of the few areas in the New York region that is hiring after years of retrenchment.
The new faces are older and more experienced than those hired in the past, and, if David Nelson is any example, they bring a more lucrative list of potential clients with them.
Mr.
Nelson, 43 years old, was once lead guitarist for the Turtles, one of the mop-top rock groups that characterized the rebellious flavor of the late 1960's.
Last year, he became a broker at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, and by tapping his acquaintances in the music business, he is likely to develop a fuller book of clients than most first-year brokers.
Opportunity Knocking Again
"I've already been able to make inroads with record companies that need business and financial advice," said Mr.
Nelson, who talks about cash-flow, pension and insurance issues with the assurance of a knowledgeable insider.
"I don't want to limit myself to the music business, but that is obviously my area of expertise.


Retrievers Fetch America's Ardor
The Labrador retriever is the nation's favorite dog breed.
In 1991, it displaced the cocker spaniel, which had been No. 1 since 1985.
Last year, 105,878 Labs were registered with the American Kennel Club, while there were 96,937 cockers.
Third, of the 134 breeds listed, was the poodle, which had been the front-runner for 25 years until nudged out by the cocker.


Devjo Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Beverly Hills Fan Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Reviews/Pop; Blues With a Mostly Chicago Bite
To mark its 20th anniversary, Alligator Records brought five hours of what it calls "house-rocking music" to the Marquee on Friday night.
The tour's New York stop was taped on Friday for eventual broadcast on National Public Radio; it includes Koko Taylor, Lonnie Brooks, Elvin Bishop and, in shorter sets, Katie Webster and Li'l Ed and the Imperials.
The lineup is steeped in the blues but also reaches into rhythm-and-blues and rock.
At first, Alligator recorded Chicago blues; now, performers on its roster also hail from points south and west.
The Chicago-based label, founded and still run by Bruce Iglauer, chooses performers who make a universe out of basic, three-chord songs and who play and sing with a raucous, unmistakable bite.
Bluesy swagger and defiance, not desolation and vulnerability, are the label's mandate.


Tally of Ex-Soviets' A-Arms Stirs Worry
Concern has been raised about unconfirmed reports that two or three tactical nuclear weapons are unaccounted for in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan, American officials said today.
But whether they are missing or are figments created by a bookkeeping error cannot be determined.
The reports are being investigated, and if the weapons are actually missing, a senior Administration official said, it is feared that they could turn up in neighboring Iran, where they might be used to make a crude bomb.


Critic's Notebook; Farm Aid: Music Omits Message
At the Farm Aid V benefit concert at Texas Stadium in Irving on Saturday, the music often spoke louder than the message.
Flanking the stage were two enormous banners bearing the Farm Aid logo of a tractor flying an American flag.
On the stage itself were enlarged black-and-white photographs of farmland scenes: Richard Avedon-style portraits of wan children's faces, landscapes of silos, homesteads and waves of grain.
With these few token references in place, many of the big names from the roster of more than 50 country, rock and folk performers scheduled throughout the 12-hour event took the opportunity to perform some of their big hits.


Athey Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Favor Russia Among Ex-Soviet States; Separation Pains
To the Editor:
In "Get Tough With Ukraine" (Op-Ed, March 4), Dimitri Simes points out the escalation of the quarrel between Russia and Ukraine over the Crimea and the Black Sea Fleet.
However, his prescription -- that the United States mediate, taking a position sympathetic to Russian claims on the Crimea -- is myopic and rash.
The inviolability of borders is wisely guaranteed by the founding agreement of the Commonwealth of Independent States; it is vital that this be upheld with unflinching rigidity.
The legitimacy or illegitimacy of Russian claims is beside the point.


Vincent Informed Mets of Rape Investigation
Commissioner Fay Vincent said tonight that his office became aware of a rape complaint against three Mets players less than a month ago, and that baseball then informed Mets officials that an investigation into the complaint was being conducted by the police department here.
According to Vincent, baseball became aware of the situation when law enforcement officials in Port St.
Lucie informed Kevin Hallinan, major league baseball's director of security, of the investigation.


Nancy Lieberman, Lawyer, Weds Jody Spatola
Nancy Davida Lieberman and Jody Spatola were married yesterday by Rabbi Michael Ehrlick at Fox Hollow in Woodbury, L.I.
Ms.
Lieberman, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Gordon Hurwitz Butowsky Weitzen Shalov &amp; Wein.
She is a graduate of Hofstra University and has a law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Jerome Lieberman of Hewlett, L.I., and Florence Gilbert of Bethpage, L.I.
Mr.
Spatola, 33, is a vice president of Weather Control Systems, a home improvement company in Bayside, Queens, and a graduate of Brooklyn College.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick Spatola of Brooklyn.


Commtron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


The Virtues of Repeating As a Kelly Award Nominee
THE 25 finalists for the 1991 Stephen E. Kelly Award honoring creative excellence in magazine advertising look awfully familiar.
Yet that pleases the award's sponsor, the Magazine Publishers of America.
The finalists included a record 15 campaigns that competed previously in the award's 11-year history, compared with 8 for 1990.
Rather than exemplifying a dearth of creativity, the association's executives say, the high number of repeaters means that advertisers and agencies are favoring long-term image-building efforts over short-term attention-grabbing gimmicks.


Foreign Affairs; Sleeper Issue in '92
Inexorably, virtually unnoticed and contrary to Washington wisdom, Democrat and Republican standard-bearers are inching toward a direction-setting confrontation on foreign policy.
After the smoke of the primaries clears, an unusually united Democratic Party will stress domestic over foreign priorities and offer a "new agenda" of human rights and economic issues.
And an unusually fractured Republican Party will cling to the present domestic/foreign balance and press familiar considerations of power politics.


C. V. Wood Jr., Who Pioneered Large Theme Parks, Is Dead at 71
C.
V.
Wood Jr., a pioneer developer of theme parks who planned and supervised the creation of Disneyland and the moving of the London Bridge to Arizona, died Saturday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Houston.
He was 71 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of lung cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Military Aid Imperils Salvadoran Peace Pact
To the Editor:
In light of the Salvadoran peace accords signed in Mexico City last Jan. 16, it is hard to believe that the Bush Administration has asked Congress for $14 million in new military aid for El Salvador for fiscal year 1992 and $40 million in new military aid for fiscal 1993.
This request violates the spirit of the accords, threatens to add to the stockpiling of arms and sets up a confusing relationship between the United States military and the Salvadoran armed forces.


Energy Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gambian Musician Makes New York Debut


Business and Health; Savings Expected On Medicare Fees
HEALTH CARE experts say that employers and retirees will save millions of dollars this year because of new Medicare rules that were enacted by Congress in December 1990.
The rules, which were not aggressively enforced for more than a year, limit what doctors in the Medicare program for the elderly and disabled can charge beneficiaries in addition to what Medicare pays.
The excess charge for 1992 is limited to 20 percent; it will drop to 15 percent next year.
The law is intended to curb the custom of some doctors who charge fees far above what Medicare pays.


Topics of The Times; A Confusion of Spring
Winter, which hasn't acted too wintry this year, took a last-minute swipe as the annual New York Flower Show opened on a Hudson River pier.
Blowing its iciest winds, it numbed the visitors but missed the mark.
Inside was spring -- fresh, triumphant and confused.
The show, which closes Sunday, is a wonderful mix-up of months, a botanical make-believe.
March heather and April tulips crowd into May azaleas and June roses, in a scene that seems naturally harmonious and unnaturally immaculate.
Orchids grow near pussywillow.
Roses look so waxen they have to be touched to be believed.
The best-in-show begonia is three feet tall with huge finger-like leaves, no resemblance to your windowsill plant.


Prehistoric Building
Archeologists say carbon-dating shows that post holes and pits uncovered at a construction site in Medina, Ohio, are 12,000 years old, making them the oldest evidence of structures in North America.
The site is about five miles west of Akron in northeast Ohio.
It was uncovered in 1990.
Carbon-dating by the University of Arizona put the structure at about 10,200 B.C., said David Brose, chief curator of archeology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.


3 Students Caught Carrying Weapons In New York Schools
Two students were arrested yesterday in separate incidents at Springfield Gardens High School in Queens, one in the stabbing of another student with a pen knife, the second for carrying a loaded pistol, the police said.
And at Susan Wagner High School in Staten Island, security officials found a gun in the bag of a 15-year-old student.


TCA Cable TV Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


By Design; Return to the Wild West
Judging from recent reports from Milan, Italy, cowboys and Indians are running rampant down fashion runways.
By next fall, women will be able to dude up in every sort of Wild West attire, real or fantastical.
The spirit of this look is exhilarating.
The trick is to blend a little of it with what you normally wear.
Indulging whole hog comes perilously close to an image of the Ethel Merman in "Annie Get Your Gun." Taking pieces shown in the sketch here would be great.


Thermo Cardiosystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Dynascan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whole Point for Knicks: How Can They Get More?
When the Knicks have trouble winning, they usually have trouble scoring, too.
The Knicks are 9-18 this season when scoring fewer than 100 points.
Their most recent performance was the latest case, when the Knicks dropped a 96-94 overtime decision to the Nets on Saturday at Madison Square Garden.


Bonds Still Bothered By Injured Hamstring
BARRY BONDS returned to action yesterday, but he's still ailing.
After missing nine games with a strained left hamstring, Bonds started in left field in the Pirates' 2-1 loss to a Cincinnati Reds' split squad at Plant City, Fla.
He was 0 for 4 and left the game after the seventh inning.


Venturian Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Upsets Galore: Edberg Loses; McEnroe Wins
The upsets were the opposite of the bookend variety.
In the staid daytime version, an unheralded upstart erased 287 steps on the ranking ladder to eliminate the world's No. 2 player, Stefan Edberg, whose forte it is to remain mild-mannered in victory or defeat.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON FOES PUSH ELECTABILITY ISSUE
The Michigan and Illinois primary campaigns roared to an angry close today with former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas struggling to raise doubts about Gov.
Bill Clinton's ability to win in a general election.
Mr.
Brown, who some Democrats believe could knock Mr.
Tsongas out of second place in Michigan, pressed a fierce new attack on the ethics of Hillary Clinton's working for a law firm that does business with the State of Arkansas.


Sports of The Times; What Bo Didn't Want To Know
HE could always run fast.
Run the bases.
Run with a football.
Run track.
As a third- grader, he wasn't eligible for his grammar school track team, but then he outran all the other kids in the fourth, fifth and six grades.
Vincent (Bo) Jackson made the team.
"I love to run," he often said.
But now Bo knows he can't run.
In deciding on artificial-hip surgery, he said: "I feel like myself, except for running. If you can't run, you can't play."


'Private Lives' Closing Early
"Private Lives," Noel Coward's 1930 comedy, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street.
It had been scheduled to run until April 5.
Sunday's matinee of the play, directed by Arvin Brown and starring Joan Collins, will be its 37th regular performance; it had 11 previews.
Refunds or exchanges for tickets can be obtained by calling Telecharge, (212) 239-6200 or at the box office.


Baker Rebuffs Compromise Plan By Congress on Israel Loan Issue
The Bush Administration has rejected key elements of a Congressional compromise proposal for granting loan guarantees to Israel, possibly dooming the Israeli aid request, Congressional and Administration officials said today.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, in discussions over the weekend with Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee responsible for foreign aid, made clear that the Administration opposed important parts of the compromise.


Goldfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rymer Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


How AIDS Smolders: Immune System Studies Follow the Tracks of H.I.V.
EVER since the virus that causes AIDS was discovered, scientists have puzzled over a central mystery of the disease.
How can this virus smolder in the immune system for as long as 10 years before it finally destroys a person's ability to fight infections?
What is going on in that prolonged period of steady, but very subtle, decline of the immune system?
After years of bafflement, investigators now believe they have nearly cracked the puzzle.
They have several competing ideas to explain the mystery, and some researchers propose that all the mechanisms they are finding may act in concert to topple the immune system.


Market Place; Nikkei's Fall Tests Stock Managers
THE plunge of Tokyo's blue-chip stock index below 20,000 yesterday made one issue clear: Japan has become the make-or-break bet this year for many global money managers and investors.
If the market now rallies, the Tokyo bears who have pared their holdings in Japan will have a lot of trouble catching up.
With only a small share of their portfolios in Japan, they would get only a little lift from a rally, especially if they could not change their position quickly.
But the international indexes by which managers are ranked would rise much more because they include a full weighting of the Japanese market.


Yanks Expect Nomination to Be Passed
Deputy Commissioner Steve Greenberg is expected to meet with Joseph Molloy next week, and Greenberg said today that he did not anticipate any trouble in Molloy's nomination as the Yankees' next managing general partner moving forward to the ownership committee.
Known more for being George Steinbrenner's son-in-law then he is for any baseball acumen, Molloy was chosen for the managing partner's position by the partnership March 12 after becoming chief administrative officer three weeks before that.
The Yankees endured several weeks of uncertainty while Daniel McCarthy, a limited partner, was being considered as the managing partner, but Commissioner Fay Vincent rejected McCarthy's bid Feb. 28.


Police Issue Sketch of Suspect in Editor's Killing
New York City police yesterday issued a composite sketch of the suspect in the killing of an editor and writer who specialized in stories about drugs and politics, and Commissioner Lee P. Brown said detectives were working round the clock on the case.
A dozen Hispanic journalists had gone to the commissioner to press for more effort in finding the killer of Manuel de Dios Unanue and left saying, as one of them put it, that "a lot more was being done than we realized."


Santa Anita Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Works Party's 2 Sides: The Blue and White Collars
President Bush worked both sides of the Republican political coalition today with elan, acting like a man who believes he has put his political rivals and his campaign's problems behind him.
By and large, both sides seemed to believe so, too.


CHRONICLE
Just to show they don't hold a grudge, city officials in Burbank, Calif., have proposed renaming the Buena Vista Park there for JOHNNY CARSON.
Mr.
Carson, who will retire on May 22 after 30 years on the "Tonight" show, frequently joked that Burbank, the Los Angeles suburb where the show is produced, was a far from colorful spot.


Mets as Team? Connect the Doubts
Armed with a long list of off-season accomplishments, the Mets began the spring with what the organization believed was a short list of potential problems.
"It's a veteran club," Howard Johnson had said. "There are no question marks."


Art Buchwald Awarded $150,000 in Suit Over Film
The nearly four-year court fight in the multi-million-dollar lawsuit that pitted the humorist Art Buchwald against Paramount Pictures ended today on a disappointing financial note for Mr.
Buchwald.
He was awarded only $150,000 for his contribution to "Coming to America," the 1988 hit Eddie Murphy comedy.
Mr.
Buchwald's producing partner, Alan Bernheim, was awarded $750,000 by the judge in the case, Harvey A. Schneider of Los Angeles Superior Court, who heard the case without a jury.


Alenia Acquires Stake in Fokker
Fokker N.V., the Dutch aerospace group, said the parent company of a rival, Alenia S.p.A. of Italy, had taken a 6 percent stake in the company.
Fokker added that it was awaiting news on the Italian company's motives.


Patterns
A British Cottage Industry
Under drizzly, iron skies about 4,000 store buyers and journalists, mostly clad in black, poured into a tent village set up near the Duke of York's Barracks in Chelsea over the weekend to view the cottage industry that is British fashion.
There were lots of fancy evening frocks, like those of Tomasz Starzewski, whose show ended with artificial snow falling on a bride in an enormous white fur toque, presumably to simulate a St.
Petersburg wedding.
In a booth in the trade show tent, Lady Tryon, who was described recently by The Daily Express newspaper as "a close confidante of Prince Charles," showed all evening styles, including a short pink pouf dress that looked as if a bicycle pump had been used to inflate the skirt.


Coaxing Grand Central's Homeless Into the Light; Sergeant Henry Tries to Balance Compassion and Firmness, Far Below Ground
Stepping over the electrified rails that lie like minefields deep within Grand Central Terminal, Sgt.
Bryan Henry patrols 48 acres of tracks, steam tunnels, crawl spaces and platforms buried three stories beneath midtown Manhattan.
It is his beat.


T Cell Sciences Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rocky Mountain Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Teleconcepts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pension Funds Becoming a Tool for Growth
Public pension funds in many states are increasingly being viewed by elected officials not just as sources of retirement income for millions of state and local employees, but as potentially powerful tools for creating jobs, promoting economic growth and meeting social needs.
With political pressure mounting to create or save jobs and provide more social services, cash-short state and local governments are pushing their pension funds to invest in local businesses, housing and other ventures in ways intended to bolster the economy.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY GAY GROUP LOSES ON IRISH PARADE
A Federal judge refused to order a group of gay marchers admitted to the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, putting to rest several months of legal wrangling but setting the stage for possible confrontations at the traditional festivities today.
The decision also forced politicians to choose whether to march at what had always been one of the city's premier political events.
A1.
A QUANDARY IN QUEENS
Since the early 1960's, a constant feature of life in Flushing, Queens, has been the smell of freshly baked bread wafting out of the Taystee Bakery.
Soon, though, the bakery will be shut down, posing a classic problem for the Dinkins administration.
How far should it go to subsidize manufacturers so that there are reasonable-paying jobs for unskilled, uneducated workers, many of whom are immigrants or minorities?
A1.


Flutie Eyes N.F.L.
DOUG FLUTIE will not re-sign with the Canadian Football League's British Columbia Lions next year and is considering offers from two National Football League teams and other clubs in Canada, his lawyer said yesterday.
The free-agent quarterback from Boston College was the Canadian Football League's most valuable player last season.


Nets Seem to Bend a Bit Put Prove Hard to Break
Drazen Petrovic knows what people were saying about the New Jersey Nets just three short weeks ago, and he knows it wasn't glowing.
The Nets were about to play 11 of the most ferocious teams in the league, all with .500 records or better, a trial by fire that doesn't end until Tuesday night's soldout game against the Chicago Bulls in the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


American Eagle Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Leap Year Demystified
To the Editor:
Robert Coover, author of "Sex, Stars and Leap Year" (Op-Ed, Feb. 29), will be saddened to learn that the term leap year is mundane in origin and not caught up in sex and power.
What the term refers to is that after a leap day any holiday falls two days later in the week than in the previous year, rather than the customary one day.
For example, Christmas fell on a Wednesday last year, and will leap over Thursday and fall on Friday this year.
DOUGLAS RAILA Norwalk, Conn., Feb. 29, 1992


Bell Atlantic Plans Service That Links Phone Numbers
The Bell Atlantic Corporation said yesterday that it would introduce a "one person, one number" service allowing a customer, through a single telephone number, to receive calls at the office or at home; on a cellular telephone, a facsimile machine or a pager, or by a message left on voice mail.
Although the service, the largest yet of its kind, will be marketed first to cellular telephone subscribers in the Baltimore-Washington area, it may eventually be offered to the vastly larger market of conventional telephone customers, the company said.


Careers; Stepping Up The Training In Ecology
WITH corporations increasingly being held responsible for the impact of their products and manufacturing processes on the environment, more colleges and universities are offering courses in environmental science.
One of the newest such academic programs, at the University of Rochester, is expected to begin this fall.
The program will offer two degrees: a bachelor of science and a bachelor of arts, both with majors in environmental science.


The Nicaraguan Tinderbox: Arms and Anger
The recent takeover of the northern city of Ocotal by well-armed former Nicaraguan Army soldiers has left Government officials worried about the continuing volatility of the Nicaraguan countryside, where economic hardship and lingering divisions from this country's civil war have sent former combatants from both sides back to their guns.
After a week of negotiations with the Government, most of the estimated 400 men who took over Ocotal, former soldiers in the Sandinista-controlled army, turned over their rifles for payments of $100 to $200 in cash and promises of houses and land with clear titles.


National Security Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southwestern Electric Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G-III Apparel Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Quotation of the Day
"I suppose I could have stayed home and baked cookies and had teas.  But what I decided to do was pursue my profession, which I entered before my husband was in public life." -- HILLARY CLINTON, lawyer.  [ A20:2. ]


It's Official at Chrysler: G.M. Man Will Be Chief
The Chrysler Corporation, as expected, announced today that Robert J. Eaton, a 29-year General Motors employee, would replace Lee A. Iacocca as chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Iacocca steps down at the end of the year.
Mr.
Eaton, who was elected vice chairman and chief operating officer unanimously on Saturday night by the directors of Chrysler, met with 25 top Chrysler officers this morning at the company's headquarters in Highland Park, Mich.
He will join Mr.
Iacocca in a newly formed office of the chief executive.
Mr.
Iacocca will be 68 in October and plans to remain a Chrysler director and chairman of the board's executive committee.


Putting America At Your Fingertips
HOOKING up your computer to the world, or at least to an on-line service, means making choices and, inevitably, compromises.
At the extremes, Compuserve is huge, but it is all too easy to rack up equally hefty bills, while Prodigy is relatively small and inexpensive, but does not offer the full range of services an enthusiast expects.
America Online falls between.


Lopiano Named to Post
DONNA LOPIANO, the women's athletic director at the University of Texas for the past 17 years, has been named executive director of the Women's Sports Foundation.
At Texas, Lopiano guided a program that produced 18 national championships in six sports.


Review/Television; An Irish Poet Takes a Longer View, Much Longer
St.
Patrick's Day has become a spectacle in more ways than one.
The traditional parade in New York threatens to become a traditional brawl as some Irish-American elders cling to their politics of exclusion, turning their backs on what they deem to be threatening outsiders.
These days the enemies list includes Mayor David N. Dinkins and Irish-born gay men and lesbians.
In fact, Ireland itself and the Irish generally, especially the younger generations, have become noticeably more receptive to change in recent years despite the fretting of an old-guard establishment.
A spirited willingness to challenge entrenched cant is evident in everything from the popularity of Mary Robinson as liberal President of the republic to the success of The Irish Voice, a lively, nose-tweaking weekly newspaper in this country.
Rockers from Van Morrison to U2 keep Ireland on the international music map.
And then, of course, there is the independence of the country's poets, always the poets.


Nervous South Africa Prepares for White Vote on Democratization
A mood of trepidation and foreboding has gripped South Africa as whites prepare to vote on Tuesday in the referendum that President F. W. de Klerk has called to gain a mandate to negotiate an end to minority rule.
The proponents and opponents of political change have both played to white fears in the referendum campaign, leaving some potential voters jittery or confused.
Others are expected to vote no to protest rising crime and economic stagnation as well as to show their discontent with the course of negotiation that Mr. de Klerk has chosen.


Forget the Close Encounters
He was just a freshman then, a little-known point guard on a Princeton basketball team that nearly pulled off one of the biggest upsets in the history of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Against Georgetown on a March night in 1989, George Leftwich was running an offense that belonged to another era.


Andersen Civil Suit Is Settled
Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, one of three accounting firms that went on trial last week on charges of helping Charles Keating Jr. cheat investors in Lincoln Savings and its parent out of $285 million, settled the civil charges yesterday for as much as $30 million.
News of the settlement came as attorneys for the defendants were presenting their opening arguments in the Tuscon, Ariz., trial, and just one working day after the jury heard Joseph W. Cotchett, the plaintiff's lead lawyer, contend that the defendants had done Mr.
Keating's bidding in return for multimillion-dollar fees.
Mr.
Cotchett's clients are seeking a total of $1.2 billion, including interest and triple damages.


New Campaigns
*
In hopes of appealing to drinkers in their 20's, Priviet Russian vodka, a lower-priced sibling to Stolichnaya vodka, will introduce a print campaign that playfully simulates the hype of tabloid headlines.
In one of the ads, created by Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector in New York, a bold headline reads, "Amazing Russian vodka: changes color when mixed with fruit juices!"


Q&amp;A
Picking Bones
Q.
What are the largest and smallest bones of the human body?


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Miscellany
*
Ketchum Public Relations, New York, acquired Robert Amen &amp; Associates, Greenwich, Conn., a corporate and investor relations consulting firm.
Robert Amen will become Ketchum's executive director of corporate and investor relations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Japanese stock market improved marginally today amid a tense atmosphere.
Analysts said most players appeared to be watching for what, if anything, the Government would do to try to arrest the steady erosion in investor confidence.  [ Page D1. ] Companies
Robert J. Eaton, who was named to replace Lee A. Iacocca when the chairman and chief executive of Chrysler retires at the end of the year, gives up a 29-year career at General Motors and takes his biggest risk yet in joining the No. 3 U.S. auto maker.  [ D1. ]


Hydropower Under Review In Albany Bill
Making a highly unusual foray into foreign policy that New York power officials denounced as unconstitutional, the state Assembly today approved a bill that would require an exhaustive environmental review before New York State could buy power from a enormous hydroelectric complex that Quebec wants to build in the Canadian subarctic.
The bill, which would aid environmentalists seeking to scuttle or at least delay the project, has generated fierce opposition from the Quebec Government and equally fervent support from Cree Indians who live in the affected region and whose leaders have traveled to Albany to urge its passage.


Sequestering Juries Guarantees Trial System
To the Editor:
Outrageous!
That is the only appropriate response to "Greed, Sequestered" (Topics of The Times, Feb. 28).
It might appear that the expenses of sequestering a jury overnight while it is deliberating its verdict far outweigh the value of sequestration in difficult economic times.
Repeatedly, however, we have demonstrated that claims of the saving to be gained by eliminating jury sequestration are inaccurate.
Our position has been supported by data taken from the New York State Office of Court Administration budget.
Eliminating sequestration of jurors would be a blatant invitation to violence, tampering and unfair solicitation, not to mention the cause of numerous mistrials.
You are likely to spend more, not less, to maintain the credibility of the trial process by eliminating sequestration.
We believe the law works perfectly for those it is designed to protect: the public and crime victims.


N.F.L. Owners Debate TV Deal
While National Football League owners today debated the idea of returning $210 million to the television networks and extending their TV contract through the 1995 season, the New England Patriots' owner, Victor Kiam, mulled the latest proposal by which he would sell his interest in the Patriots and resolve debt headaches that have made the franchise a subject of constant controversy.
The owners said that the television issue could be resolved here at their annual meeting later this week, and indications are that Kiam will make his decision on an offer quickly.


Lobbyists for Foreigners Barred From U.S. Panels
The Justice Department has told the White House that registered lobbyists for foreign companies and governments cannot serve on Federal Government advisory panels, Administration officials said today.
The legal opinion has forced at least one Washington lawyer to drop a client so as to stay on a trade policy panel, while three members of advisory panels for the Environmental Protection Agency have resigned rather than give up their clients.


Trenton Vote Splits Raise in Wage Law
The Republican-led Assembly today approved legislation spreading out over two years an 80-cent-an-hour increase that would have made New Jersey's minimum wage the highest of any state in the country on April 1.
That bill and another one approved today, which would deny farm workers a rise in the $4.25-an-hour minimum, drew unexpected opposition from some Assembly Republicans.


Haitian Leader Meets Hunger Striker in U.S.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the deposed President of Haiti, came to this impoverished city today to meet Katherine Dunham, the choreographer, who is in the 45th day of a fast to protest the deporting of Haitian refugees.
Father Aristide, who was overthrown in a coup on Sept. 30, told about 150 supporters of Miss Dunham that he had invited her to accompany him when he returns to Haiti.
He and his rivals agreed last month to establish a new government and a timetable for his return.
He was accompanied on the visit by Jesse Jackson.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Sent Todd Van Poppel, Reggie Harris, John Briscoe, and David Zancanaro, pitchers; Gus Polidor and Brent Gates, infielders; Eric Helfand and Kurt Brown, catchers, to their minor league camp for reassignment.


Great American Management &amp; Investment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Fifth Dimension Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armenians Have Also Known Massacres
To the Editor:
As an organization following the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh, the predominantly Armenian enclave in the former Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, since the 1988 massacre of Armenians in the city of Sumgait and the Armenian pogroms of Baku in 1990, we read "Massacre by Armenians Being Reported" (news article, March 3) with dismay and disbelief.
It's not every day that your newspaper gives such prominence to this continuing tragedy and its toll on the innocent.
If the intent of this Reuters article, accompanied by compelling graphic depictions, is to elicit outrage, people of good will are better served by identifying all perpetrators and all victims -- Armenians and Azeris alike.


Fox Plans News Program
The Fox Broadcasting Company plans to start a national news reporting organization and its own prime-time news magazine within a year, the company announced yesterday.
In what the new president of the Fox news division called a "clear signal of an organizational change," Fox News will assume all news-related programming at the company, beginning with the local newscasts at the stations it owns in New York City, Washington, Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas, Houston and Salt Lake City.


Trenton Panel Backs Bill To Lower Sales Tax to 6%
Amid signs of growing differences among Republicans over legislative strategy, the Assembly Appropriations Committee today sent a sales-tax reduction bill to the full Assembly for a vote next week.
But Senate Republicans said they planned no action on the measure to reduce the sales tax to 6 percent from 7 percent until they have completed a series of public hearings beginning with one on March 24 in Hamilton.


Dow Up 0.45 in Light Day; Japan's Drop Spurs Caution
Stocks ended mixed in lethargic trading yesterday, as investors moved cautiously after a sharp drop on the Tokyo stock market.
After trading lower much of the day, the Dow Jones industrial average barely budged, gaining 0.45 point, to 3,236.36.
Blue-chip issues rallied at the close, as some investors who had sold stock short scurried in the face of market uncertainty to buy shares to cover those they had borrowed.
The market may also have been held back as traders awaited economic data due out today, including reports on February consumer prices, housing starts, industrial production and capacity utilization.


Robeson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Searchers Display Possible Earhart Artifacts


Possis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


5 Big East Teams Make Cut But Still Have More to Prove
For all of the recent talk about the Big East's loss of stature, 1992 could be the year that the conference breaks out of its N.C.A.A. tournament slump.
The conference has not won a national basketball championship since 1985 and has not placed a team in the Final Four since 1989.


Rangers Prove They're No Ice Charade
The Montreal Canadiens, outfitted in their handsome jerseys and wrapped in a 23-Stanley Cup tradition, entered the Garden last night with the second-most points in the National Hockey League.
They exited the same way -- harried, humbler Habs.
This latest challenge was met, and overcome, almost easily by the league-leading Rangers, who played a nearly perfect game at the Garden to whip Montreal, 4-1.


Gilead Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


National Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bergen Brunswig reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Value Line Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  RUSSIA CREATING ITS OWN ARMY
President Yeltsin ordered the creation of a separate Russian Defense Ministry with himself as its acting head, appearing to doom any chance of keeping a unified military command for the Commonwealth of Independent States.
A1  MOSCOW'S DANGEROUS VACUUM
From superpower empire to hungry recipient of its former enemies' aid is a long fall for Russia, and it hurts even those who never much cared for Communist rule.
A12  ISRAEL AID COMPROMISE REJECTED
The Bush Administration has rejected key elements of a Congressional compromise proposal for loan guarantees to Israel, possibly dooming the aid request, Congressional and Administration officials said.
A1  U.S.
AND ISRAEL DISCUSS MISSILES
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney pressed Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel to explain intelligence reports that Israel had illegally shared American missile technology with China.
A6  U.N.
FORCES ARRIVE IN CROATIA
United Nations peacekeeping forces, including 20 Russian officers, began deployment in the secessionist Yugoslav republic of Croatia.
A1  ZIMBABWE MAY TAKE WHITE LAND
Driven by its growing unpopularity among black voters, the Government of Zimbabwe is forging ahead with plans to forcibly acquire large chunks of agricultural land held by white farmers.
A3  SOUTH AFRICAN WHITES VOTE TODAY
Trepidation and foreboding gripped South Africa as whites prepared to vote today in the referendum that President F. W. de Klerk has called to gain a mandate to negotiate an end to minority rule.
A3  WARNING FROM EASTERN ORTHODOX
The world's Eastern Orthodox churches warned Roman Catholics and evalengical Protestants not to treat Eastern Europe and the lands of the former Soviet Union as mission territories.
A7  NATIONS DIFFER ON ENVIRONMENT
As nations map a plan to preserve Earth's environment, old battles continue between the wealthy, industrial countries of the north and the poor, underdeveloped countries of the south.
A8  Jerusalem Journal: Documents contain whispers of the Holocaust.
A4  A shipload of American food assistance arrived in Beirut.
A5  A Nicaraguan city has been taken over by former soldiers.
A10  Albania's opposition leader is campaigning across the country.
A12  National A14-22  ATTACKING CLINTON TOGETHER
The Michigan and Illinois primary campaigns closed rancorously, as former Governor Brown and former Senator Tsongas questioned Governor Clinton's ability to win a general election.
A1  A BATTLE OF THE BATTERED
Political Week: The frontrunners in the Presidential race look more like shipwreck victims than like sure-handed captains of the ship of state.
As a result, a make-the-best-of-it mood has gripped Democrats and Republicans alike.
A21  CRUCIAL CONTEST FOR BROWN
Former Governor Brown is hoping that he will do well enough in the Michigan primary to establish himself as the logical alternative to Governor Clinton.
A21  COMPILING A CAMPAIGN MESSAGE
The success of Bill Clinton can be traced in part to a knack for appropriating the best ideas of his opponents and incorporating them into his plans and promises.
A22
Hillary Clinton said she did not gain from her firm's state work.  A20
Where the Democrats plan to encamp in New York.  A20
A mind-numbing day in the life of a campaign reporter.  A21
President Bush campaigned like a man who believed he had won.  A22
Paul Tsongas returns to his old theme.  A22  CRIMINAL INQUIRY AT HOUSE BANK
Federal prosecutors began an inquiry into possible criminal wrongdoing involving financial transactions at the House Bank, a spokesman for the United States Attorney said.
A16  GINGRICH'S WAR ON CONGRESS
As members of Congress muttered mea culpa for overdrawing their bank accounts, Newt Gingrich shouted in triumph.
It was another victory for a Republican who believes the best way to save Congress is to destroy its reputation.
A18
The House's officers are also adept politicians.  A18  A CASE OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Shirley Lowery walked into a Milwaukee courthouse to get a restraining order against the companion she had recently fled.
A few minutes later, she was stabbed to death, becoming one of the thousands of women who are slain by their boyfriends or husbands each year.
A14  TELEPHONE RECORDS DEMANDED
A prosecutor investigating the disclosure of the sexual harassment accusation against Clarence Thomas subpoenaed the home telephone records of the two journalists who first reported the complaint.
A14  A judge's plan to punish a sex offender with castration collapsed.
A16  Young Americans showed pessimism about race relations.
A16  Metropolitan Digest, B1 QUEENS BAKERY TO CLOSE Since the early 1960's, the smell of freshly baked bread wafting from the Taystee Bakery plant has been a feature of life in Flushing, Queens, but the operation will soon be closed and at least 500 people are expected to lose their jobs at what was once the largest bakery in the nation.
A1  GAY GROUP OUT OF PARADE
A Federal judge refused to admit a gay group to the St.
Patrick's Day parade, resolving months of legal wrangling but setting the stage for confrontations today.
Politicians were forced to choose whether to march at what had been a premier political event.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports B8-15  FRESH CHANCE FOR ETHIOPIANS
Ethiopia's distance runners have long been regarded as the best such national group in the world, but the country's political loyalties kept them out of the Summer Games in 1984 and 1988.
This summer in Barcelona, Spain, they'll get a chance to dominate in an Olympics.
A1
Baseball: Mets have problems everywhere.  B9
Basketball: Princeton tired of close encounters.
B9  Science Times C1-12  A clue to a long gap in prehuman history.
C1  A hiding place for H.I.V.?
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  In search of an Oscar.
C13  Two writers who keep their fiction free of politics.
C13  Art Buchwald wins lawsuit.
C13  Fashion Page B7  Obituaries B6  Helen Deutsch, screenwriter  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Democrats soft-pedal race.
A sad day for the Irish.
Help Venezuelan democracy.
Topics: A confusion of spring.
Letters A24  Russell Baker: Ganga Nostra days.
A25  A. M. Rosenthal: The hard corps.
A25  Paul Muldoon: A clear signal.
A25  William Julius Wilson: The right message.
A25  Guillermo Martinez: Newsmen in peril.
A25


Excerpts From Ruling: Harm to Both Sides
Following are excerpts from yesterday's ruling by Judge Pierre N. Leval of the Federal District Court of the Southern District of New York denying a request by the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization for a preliminary injunction against the sponsor of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, the Ancient Order of Hibernians.
. . .
The issue is perhaps more clearly illustrated in the context of assumed hypothetical facts.
Let us assume that a city maintains an apartment block in which, because of desirable location, excellent maintenance and low price, the apartments are much in demand.
Applicants are taken from a list in order of priority of application whenever an apartment becomes available.
Assume the waiting list numbers 30 applicants, which can be expected, based on past experience, to take four years to clear.
Assume a new applicant arrives who is an adherent of an unpopular religious cult.
The City Administrator illegally discriminates against the cult and either rejects the new applicant outright, or disingenuously puts him on the waiting list having already determined that he will be rejected when he reaches the top of the list.
He sues and, when the first apartment becomes available, moves for a preliminary injunction demanding that he be given occupancy.
No matter how well founded his suit may be for illegal discrimination, his motion for preliminary injunction for the first apartment must be denied, simply because there are 30 applicants ahead of him who must first be accommodated.


Ross Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Jawbone Offers Clues in Search for 'Missing Link'
EVER since Darwin postulated a close relationship between humans and apes, scientists have found little more than false leads and true frustration in their search for the common ancestor, some "missing link" species that immediately preceded the evolutionary split giving rise to chimpanzees, gorillas and humans.
Where it counts, the period from 14 million to 4 million years ago, the fossil record is a virtual blank, a terra incognita on the map of prehuman antiquity.
No one knows whether the split occurred as early as 10 million years ago or as recently as 5 million.
No one has yet uncovered pre-split fossils that promise a ready resolution of the mystery.


Jerusalem Journal; Ghostly Volumes That Speak of the Unspeakable
The pile of documents on the desk stood five inches high, paper whisperings of the old horrors that Shmuel Krakowski relives almost every day as archive director of Yad Vashem, Israel's memorial to the Holocaust.
"It just came in," Mr. Krakowski said, gesturing toward the stack.


Market Struggling In Tokyo
The Japanese stock market improved marginally today amid a tense atmosphere as Government and business leaders offered an array of conflicting solutions.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed today at 19,917.63, up 80.47 points, after falling through the psychologically important 20,000 barrier on Monday for the first time in five years.


Intermetco reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Distributed Logic Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


There's Still Some Unfinished Business in Florida
The winter racing season in Florida produced some stirrings of economic revival, a slight gain in attendance and record betting despite a one-day boycott of Gulfstream Park by the local trainers.
But it failed to produce its two main goals: an agreement on racing dates among the three contending tracks in the Miami area, and a dominant horse to challenge Arazi for the Kentucky Derby and beyond.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 16


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Top Candidates Duck And Hope Nothing Hits
With the voting here and in Michigan on Tuesday, the first wave of big primaries will be over, and the big news is that the backwash has left both parties with cold feet.
Indeed, the front-runners look more like shipwreck victims who have washed up on the beach than sure-handed captains of the ship of state.
As a result, a make-the-best-of-it mood has gripped Democrats and Republicans alike.
The rolling psychodrama of Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign has been a blessing for President Bush because it has diverted attention from an equally striking spectacle of the early primaries -- the tattering of a reputation for political competence that he had spent three decades building.


Nu-Med Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Uniforce Temporary Personnel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Old Dominion Freight Line reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Speeches Echo Messages of His Rivals
The apparent success of Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign stems, at least in part, from his skill in appropriating the best ideas of his opponents and incorporating them into his plans and promises.
It is not wholesale thievery, and it is a technique used by other candidates.
By making a deft selection of emphasis, the Arkansas Governor sharpens his message in areas that have proved popular for other Democrats and presents himself as the best of every candidate -- an effort to win over his opponents' former supporters.
Especially in Michigan and Illinois, this approach is a way to woo traditional, mainstream Democrats and to cast his rival, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, as conservative.


Killing of Woman Waiting for Justice Sounds Alert on Domestic Violence
The air was chilly and choked with rain the other day as Shirley Lowery wrapped a white scarf over her head and hurried into the county courthouse here.
She did not want to be late. She felt that her freedom and even her life were at stake.


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hammond Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helen Deutsch, 85, Screenwriter Of 'Lili' and 'National Velvet'
Helen Deutsch, the award-winning screenwriter for "Lili," "I'll Cry Tomorrow" and "The Unsinkable Molly Brown" and co-author of "National Velvet," died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 years old.
She had been under nursing care and died of natural causes, the medical examiner's office said.


Classical Music in Review
'The Methods of Madness'  Mannes College of Music
In this era of vocal impoverishment, an opera without a tenor may be an idea whose time has come.
But the Mannes Opera Ensemble did not make a strong case for Donizetti's one-act comedy "Methods of Madness" ("I Pazzi per Progetto," 1830), whose only males are baritones and basses.


Onyx Pharmaceuticals Gets Executive Team
The Chiron Corporation and some venture capital investors announced yesterday that they had created a new company, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, to focus on developing drugs to treat cancer by understanding the molecular mechanisms of the disease.
The formation of Onyx will mean more financing and responsibility for Dr.
Frank McCormick, who has been heading a research project on this subject at Chiron and will now become vice president of research at Onyx.


Invest in Venezuelan Democracy
A month after dodging assassination during a military coup attempt, President Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela still fights for survival.
He has struck back with political reforms meant to revitalize one of Latin America's oldest democracies.
The U.S., with a strong interest in his success, can help.
No economic bailouts are needed, just more consistent political engagement and follow-through on existing initiatives.
The coup attempt revealed deep fractures behind Venezuela's democratic facade.
Government patronage and consumer subsidies financed by oil surpluses had helped build a broad consensus.
When oil prices fell and world markets became more competitive, Venezuela had to retrench.


Study Finds One Cell Can Provoke Many Tumors
AN analysis of four cases of bladder cancer has shown that in each one multiple tumors appear to have been produced by a single mutated cell, challenging a common view about the origin of such cancers.
In studying the origins of the tumors, the researchers said, they also found new evidence about which genes may initiate the cancerous growths.


Goldwyn (Samuel) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Pfizer Reportedly Wants to Sell Coty
Pfizer Inc. is in talks to sell its Coty division to Benckiser Consumer Products Inc., the American unit of a German household-products concern, according to executives in the fragrance industry.
Industry reports have put Pfizer's asking price for Coty, which makes low-priced fragrances like the Stetson and Exclamation lines, as high as $475 million.
Executives at both companies refused to comment.


Oppenheimer &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Musings on March Madness: No Method, Plenty of Theories
There is a reason that somebody thought to refer to the national collegiate basketball tournament as March Madness.
The sun goes down, the sun comes up, and Selection Sunday turns into Travel Agent Monday, full of extremely important questions.
Most of these questions begin the same way:
"Why can't ..."
"Why isn't ..."
"Why not"
Why can't somebody please help St.
John's coach Lou Carnesecca find an italian restaurant in Atlanta?
O.K., O.K.
How about Buckhead?
Why can't all those very distinguished, very important college graduates convince their schools that there must be extra tickets hanging around?
Why isn't there a chance to fit all those Indiana Hoosiers who thought they were headed to Cincinnati into the Owyhee Plaza Hotel in Boise, Idaho?
Princeton in the Final 16?
Why not?  SOMEBODY PUT A FRESH ROLL OF PAPER ON THE RICHTER SCALE
The best matchup that may never happen: West semifinal, at Albuquerque.
Louisiana State vs.
Georgetown, Shaquill O'Neal vs.
Alonzo Mourning.
It could be the best meeting of big men since Patrick Ewing and Georgetown beat Hakeem Olajuwon and Houston in the 1984 championship game.
Just two major problems: Georgetown must get past Florida State, and L.S.U. could have a second-round game against Indiana.
We may just have to wait for an N.B.A.
All-Star Game.
MOST VULNERABLE NO. 1 SEEDED TEAM
The Bruins of U.C.L.A., the last to repeat as champion, in '73.
U.C.L.A. (25-4) was seeded first in the West despite late-season losses to Southern California and Duke.
The Bruins could face a second-round game against Louisville and Denny Crum, a former assistant to John Wooden for part of the school's historic run of 10 championships in 12 years.
BEST NAME IN TOURNAMENT
Delaware's Spencer Dunkley, a 6-foot 11-inch center who does not lead the Blue Hens in dunks.
That distinction is held by 6-6 forward Alex Coles, who has had 43 dunks this season and 146 in his four years.
IS THIS PART OF THE SYRACUSE PROBATION?
Before the sun went down on Selection Sunday, Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim was smiling as he stood outside a dressing room in Madison Square Garden.
His team's Big East tournament trophy had fresh fingerprints on it, and Boeheim was tweaking detractors who predict an annual early N.C.A.A. tournament exit.
"I love being the underdog," Boeheim said.
"I've never been an underdog before."
So who do the Orangemen draw? The Princeton Tigers, every yuppie's underdog.
LONGEST WAIT FOR A TICKET IN NEW YORK CITY...
Twenty-one years.
That is how long it had been since Fordham University conducted its last sale for an N.C.A.A. game.
Fordham's allotment of 250 tickets for the game against Massachusetts Friday at Worcester, Mass. was gone in less than 30 minutes.
After seats were set aside for families of players, the band, and athletic department personnel, there were only about 50 left.
"It's a shame," said assistant business manager George Kolb.
"Everybody has been so angry. I don't know what to say to them."  ...AND ANYWHERE
After exhaustive research, the University of Delaware determined that its state, which as license plates have reminded us was first to ratify the Constitution, was the last to place a team in any level of the men's or women's tournament.
Which led sports information director Scott Selheimer to proclaim: "First to ratify, last to qualify."  ISN'T THE OTHER ONE SUPPOSED TO BE THE LOSER'S TOURNAMENT?
Iowa State, 20-12, was seeded 10th in the east despite having a Big 8 conference record FOUR GAMES below .500.
The Cyclones beat Kansas, a No. 1; Oklahoma State, a No. 2; Oklahoma, a No. 4, and Missouri, a No. 5, in the conference tournament.
But 5-9?
In a championship tournament?
THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN SUCH NICE GUESTS
Among the better teams that did not receive dance cards:
Wisconsin-Green Bay (25-4)
Ball State (24-8)
Tennessee-Chattanooga (23-7)
Manhattan (23-8)
And the best?
U.N.L.V. (26-2; with 22 in a row)
Tell it to the judge. AND IF YOU'RE LOOKING FOR A PLACE TO DROWN YOUR SORROWS...
Hey, we all have to eat.
Best place for a post-game meal, especially a devastated post-game meal.
No contest.
The Heartbreak Cafe.
Boise, Idaho.
One mile from Boise State University Pavilion.
Reservations are recommended, not required.


Intervisual Books Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Myra Woodruff, 95, Education Specialist
Myra de Haven Woodruff, a specialist in child development who helped shape the modern nursery-school system during and after World War II, died on Friday at Medford Leas, a retirement community in Medford, N.J., where she had lived for the last 20 years.
She was 95 years old.


Pfizer Reportedly Wants to Sell Coty
Pfizer Inc. is in talks to sell its Coty division to Benckiser Consumer Products Inc., the American unit of a German household-products concern, according to executives in the fragrance industry.
Industry reports have put Pfizer's asking price for Coty, which makes low-priced fragrances like the Stetson and Exclamation lines, as high as $475 million.
Executives at both companies refused to comment.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown Is Betting on Michigan to Give His Campaign Credibility
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California rolls the dice on Tuesday here in Michigan.
He hopes that an upset victory in this state's Presidential primary, or at least a strong second-place finish, will send the campaign of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts into a tailspin, establish himself as the logical alternative to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and set up several credibility-building successes culminating in a California sweep.


Lawyer Says Accuser of Mets Will See Case Through
The lawyer for the woman who told the police that three Mets raped her here last March said today that his client had anticipated the storm of publicity that has raged around the case and that she was determined to see the investigation through to its conclusion.
"She knew it would be difficult," said Bernard Dempsey, an Orlando lawyer who is counseling the New York City woman.
"But it's her intention to cooperate fully with the authorities, and she intends to continue to cooperate with them to the end."


Wavetech Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Corrections
An article and a caption in Science Times last Tuesday about a species of tropical bird whose females nest in harem-like colonies rendered the species name incorrectly.
It is Montezuma's oropendola.


Supreme Equipment &amp; Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Luby's Cafeterias Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


North-South Divide Is Marring Environment Talks
As the nations of the world map a plan of action to preserve Earth's environment, their meetings have been bogged down by the old battles between the wealthy, industrial countries of the north and the poor, underdeveloped countries of the south.
The disputes are mirrored in thick stacks of papers, 20,000 pages sent in by 121 governments, that are now being examined in an elegant villa on the outskirts of Geneva.
They are lists of the world's green worries, each country's view of its most pressing environmental concerns.


Review/Music; African Songs and Tales
Radio Gambia starts every broadcast day with the music of Amadou Bansang Jobarteh, who made his New York debut on Friday night at Washington Square Church.
Mr.
Jobarteh is a jali (the Mandinka word) or griot (the French word), an oral historian and praise singer, who accompanies himself on the kora, a 21-stringed harp.
In the traditional way, he learned music from his father, who migrated to Gambia from Mali in the late 19th century; as a result, Amadou Bansang Jobarteh's repertory includes both Gambian and Malian styles.
For the first part of Friday's concert, presented by the World Music Institute, Mr.
Jobarteh played Gambian songs: meditative music with chiming plucked patterns and improvisational flurries.
Eric Charry, one of Mr.
Jobarteh's students and the concert's translator, played ostinatos on a second kora; Mr.
Jobarteh would add interlocking patterns or break into quick scales or insistent repeated notes, humming along with the lines he played.


Christie's International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Officeland Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Trial Begins for Police Officer Charged With Manslaughter


Special Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Brampton Brick reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


National Gypsum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
A group of young New Yorkers will say "yes" -- and a lot more -- to NANCY REAGAN this afternoon, when she is scheduled to visit the Citykids Foundation in lower Manhattan and take part in a rap session.
About 50 youths, who met their peers in a tour last year in the Citykids National Youth Leadership Campaign, will share what they have learned about self-esteem through their own music, drama and dance.
They plan to tell her how the problems of young people in cities should be addressed.


Amid Controversy, Castration Plan in Texas Rape Case Collapses
A state judge's plans to punish a man accused of rape with castration collapsed today as several black leaders accused the judge of bigotry and he accused them in return of polarizing the city.
The judge, Michael T. McSpadden of State District Court, removed himself from the case at a hearing this morning as he had said he would do if the castration could not be carried out.
He acted after a lawyer for the defendant, who is black, reported that no doctor could be found to perform the operation because the plan had touched off such intense news coverage.


Ethiopian Runners Regain Olympic Purpose
On a hill behind this mile-and-a-half-high city, this year's most awaited marathon runners are training on the steep slopes and flat stretches, dodging donkeys laden with straw and weaving among women whose backs are piled with wood.
On one crisp morning recently, Abebe Mekonnen, the 1989 Boston Marathon champion, led a pack of elite runners who were striding through five leisurely laps, a little over four miles apiece.
Negash Dube, last year's Beijing Marathon winner, gave the more seasoned Abebe a deferential edge as they finished their weekly endurance workout.


Sonesta International Hotels Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Their Beaches Eroding, Threatened Sea Turtles Have Few Places to Nest
EVERY spring, the sea turtles begin returning to the beaches of Florida to lay their eggs.
Theirs is a treacherous journey.
Shrimpers' trawls drown them, lights on ship and shore confuse them, and they are routinely ground up by dredging equipment.
But a more intractable problem awaits the females lucky enough to make it to shore: in many places, erosion has left them with no place to dig a good nest.


Most U.S. Youths in Survey View Race Relations as Poor
Young Americans are deeply pessimistic about the state of race relations and divided along racial lines over what to do about the problem, a new survey shows.
The survey, conducted for People for the American Way, a liberal civil rights group based here, found that 50 percent of American young people interviewed said the state of race relations in the United States was "generally bad." It also found that youths of different races disagreed greatly on issues like affirmative action.


Most Nursing Homes Comply With the Laws on Restraints
To the Editor:
As a nursing home administrator, I am offended that "Free Nursing Home Patients" (editorial, March 7) portrays dedicated health-care professionals as villains and saddened that you contribute to the health-care consumer's lack of awareness and fears about nursing homes.
You imply that all nursing homes are tying down or doping residents for staff convenience.
You state that health care professionals "routinely" disobey laws and regulations.


Despite Cuts, Nassau Faces Possible Tax Increase
After laying off or demoting one of every seven county workers -- disrupting services from road repair to welfare -- Nassau County officials warned today that the county faced continuing financial problems this year and a possible tax increase of as much as $50 million next year.
The news came amid continuing partisan wrangling and governmental paralysis as Democrats and Republicans sought to hold one another responsible for any future tax increases.


Holiday RV Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Lehrer McGovern Associates Inc., New York, a construction management unit of Bovis Inc., named James D'Agostino president and chief operating officer. *
Diversified Pharmaceutical Services Inc., Minneapolis, a unit of United Healthcare Corp., named Henry F. Blissenbach president and Kevin L. Roberg chief operating officer.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; After Midwest Swing, Democrats Are Ready to Return to Delegate-Rich East
Gov.
Bill Clinton has a big New York office overlooking Times Square.
When he arrives here on Saturday the Arkansas Governor will probably move right into the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue until the state's primary on April 7.
Paul E. Tsongas's campaign has its New York headquarters in the dark basement of a SoHo brownstone.
When the former Massachusetts Senator shows up later this week , he will stay upstairs in the same building, in the guest room of his New York chairman, Jim Armenakis.


Garden to Host Event
KIM UN YONG, the president of the World Federation for Taekwondo, announced yesterday that taekwondo's next world championships, in 1993, will be staged in New York, probably in Madison Square Garden.
The push he envisions could help taekwondo, a sport that employs techniques of boxing and kicking, get on the Olympic program as a full medal sport.
Taekwondo was a demonstration sport in the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, and will be again this summer in Barcelona, Spain.


Paychex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Gulfmark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Peculiar Molecule Is Found
CHEMISTS at Pennsylvania State University have reported the discovery of a novel ball-shaped molecule with properties that they believe could revolutionize the storage of information by computers.
In an article in the current issue of the journal Science, the chemists, Dr.
A.
Welford Castleman Jr. and his colleagues, reported that they had accidentally discovered a peculiar molecule consisting of eight titanium atoms and 12 carbon atoms symmetrically arranged in a 12-sided cage resembling a soccer ball.
The molecules apparently assemble themselves spontaneously from mixtures of methane and titanium vapor heated to a high temperature by a laser.


Frenchtex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Connecticut Jail Escapees Surrender in New York NEW LEBANON, N.Y., March 16
Two 18-year-old escapees from a Connecticut jail surrendered here today after holding a hostage at gunpoint for several hours.
During their two days on the run, the authorities said, one of their stolen getaway trucks broke down, another ran out of gas, the subzero weather left them with mild cases of frostbite and they ran out of cigarettes.


Koninklijke Ahold nv reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 29


Quake Jolts Salt Lake Valley
A light earthquake rumbled through the Salt Lake Valley this morning, cracking windows and knocking dishes off shelves.
There were no immediate reports of injury or substantial damage.
The temblor measured 4.3 on the Richter scale of ground motion, said Sue Nava, a seismologist at the University of Utah.
The quake, which struck at 7:42 A.M., was centered about 20 miles south of Salt Lake City.


Market Facts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Warner Music, NBC And Coke in Deal
The Warner Music Group, NBC and Coca-Cola yesterday announced a summer promotional program tied to NBC's telecast of the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, of which Coca-Cola is a major sponsor.
A spokesman for Coca-Cola in Atlanta said that while further details would be disclosed at a later date, the program would involve Warner music artists and retailers that sell Warner cassettes and compact disks.


On My Mind; The Hard Corps
In Washington, the Government of Israel received two pieces of information from the United States on the same day.
First the Israelis were told at the State Department that the United States had intelligence reports that Israel had transferred technology about American Patriot missiles to China.


State Auto Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dents Detected in Boundary of Earth's Interior
GLOBAL mapping of the boundary between the upper and lower levels of the earth's deep interior has shown dents in that boundary suggesting to researchers that ocean floor slabs have been deflected there, rather than descending even deeper into the earth.
The slabs have not, however, been deflected because of a compositional change at that depth, say scientists at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., but simply because the deeper layer has been compressed to a denser state.


Accounts
*
TJX Cos., Framingham, Mass., to Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston, for a new chain of off-price home furnishings stores called Home Goods.
A review included two other Boston agencies, Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson and Rossin Greenberg Seronick.
Billings were not disclosed.


Walker Power Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Writers Whose Fiction Stays Free of Politics
When Shulamith Hareven wrote "Loneliness," the story of a woman's boredom with herself and her plodding marriage, Palestinians living just a few miles from her apartment in the Jerusalem hills were rising up daily, throwing stones at the Israeli troops who control the territories where they live in Gaza and the West Bank.
But loud as it was (and is), the political cacophony never entered Mrs.
Hareven's short story, or the others in her latest book to be translated into English, "Twilight and Other Stories" (Mercury House).


Corrections
An article on Feb. 29 about an agreement by Dr.
Norman Orent reich, a New York doctor, to stop treating wrinkles with injections of liquid silicone misstated his relationship to one of his partners.
The partner, Dr.
David S. Orentreich, is his son, not his brother.


Detroit &amp; Canada Tunnel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


With Apologies to Havel, Let Reason Rule; A Wan Spirituality
To the Editor:
"The End of the Modern Era," (Op-Ed, March 1), Vaclav Havel's New Age maundering, would not be so ominous if he were not in charge of a newly democratized nation, and thus the focus of a certain hopeful expectancy.
To Mr.
Havel the end of Communism is a "message to the human race" that employing the scientific method and accumulated objective knowledge to help bring about commonly agreed-upon social goals is not the way to go.
Instead, he offers a wan spirituality in which we are led by a new breed of politicians, each with "trust in his own subjectivity as his principal link with the subjectivity of the world."


Bridge
For players with world championship ambitions, the most important local event is the Grand National Teams.
This can lead, by a long and tortuous route, to a world title.
A Swiss-team qualifying stage, played over the weekend at the Landmark Education Center in Manhattan, cut the field in New York City and Long Island to four teams.
The winners were John Roberts, George Tornay, John Solodar, Alan Miller and August Boehm, all of Manhattan, and Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn.
The other qualifiers were teams captained by Alan Sontag, David Berkowitz and R. Jay Becker.
The Roberts team had the right to select its semifinal opponent, and has chosen Becker.


Gehl Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sturm Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boston Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cooper's Biggest Distraction Is Outside Ring
In November, as a late replacement for Francesco Damiani, Bert Cooper came within a heartbeat of stopping Evander Holyfield for the heavyweight title.
But Holyfield, on the verge of being knocked out, rallied and managed to score a seventh-round technical knockout over Cooper.


Disillusionment and Resentment Fill The Cracks in Moscow's New Veneer
The red star still flickers faintly here, but Gold Star seems omnipresent, too, pushing its video recorders and other marvels made in South Korea, once an ideological enemy of the first order.
The red slogans are gone; the commercial billboards are proliferating.
Gold Star has one in a prime location on the way into Moscow from the airport.


Hosposable Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sherritt Gordon reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Canadian Jorex reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Link Found Between Species Diversity and Hiding Places
TO their surprise, a mathematician and a biologist have found that one of the most important determinants of species diversity in an ecological community is the number of hiding places available.
The researchers, Dr.
Michael Hochberg, a theoretician at the National Center for Scientific Research in Paris, and Dr.
Bradford Hawkins of the Center for Population Biology at Imperial College in London, devised a model that approximated the real-life drama of parasitic wasps and their prey, the insects into which they lay their eggs.
These wasps are different from other kinds of parasites in that their developing young do not just weaken their hosts but eventually kill them.


Gensia reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federated Names Head For Jordan Marsh Unit
Federated Department Stores Inc. yesterday named Joseph Pennacchio, a senior executive at its Abraham &amp; Straus division, president of its Jordan Marsh chain.
The move is part of Federated's plan to consolidate the ailing Jordan Marsh operation, which has 20 stores in New England, with those of the healthy Abraham &amp; Straus.
In February, Federated emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection from creditors as an independent company.
It had been part of the troubled holdings of Robert Campeau, the Canadian financier.
Mr.
Pennacchio, who is 45 years old, will relocate from the New York area to Jordan Marsh's headquarters in Boston.
He will report to Chaim Edelstein, the chairman and chief executive of the consolidated division, called A.&amp;S./Jordan Marsh.


S.P.I.-Suspension &amp; Parts reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strategy; As Prospects Dim, Tsongas Turns From Attacks to Old Theme
After days of being knocked off balance by punches and counterpunches, Paul E. Tsongas announced today that he was returning to his old message.
So as he stumped in this college town and in cities like Moline and Springfield, Ill., Mr.
Tsongas talked more about his own vision for the nation and less about Bill Clinton's perceived flaws.


PHP Healthcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


American Building Maintenance reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center
Alice Tully Hall Through tonight
It would be difficult to complain of a lack of variety in the program the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presented on Sunday afternoon.
A slight charmer by Mozart and Beethoven's "Grosse Fuge" served as the program's bookends; between them came three contemporary works in related but distinct styles.


Parade Judge Avoids Tackling the Constitutional Issues
Judge Pierre N. Leval's ruling on the St.
Patrick's Day parade did not say that the parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, had a First Amendment right to exclude the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
Judge Leval may say that in the future.
But yesterday -- on the eve of a parade that has become as much an intricately tangled controversy as a Fifth Avenue tradition -- he did not.
The Federal judge's decision was narrowly focused, turning on procedural issues like when the gay group filed its request for a preliminary injunction.
Judge Leval said that even if that were not a problem, the gay group was not entitled to vault ahead of other groups who were also on a waiting list to march.


Mrazek Says He Will Press Senate Bid
Acknowledging that his prominent role in the House Bank affair in Congress will hurt him politically, Representative Bob Mrazek nevertheless vowed yesterday to remain in the race for the United States Senate.
"It's not a badge of honor," Mr.
Mrazek said of the revelation that he wrote hundreds of checks that were not covered fully by the balance in his House of Representatives bank account.
"It's my hope, at least, that fair-minded people will give me a chance to describe my particular case. The number of checks ascribed to me is hugely inaccurate."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
3.75
5.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.09
4.04
5.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.27
4.21
5.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.38
7.40
8.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.06
8.06
8.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
8.93
9.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.79
7.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Universal Medical Buildings L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Air &amp; Water Technologies Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Hughes Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Asbestos Cases Are Cleared
Federal courts in New York City are virtually free of personal-injury lawsuits related to asbestos, according to a report by three district judges who presided over most of the litigation.
The courts disposed of more than 1,500 cases in the last three months in an effort to clear the docket.
Most involved workers at the Brooklyn Navy Yard from the 1930's to the 1960's or workers who built and maintained electrical plants throughout the region.
These cases were settled in negotiations overseen by Kenneth Feinberg, a special master.


Despite Aid, a Queens Bakery Is Shutting Down and Moving
Since the early 1960's, a constant feature of life in Flushing, Queens, has been the smell of freshly baked bread wafting out of an eight-acre Taystee Bakery plant.
On its roof sat a sign that flashed weather reports and other messages to residents and drivers on the nearby Van Wyck Expressway.
But these days the sign is turned off and Taystee, once the largest bakery in the nation, is operating at 20 percent of capacity.
It will soon be shut down altogether, despite considerable financial assistance from the city.


Hudson's Bay reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Prices Mixed in Negative Market
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in fairly active trading yesterday.
Traders said market sentiment remained very negative, despite the rise in interest rates over the last two months.
"I like the market, particularly securities with maturities of four years or less," one government securities trader said.
"But it is hard to fight what is going on."


Right Start Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Gingrich Takes No Prisoners in the House's Sea of Gentility
Above the low confessional groan coming forth from Capitol Hill in the aftermath of the House bank scandal, one ebullient war cry rings out.
It is the voice of Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip, who is described even by his friends as a bomb thrower, a pit bull, a guerrilla.
For Mr.
Gingrich, the vote to make public the names of hundreds of House members who overdrew their House bank checking accounts was a dramatic personal victory.
But it was something more -- the triumph of a militant style of Republican leadership that the House has not seen for decades.


Dinkins's Illness Offers Peek at Modus Operandi Of Medical Detectives
WHEN Mayor David N. Dinkins woke in the night last week, shaking for an hour with chills and with a 103-degree fever, doctors who treated him at the New York Hospital emergency room did not know what was wrong.
The number and range of possibilities was enormous.
So as they would with any patient with mysterious symptoms, the doctors began a round of intense medical sleuthing.
In the Mayor's case, the investigation turned up a microbe that is part of an extraordinarily diverse family.


Semtech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Star Wars' Instrument Is Lent to Astronomers
IN the first transfer of its kind, a device built for antimissile defense has been lent to a university, which hopes to use it to eliminate the twinkling of stars, the bane of earthbound astronomy.
The University of Chicago astronomers who are to have the device for five years hailed the transfer as a step likely to enhance infrared observations by ground-based telescopes so they would equal those of telescopes orbiting outside the Earth's atmosphere.


Bioplasty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Orthodox Warn Other Christians on East Europe
The heads of the world's Eastern Orthodox churches have warned Roman Catholics and evangelical Protestants not to treat Eastern Europe and the lands of the former Soviet Union as mission territories.
On Sunday, at the close of an unusual meeting in Istanbul, Orthodox leaders issued a strong statement making the future of dialogue with the Vatican hinge on resolving conflicts between their churches and Eastern-Rite Catholics.
But while insisting that Orthodox-Vatican conversations focus on this issue, the Orthodox clerics did not break off talks with Rome, something that Catholic officials saw as hopeful.


Microenergy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senate Counsel Seeks Phone Records of Reporters
The special counsel investigating the disclosures of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's complaint of sexual harassment against Clarence Thomas has subpoenaed the home telephone records of two journalists who first reported her accusations and data on thousands of calls made from their news organizations here.
Lawyers for the two reporters, Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio and and Timothy Phelps of Newsday, said today that they were notified of the subpoenas issued to the C&amp; P Telephone Company from the special counsel, Peter E. Fleming.


Sanborn Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ilio Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Omega Health Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Thermal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of the 18th Century
Avery Fisher Hall
Like many period-instrument orchestras, Frans Bruggen's Orchestra of the 18th Century began with its feet firmly in the Classical era and moved inexorably toward the Romantic mainstream, with the Beethoven symphonies serving as a portal between the two worlds.
And the orchestra's name notwithstanding, the program it played on Sunday evening drove well into the 19th century.
The first half was devoted to the Beethoven Seventh, composed in 1812; the second was given over to the Schubert Ninth, completed in 1826.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Chiron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hillary Clinton Defends Her Conduct in Law Firm
Hillary Clinton said today that she did not earn "a penny" from state business conducted by her Little Rock law firm and that she never intervened with state regulators on behalf of a failed Arkansas savings and loan association.
Campaigning here with her husband, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Mrs.
Clinton said the questions, raised by former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California near the end of a Democratic candidates' debate on Sunday, were a "pathetic and desperate" attempt to derail the Clinton Presidential campaign.


G.E. Whistle Blower Could Face a Suit
The General Electric Company has threatened to sue a whistle-blowing employee to recover any monetary award he receives for bringing forward allegations of wrongdoing in the company's sale of military jet engines to Israel, people involved in the case said yesterday.
For several years military contractors have sought ways to blunt the provisions of a Federal law intended to encourage and protect whistle blowers.
But General Electric's threat to countersue the whistle blower in this case is a highly aggressive tactic that will raise substantial questions about the way the whistle-blower law works, lawyers and Congressional investigators said.
Chilling Effect Seen
Proponents of the law, the False Claims Act, said countersuits from companies would have a chilling effect on prospective whistle blowers and would undercut the spirit, if not the letter, of the law.


Observer; Ganga Nostra Days
The rich compote of gangster lore filling New York newspapers takes me back to 1935 when I entertained the idea of a career in gangstering.
I had seen Paul Muni and George Raft do it and admired the elegant cars, expensive suits and fancy fedoras that were standard gangster equipment.
On the negative side, Muni and Raft spent a lot of time listening to Ann Dvorak sing about Casey Jones at the piano.
Joan Blondell tickling the ivories at my hideout might have been tolerable, but Ann Dvorak was not my type.


With Apologies to Havel, Let Reason Rule
To the Editor:
"The End of the Modern Era," your excerpted address by Vaclav Havel (Op-Ed, March 1) is both eloquent and incomprehensible.
While the Czechoslovak playwright President points to major threats to our civilization, he misattributes some problems to science, which he believes "cannot offer us truly effective and practicable instructions on how to avoid them." On the contrary, science can provide the means to limit the population explosion (one of the dangers he mentions), while all politicians find it more profitable to pander to runaway emotions than advocate effective actions.
The theme of distrust of scientific reasoning, which pervades Mr.
Havel's remarks, appears to me to represent misperceptions of science common to all too many nonscientists.
From the first day to the last day of my 45-year career as a research scientist, I never had either the reason or the inclination to believe that scientists were capable of "objectively describing, explaining and controlling everything that exists" or that "the world is a wholly knowable system."


Jarvis Cromwell, a Civic Leader And Finance Executive, 95, Dies
Jarvis Cromwell, a finance executive and longtime civic leader in New York City, died on Sunday at Princeton Hospital in Princeton, N.J.
He was 95 years old and lived in Hightstown, N.J., and Mount Desert Island, Me.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Ecology &amp; Environment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Why Hasn't G.M. Switched Even One Agency Since '58?
THE auto makers are perhaps the best illustration of advertisers' tendency to dismiss their agencies more frequently during a recession.
Since last summer, Isuzu, Mercedes-Benz and Subaru have changed shops, while Jaguar's account has gone into review.
One car maker that is certainly troubled is the largest, General Motors, which plans to close 21 plants and eliminate 74,000 jobs by 1995.
Yet, the last time G.M. dismissed one of its national agencies, Dwight D. Eisenhower was President: In 1958, G.M. switched its Buick division from the Kudner agency to McCann-Erickson, where it has remained.


Judge Refuses to Order Gay Group Admitted to St. Patrick's Parade
A Federal judge yesterday refused to order the sponsors of the St.
Patrick's Day parade to admit a group of gay marchers, resolving months of legal wrangling but setting the stage for possible confrontations at the parade today.
The decision also forces politicians to choose whether to march in what has always been one of the city's premier political events.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of United States District Court in Manhattan declined to rule on which group's constitutional rights were paramount: the parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, or the gay group, the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
Protests Are Planned
Instead, he ruled on narrower grounds, saying that the gay group was not entitled to vault ahead of other groups that were also on a waiting list to march.
He also said that by the time the gay group had filed its request for a preliminary injunction seeking admission to the parade, it was too close to the parade date.  [ News analysis and excerpts, page B2. ]


Rexworks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dinkins Sent to Hospital To Adjust His Medication
After his first full day of work since being released from the hospital on Saturday morning, Mayor David N. Dinkins was taken to the emergency room last night to have his medication adjusted, a hospital administrator said.
The Mayor arrived in the emergency room of New York Hospital shortly after 11 P.M., a hospital administrator, Pam Davis, said.
After the medication was adjusted, he returned to the Mayor's residence, Gracie Mansion, at 12:22 A.M., the Mayor's spokesman, Leland T. Jones, said.


BBDO Dismisses 22, Including Unit Chief
BBDO Los Angeles has dismissed 22 employees, including Gene F. Cameron, president and chief executive, following the loss of several accounts and what the agency called "differences of opinion on how to restructure."
A spokeswoman in Los Angeles yesterday confirmed reports in trade publications this week that the dismissals included Mr.
Cameron and several other senior managers.
Assuming Mr.
Cameron's duties as chief executive was Steve Hayden, chairman and chief creative officer.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Quantum Corp., of Milpitas, Calif., has filed for $200 million convertible subordinated debentures, due in 2002, to be offered through Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
Quantum supplies hard disk drives for desktop personal computers and notebook computers.
Common  *
Trimas Corp. of Ann Arbor, Mich., has filed for four million common shares to be offered through Lehman Brothers and Paine Webber.
The company makes fasteners, towing systems, specialty containers, insulation and tape products and precison-cutting tools.
Ratings  *
Baltimore Bancorp's subordinated debt has been downgraded by Standard &amp; Poor's to CC from CCC+, and it has been removed from Creditwatch.
Only about $7 million of long-term debt is affected, but S.&amp; P. says the banking company continues to experience severe problems with the quality of its assets.  *
May Department Stores Co.'s $402.1 million debt securities filed as a shelf registration have received a preliminary rating of A from Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Toyota Motor Finance (Netherlands) has won an AAA rating from Standard &amp; Poor's for its $200 million Eurobond issue, due in 1995.
S.&amp; P. said the rating reflected the strength of the Toyota group of companies and the various agreements among them.


Innovo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Four Seasons Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture caption on Jan. 9 about the delayed departure of a Palestinian delegation for Middle East peace talks in Washington misstated the reason for the delay.
It was a protest against Israel's expulsion orders against 12 Palestinians from the occupied territories, not against the expulsions themselves, which have not yet taken place.
This correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Lear's to Get A New Editor
Four years after she founded the women's magazine that bears her name, Frances Lear is stepping aside as editor in chief of Lear's.
The move was confirmed last night by Ms.
Lear's successor, Caroline Miller, who is now executive editor at the weekly edition of Variety, the entertainment industry publication.


NIKE Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; On the Campaign Trail: From Apathy to Tedium
Ever since "The Selling of the President" appeared in 1969, it has been a common complaint among voters that they are not getting the real story of the Presidential campaign.
In fact, there is some truth to this complaint.
But instead of griping, voters probably ought to be grateful for the omission.


Ericsson's reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New Studies Predict Profits In Heading Off Warming
FAR from being ruinously expensive, efforts to head off a feared global warming could actually save money or even turn a profit in the long run, environmentalists, government analysts and even some business leaders and economists say.
The view is contrary to that of the Bush Administration, which in international talks has resisted placing limits on emissions of carbon dioxide, a heat-trapping gas.
The Administration has found support from studies indicating that the costs of ultimately reducing emissions could run to tens of billions of dollars a year.


Elron Electronic Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cheney Presses Israeli on China Missile-Aid Issue
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney pressed Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel today to explain United States intelligence reports that Israel had illegally shared American-made Patriot missile technology with China, senior Pentagon officials said.
In a 30-minute meeting at the Pentagon, Mr.
Cheney presented Mr.
Arens with intelligence indicating that Jerusalem had shared the technology in violation of United States-Israeli agreements that ban such sales.


Zimbabwe Moves to Take Over Whites' Farmland
Driven by its growing unpopularity among black voters, the Government of this southern African nation is forging ahead with plans to forcibly acquire large chunks of agricultural land held by white farmers.
President Robert G. Mugabe appears intent on pushing aside the protests of the white farmers and ignoring pressure from Western aid donors to modify sweeping land legislation, which is set for final debate in Parliament on Tuesday.


Fehr Addresses the Mets, But Not About Investigation
Donald Fehr, executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, this morning addressed the Mets players in one of a series of regularly scheduled meetings between players and union officials conducted at every spring training site.
"There were a lot of questions; none about this, though," Fehr said, referring to the police investigation of a woman's complaint that she was raped by three members of the Mets last March.


House's Top Officers Act As Adept Politicians, Too
The five officers who minister to and manage Congress are as politically adept as the members they serve.
They have quaint titles, like doorkeeper, postmaster and sergeant-at-arms, but their staffs total more than 1,100 people and their budgets exceed $35 million a year.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about voters in Rockford, Ill., misattributed part of a quotation in some copies.
Paul E. Tsongas, not David Burrelli, said: "Somebody has to care. I care. You're looking at a boy from Lowell, Mass. The city I grew up in knows what economic decline is about."


As Calls to Child-Abuse Line Soar to Highest Since '87, Expansion Is Planned
The number of people calling New York state to report suspicions of child abuse or maltreatment has increased sharply this year to the highest level since 1987, when the Lisa Steinberg case burst into the public consciousness.
State officials say the rising number of reports -- from an average of 1,250 a day in 1991 to 1,500 a day so far this year -- may be a result of several recent highly publicized child abuse cases, like the death of a 6-year-old girl in the Bronx whose aunt is charged with murder for beating the girl because she ate the woman's Valentine candy.
The officials conceded that the latest deluge of calls has caused delays in the state's ability to respond.


Hallwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


WPP Group Net Off 37.7% for '91
The WPP Group reported yesterday that its financial results for 1991 were somewhat better than expected, but it painted a gloomy portrait for 1992.
WPP in London, which owns agencies including Ogilvy &amp; Mather and J. Walter Thompson, said its pretax profit fell 37.7 percent last year, to $:56.1 million, or $99.2 million, from $:90 million, or $159.2 million, in 1990.
Revenues declined 4.8 percent, to $:1.2 billion, or $2.13 billion, from $:1.26 billion, or $2.24 billion, in 1990.


Can Democrats Do Better on Race?
The issue of race has long divided American society and does so today.
Republican exploitation of the issue simply made matters worse.
Yet the Democrats who aspire to the White House, with one exception, have paid little attention to race.
Bill Clinton has addressed the issue more shrewdly and boldly than his opponents, but even he focuses mainly on cures for the sagging economy.
That's an understandable preoccupation: the economy is Topic A. But while the dangerous racial climate may not be as corrosive as the recession, it surely runs a close second.
And it surely deserves far more attention than the people who aspire to lead a united nation give it.


Investcorp Heads Group Seeking to Buy Circle K
Investcorp S.A. an investment bank with a low profile and deep pockets, emerged yesterday as the leader of a group that has offered $425 million to buy the Circle K Corporation, the bankrupt convenience store chain.
A sale agreement announced yesterday by Circle K, if approved by a bankruptcy court, would transfer ownership to the investor group.
However, approval is not certain.
Bondholders, who would get little of the more than $1 billion they are owed, said they were considering legal action to block the deal.


FOOD AID FROM U.S. ARRIVES IN BEIRUT
A ship carrying food assistance from the United States docked today at Beirut harbor after Prime Minister Omar Karami warned the country of "economic hard times ahead."
The freighter brought 7,500 tons of rice, wheat, navy beans, lentils and vegetable oil to help 135,000 needy Lebanese families.
The consignment will be distributed by charitable institutions in all parts of the country.


Attacker Of Sharpton Is Sentenced
A justice in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn yesterday sentenced the man convicted of stabbing the Rev.
Al Sharpton to the maximum of 5 to 15 years in prison, despite a plea for leniency by Mr.
Sharpton himself.
Rising in the courtroom to speak to Justice Francis X. Egitto before the sentencing, Mr.
Sharpton urged a lesser sentence for his assailant, Michael Riccardi, said a spokesman for the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office.


The Talk of Hollywood; A Mother-and-Daughter Team Musters Forces in Oscar Battle
Diane Ladd, a star of "Rambling Rose" and an Academy Award nominee for her role in that film, spoke in a clenched voice.
"It's breaking my heart, just breaking my heart," she said.
"People can't even see our movie. We're
invisible.
So we had to begin this grass-roots campaign."
Laura Dern, her daughter, who has also been nominated for an Academy Award for the film, said with a sigh: "It's staggering. Insane really. People say to me, like, 'Why aren't there ads for your movie?' And I'm like: 'You guys, forget about the ads! We've just got to get enough money to get people to actually
see
the movie.' "


Corrections
A picture of Gov.
Bill Clinton marching carried an incorrect caption in some editions yesterday.
It showed him participating in Chicago's St.
Patrick's Day Parade, not meeting with patrons in a Chicago restaurant.


Gotti Tapes Discuss 'Rats' And Paying for Information
Hours of taped conversations were played yesterday to support the prosecution's charges that the reputed Mafia boss John Gotti bribed a police detective to obtain secret information about investigations of the Gambino crime family.
After two weeks of testimony by Salvatore Gravano, the Mafia underboss turned informer who described murder and mayhem in the Gambino group, the prosecution has turned to obstruction of justice and other charges in Mr.
Gotti's racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Manatron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Books of The Times; Trying to Tickle the Liberal Pulse of America
The L Word  An Unapologetic, Thoroughly Biased, Long-Overdue Explication and Celebration of Liberalism  By David P. Barash  233 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.
God and Other Famous Liberals  Reclaiming the Politics of America
By F. Forrester Church  167 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.
Two current books on the nature of liberalism in this Presidential election year owe a debt of gratitude -- albeit one that is dripping with sarcasm and despair -- to Presidents Reagan and Bush.
"The L Word," by David P. Barash, a professor of psychology at the University of Washington in Seattle, and "God and Other Famous Liberals" by F. Forrester Church, the Unitarian pastor of All Souls Church in New York City, may not revive the liberal impulse in this country, but it won't be for lack of trying.
Opposing the anti-liberal sound bites that have played so well in middle America, they want to remind the Democratic candidates of the party's proud liberal past.


Continental Deal Held Near
The Houston Post reported yesterday that Charles E. Hurwitz, the Houston investor, was close to an agreement to obtain a major stake in Continental Airlines, the nation's fifth-largest carrier.
But an executive familiar with the investor's efforts said after the article appeared that a deal was not imminent,
The person, who did not want to be identified, said that reports that such an effort was under way were probably coming from the creditors committee of Continental as part of an attempt to stir up interest among potential investors.


U.S. Prosecutors Begin an Inquiry Into House Bank
Federal prosecutors have begun a preliminaryinquiry into possible criminal wrongdoing involving financial transactions at the House bank, a spokesman for the United States Attorney here said today.
Mark Liedl, a spokesman for Jay B. Stephens, the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, confirmed that a review was taking place but declined to discuss the specific accusations involved and would not identify any lawmakers or House officers who may be the focus of the inquiry.
But he said the review started last fall after the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, completed an audit of the bank.


Hauser Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Useful Tools for Simple Machines
BORLAND INTERNATIONAL INC. is offering new versions of two of its leading personal computer applications, Quattro Pro and dBASE IV.
The dBASE program, the most popular data base manager for I.B.M.
PC and compatible computers, was acquired by Borland when it purchased the Ashton-Tate Company last year.
Unlike many rivals, the new versions of the Quattro Pro spreadsheet and the dBASE IV data base are designed to run on simple PC's using the DOS operating system.


Mary Childs Black Tribute
A memorial program for Mary Childs Black, an art historian, a former museum director and a writer, will be held at 4 P.M. tomorrow at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, near 77th Street.
Mrs.
Black died on Feb. 28 at the age of 69.
The speakers are to include Kent L.  Barwick, the president of the Municipal Art Society; Ann Rockefeller Roberts, a philanthropist; Norman Rice, a former director of the Albany Institute of History and Art; Ralph Esmerian, the president of the Museum of American Folk Art, and Barbara Knowles Debs, the president and director of the New-York Historical Society.


Topics of The Times; What Do They Think in . . .?
If you like being surveyed by telephone, move to Midland, Tex.
If you value privacy, try Honolulu or Anchorage.
The people of Midland were America's most polled last year, per capita, while residents of Honolulu and Anchorage were polled the least.
This trivia comes from Survey Sampling Inc., a Fairfield, Conn., company that prepares lists of phone numbers for businesses and pollsters -- for surveys,
not
telemarketing.
It is the largest in the field; thus its tallies are presumably representative, and it knows who's called most and least because it keeps track of the numbers it gives out.
That's to avoid quizzing the same person too often.


A Sad Day for the Irish
The St.
Patrick's Day Parade in New York City is bound to be a joyless, bitter event today.
Mayor David Dinkins and other leading elected officials won't even join the march along Fifth Avenue, and for good reason: by banning a gay and lesbian organization, the parade sponsors are engaging in hateful discrimination.
Those who march with them will, whether they mean to or not, appear supportive of their bias.
For months now the city has urged the parade sponsor, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, to reverse itself and let the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization march as a group in the parade.
The Dinkins administration tried everything from moral suasion to a change in sponsoring chapters.
When all else failed, the City Commission on Human Rights filed a complaint charging the Hibernians with discrimination and asking that they be forced to admit the gay organization.


National Medical Waste Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With Apologies to Havel, Let Reason Rule; End, Too, of Modernism
To the Editor:
Vaclav Havel's astute insights into how "the end of communism has brought a major era in human history to an end" (Op-Ed, March 1) also has important ramifications for art.
Not only 20th-century thought, but also modernism in art has "come to a final crisis." The first two decades of this century saw the rise of both communism and modernism from 19th-century positivism.
Both systems held a deep faith in the future and called for a clean break with the past.
Both proposed ideal structures -- one for the economy and one for art -- that could be applied internationally with little need for local variations.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Russians Seeking U.S. Tours Don't Wait Patiently in Line
The Russians are coming!
The Russians are coming!
But in the rush for hard currency, they are stepping on each other's toes.
And the impresarios who are bringing them over are getting mighty upset.
A case in point is the battle of the St.
Petersburg opera companies, two of which are about to make their American debuts.
Tonight, the St.
Petersburg National Opera, a descendant of the experimental Maly Theater, begins a three-week run at the New York State Theater.
It is offering productions of Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov," Tchaikovsky's "Pique Dame" and Rimsky-Korsakov's "Coq d'Or."


Nytest Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Maximum Health Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On a Regional Dream Team, Nets Prevail
Today we get to do what many ordinary men are paid hundreds of thousands of dollars to do: play general manager.
We are going to break up the Knicks and the Nets to select a National Basketball Association expansion team that will play in a new arena to be built on landfill around Liberty Island.
Eight players are to be chosen, a starting five plus one reserve for each of the forward, center and backcourt positions.
As this is an expansion team with its eye on the future, and the rules are being made up as we go along, we are projecting which players will be most useful over the next five years.


FCS Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sanifill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Medaphis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russians March Into Croatia Armed With Promise of Peace
At dawn today, 20 officers drawn from crack Russian airborne divisions pulled out of a Yugoslav army barracks outside Belgrade and headed west with the first United Nations peacekeeping troops into territory that was at the heart of the civil war between Serbs and Croats.
As they drove through countryside scarred by the some of the worst fighting in Europe since World War II, the Russian officers, an advance guard for a 900-member Russian airborne battalion, found much that was novel, not least in the blue berets, ascots and shoulder flashes that identified them as members of the United Nations force, and the word "Russia" that was stitched, in blue patches, to the breast pockets of their mottled camouflage fatigues.


Public-Interest Study Is Critical of Council
A government watchdog group charged yesterday that the New York City Council is a legislature where dissent is rare, where many committees meet sporadically and where nearly a third of the members never introduce substantive bills.
In its annual appraisal of the Council's record, the New York Public Interest Research Group found that the Council passed 101 local laws in the 1991 session, 17 percent more than in 1900, and that far fewer were symbolic bills like street-name changes.


Sinhalese in Sri Lanka Protest Rights Abuses


DNA Plant Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carter Hawley Consolidation
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the bankrupt department store company, said yesterday that it would consolidate the operations of its three divisions to wring out annual savings of $25 million to $30 million.
Marketing, administrative, merchandising and operational functions of the company's divisions -- Emporium, Weinstocks and the Broadway and the Broadway Southwest -- will be merged over the next six months into a single operation, said Philip M. Hawley, chairman and chief executive of Carter Hawley.
The company had previously announced the consolidation of the operations of the Broadway and the Broadway Southwest stores.


Officer's Manslaughter Trial Opens
A New York City police officer went on trial for manslaughter yesterday in the Queens death of a car-theft suspect, and the defense immediately exposed major contradictions in the account of a crucial witness.
With off-duty police officers chortling derisively at the witness when the defense scored points, and the mother of the dead man shouting that the judge was quick to quiet her but not the "peanut gallery" of laughing officers, the trial of Officer Anthony Paparella opened in a packed courtroom.
Officer Paparella has been charged in the death of 21-year-old Federico Pereira 13 months ago.


Pakistan to Handle Iranian Affairs in U.S.
Algeria, which has handled Iranian diplomatic interests in Washington, has asked Iran to find another embassy to represent it because of what Algeria describes as Iranian interference in its affairs.
Last week Pakistan agreed to take over the Iranian Interests Section, and has asked the State Department to approve the change.


Gencorp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Hillsborough Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
South African Vote Today
Foreboding gripped South Africa before a vote by whites today on a referendum giving President F. W. de Klerk a mandate to negotiate an end to minority rule.
Page A3.
Environment and an Old Rift
As nations map a plan to preserve Earth's environment, old battles continue between the wealthy, industrial countries of the north and the poor countries of the south.
Page A8.
Hazards of Whistle-Blowing
General Electric has reportedly threatened to sue an employee who made allegations linked to a sale of jet engines to Israel.
Page D1.


Home Shopping Network reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


RUSSIAN PRESIDENT MOVES TO CREATE A SEPARATE ARMY
President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered the creation of a separate Russian Ministry of Defense today and named himself its acting head, thus taking the first step toward the establishment of a potentially powerful Russian army.
Mr.
Yeltsin's decision, which follows repeated failures within the Commonwealth of Independent States to resolve the fate of the former Soviet armed forces, appears to raise serious questions about the possibility of keeping a unified military command when the commonwealth heads of state meet in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, on Friday.


A Brief Unnamed Spark; The Rest Is Darkness
NEWSPAPER stories usually deal with the known, carefully verified details, conscientiously arranged in tidy lines of type printed on fresh paper.
They give a reassuring daily sense of order to a world that looms ominously large for some of us.
It can seem messy, even frightening, not having neat answers for breakfast.
For that would imply that the suburban world, too, is sometimes a gritty, unpredictable place without justice and civilized behavior.
We don't like looking at that.
Well, here's a story full of questions and no neat answers.
Consider it an investigation in progress, which is what seven Suffolk County detectives call it every morning.


Albanian Opposition Leader Woos Rural Vote
In the last week before Parliamentary elections Sunday, Dr.
Sali Berisha, the favorite, is taking his Democratic Party's campaign from one end of Albania to the other, talking to the two-thirds of the population of three million that lives in the countryside.
"This is crucial," the 47-year-old cardiologist said during a drive south from Tirana, the capital, to this town in Albania's oil region.
"If they win, it will be very difficult."


Archbishop's New House Raises Eyebrows
As the new Archbishop of Hartford, one of Daniel A. Cronin's first decisions was where to live.
But his choice -- a $430,000 house with a swimming pool in this upscale Hartford suburb -- has put the archdiocese on the defensive just as it is beginning a major fund-raising drive.


Chat Paterson, Leader Of Veterans, Dies at 72
Chat Paterson, a Denver businessman who led the American Veterans Committee in its formative years, died March 5 at his home in Golden, Colo.
He was 72 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Chess
Exhibition matches are lighthearted affairs or are at least as close to such things as chess competitions ever get.
After the International Festival of Games in Cannes, France, Joel Benjamin said, "When there is no title on the line, there is not the same kind of intensity in the play."
The Manhattan grandmaster explained that the International Chess Federation was not rating the event and also that the members of the four-man teams had been picked, not by their own federations but by their host, the Grandmasters Association.
Indeed, the countries were chosen in the same casual way and the time limit was one hour for each player for all moves.


Input/Output reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Synalloy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Golden Knight Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Resorts International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gertrude Shurr Memorial
A memorial service for Gertrude Shurr, an early Martha Graham dancer who died Jan. 2, is to be held at 4:30 P.M. tomorrow at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
The program includes performances by Peggy Lyman in Graham's "Lamentation" and Jacqulyn Buglisi in Ruth St.
Denis's "Black and Gold Sari"; a new work by Norman Walker; May O'Donnell's "Nocturnale," and commentary.


New Program to Offer Handicapping Analysis
New York's race tracks will revamp their communications with the betting public on March 25 when a new and expanded printed program makes its debut at Aqueduct.
For the first time, it will offer bettors the past performances of horses in every race, their workout times, charts of the previous day's races and handicapping analysis.
The publication, titled Post Parade, will surpass the traditional program in size, content and cost, and will be sold for the first time at newstands instead of just at the race track.
It will measure 8 1/2 by 11 inches and will cost $1.25 at the track and $1.50 at the newstand.
The current program costs 50 cents and contains chiefly the entries, jockeys, weights and overnight odds for each race.


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yale Crew Is Saved
Nineteen members of Yale University's crew team were rescued from Tampa Bay after a wave swamped their two boats yesterday.
Nine were briefly examined at Tampa General Hospital for possible exposure in the 64-degree water.


Manor Care reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Keltic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Creative Director To Rejoin Chiat
Marty Cooke, who left Chiat/Day/ Mojo's Toronto office in December to take the top creative position at Frankfurt Gips Balkind in New York, will rejoin Chiat in New York.
A spokeswoman for Frankfurt Gips said yesterday that the agency was interviewing potential successors to Mr.
Cooke, who had been executive vice president and creative director, and expected to name a replacement soon.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Bull HN Information Systems Inc., Billerica, Mass., a subsidiary of Groupe Bull S.A. of France, received a $23.5 million order to supply 701 computers to Malaysia's Ministry of Education. *
CenFed Financial Corp., said its principal operating subsidiary, Century Federal Savings and Loan Association, had acquired approximately $39 million in deposits formerly held by Progressive Savings Bank, Pasadena, Calif.


Transact International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Decline in PCB's
Scientists have evidence that concentrations of PCB's, the pervasive industrial pollutants whose full name is polychlorinated biphenyls, have decreased significantly in the air of rural England.
PCB's were first manufactured in 1929 and used as coolants for electrical equipment in Europe and North America until the 1970's, when studies showed that the compounds had entered the food chain and were harmful to some animals.


The Right Message
Three years ago on this page I argued that the promotion of programs to unite, not divide, racial minorities and whites would strengthen the Democratic Party's position in the 1992 Presidential election.
Bill Clinton's campaign provides an interesting test case for this strategy.
He drew a clear majority of lower- and middle-income white and Hispanic voters and an overwhelming majority of black voters across the South.
Recent opinion polls indicate a similar pattern for today's Illinois and Michigan primaries.
Many point to the modest success of Jesse Jackson's "rainbow coalition" four years ago to argue against the idea that race can be removed as an obstacle in a political campaign.
But the Arkansas Governor built this biracial coalition during a time of intense racial tension in this country.
The media, more concerned about his personal past than with substantive issues, are only beginning to grasp the significance of this accomplishment.


CHRONICLE
PATRICIA J. THOMPSON says she met her father only once in her life, at the age of 3, and never told anyone but a few friends that he was a celebrated poet of the Russian Revolution.
Dr.
Thompson, a professor of women's studies at Lehman College in New York, said she is the only child of the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky.
She said she was born after a romance in 1925 between Mayakovsky, who was visiting New York, and her mother, Elezeveta Petrovna Siebert, a member of the Russian gentry who had fled her homeland.
Her mother's husband, an Englishman named George Jones, "brought me up as a daughter," Dr.
Thompson said last week in an interview in New York.


Past the 'Comfort Zone' at Chrysler
By giving up a career at General Motors after 29 years to succeed Lee A. Iacocca as Chrysler's chairman, Robert J. Eaton is taking the biggest risk yet in a career marked by calculated chances.
Most recently, the chief of G.M.
Europe delivered sizable profits to bolster G.M.'s ailing domestic operations and quickly pushed the auto maker into new manufacturing and sales operations in Poland and Hungary, where G.M. introduced its first car last week.


Review/Fashion; British Face Reality With Flair
Sandwiched between the glamorously extravagant Italian and French fashion shows, the fall and winter openings here have an intimate down-home feeling.
The models look more like the pretty girl next door than showgirls.
The clothes look like things people actually wear, not just admire in magazines.
The atmosphere is so friendly and relaxed that many people bring their children.
Arabella Pollen, the designer, cuddled her son, Jesse, 6 years old, as she accepted congratulations after her show.
Betty Jackson's two young children were in the audience and Yasmin, her star model, shooed photographers away from Amber, her 2-year-old daughter, backstage afterward.
No Baby Sitter Needed
"The British are so accepting of this sort of thing," said Daniel Pilecki, whose 2-year-old daughter, Maddi, fell asleep on his shoulder during the Vivienne Westwood show.
Mr.
Pilecki was covering fashion for Japanese television.
Like others in the audience, he was delighted not to hire a baby sitter.
Most of the shows took place over the weekend.
The low-keyed presentations frequently brought the reaction from viewers that "these are all clothes I can wear." Though there was some fashion movement, it was not the exuberant kind.
Long slender skirts were introduced thoughtfully and tastefully.
Still, most designers made sure they included some short styles so they would not antagonize women not interested in a change.
"I will be very thrilled when hemlines come down," said Zandra Rhodes , who wore a festive shortblack dress at her opening.
"My customers are not, I think, ready for it, but I myself will be thrilled not to look like mutton dressed up like lamb."
For Betty Jackson, long is already in.
"We've already shipped many long skirts to the stores for spring," she said.
"They're selling very well. The women who picked up short clothes early are ready for long ones."
Miss Pollen, who showed a lot of slender but long clothes that always reached the boot tops (some are ankle length), was enthusiastic about the new length.
"I love it," she said.
"Long and slim looks great."
Her sense of proportion, and the fact that she worked hard at achieving the right shapes, made Jean Muir's clothes successful at every level.
One of the world's least pretentious great designers, she made her trademark crepe and jersey dresses look regal because of her sensitivity to the way they fit the body.
Her colors, never riotous, focused on black, gray and olive green.
An occasional more highly colored suede jacket or abstract-pattern sweater added spice to a sober and satisfying collection.
Bobby Short, an old friend of the designer's who is making a film here with Michael Caine, led the applause from the first row.
Marc Bohan added a new deluxe group to his second ready-to-wear collection for Norman Hartnell, the couture house.
Elegantly tailored suits are his strong point, plus a fluttering of black chiffon for evening.
The Hartnell clothes were among the 100 collections exhibited at the Duke of York's headquarters on King's Road under the auspices of the British Fashion Council.
Designers are usually on hand to explain their clothes, part of the intimacy of the fashion business here.
New Designers' Showcase
Relatively new designers like Bella Freud, whose father, Lucian, is a painter and whose great-grandfather was the psychoanalyst, have a chance to present their styles to potential buyers.
"I'm so excited," Miss Freud said the other day.
"I just got my first Italian account."
Miss Freud, 30, was also pleased that her favorite color, a cheerful blue, was widely accepted by retailers, perhaps to supplement the abundance of serious shades.
Pale-blue cashmere sweaters were popular with chocolate brown leather skirts at the booth of another newcomer, Amanda Wakely, 29.
Several exhibitors, including Jenny Packham and Dale Tryon reported that the short skirt was not finished: their most popular styles were knee-baring evening dresses.
Both have orders from Saks Fifth Avenue.
In his runway show, Roland Klein gave considerable attention to short, frothy dressy styles in contrast to his man-tailored daytime styles made more emphatic with vests and ties.
While frenetic pockets of design still exist, the main thrust of British fashion is not so crazy anymore.
Even Vivienne Westwood, the archetypical eccentric designer, has been calming down.
She has been investigating early-20th-century couture design, she said, which reminded her immediately of Hollywood.
So she called her current collection "Always on Camera" and filled it with movie-star touches like head scarves, fake white fox, jeans printed with the face of Marlene Dietrich and astonishing decolletages.
Her models still stagger around on high-platform pumps, which gives an alarming tilt to some of her clothes, but honestly, the styles look considerably more tranquil than they have been.


Gitano Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Audit Faults Care Program
Because New York City does not require checks of complaints against home health-care attendants, workers are sometimes hired after having been previously dismissed for mistreating their clients, an audit released yesterday says.
The audit by the city Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, found that the city did not require nonprofit agencies to check Human Resources Administration records of complaints filed against home attendants before hiring a new employee.
It also uncovered several cases in which home attendants with poor work histories were able to get jobs either because their former employers provided doctored references or because their former employers were not listed in city records.


Double Play: Espinoza Goes and Gallego Is Given His Job
In an apparent attempt to justify the signing of the free agent Mike Gallego, save some money and perhaps rid the clubhouse of a player they did not feel would dutifully accept a part-time role, the Yankees today asked waivers on shortstop Alvaro Espinoza.
It had been obvious since the Yankees signed Gallego to a three-year, $5.1 million contract in January that Espinoza's role with the club was perilous.
His name constantly arose in trade rumors, but after General Manager Gene Michael was unable to make a deal, the Yankees made a mildly surprising one.
By releasing their shortstop of the last three seasons, they also gave the job to a player who is better suited to playing second base.


Soviet Die-Hards Fume by Candlelight
A much-ballyhooed attempt by hard-line former Communists to revive the old Soviet parliament turned farcical today as only 217 former deputies showed up, fewer than a fourth of the number predicted by organizers, and the congress ended up meeting by candlelight at a state farm outside Moscow.
A somewhat more potent show was mounted later by some 10,000 die-hard champions of the old Soviet Union who gathered outside the Kremlin under red flags to sing the old Soviet anthem and to nominate an army general, Albert Makashov, for president.


Babbage's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Highway Pileup in Japan Kills 2


Diet Fare as Cuisine
To The Living Section:
After reading Molly O'Neill's piece on the conflict between gourmets and nutritionists, "Grocery Wars: Good-for-You vs. Indulge!"  [ Feb. 26 ] , I thought it unfortunate that my colleagues, the gourmets, sounded so irrational, defensive and uninformed.


Yes, Baseball Fans, Safe, Perfect Pitching Can Be Learned
TO baseball fans, Dwight Gooden and Nolan Ryan may have quite different pitching styles, but from an orthopedist's point of view, they are doing essentially the same things.
Now researchers studying the delivery of top Major Leaguers have identified exactly what they do right and have devised a checklist for coaches and trainers to use to keep their pitchers on the mound and out of the doctor's office.


Brendan J. Reilly, 68, A Furniture Designer
Brendan Joseph Reilly, a furniture designer who owned and operated a specialty furniture store on the West Side of Manhattan, died on Thursday at the Veterans Administration Hospital, at First Avenue at 24th Street.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


A Tighter Ship With a Leaner Diet
CAN young American men used to eating meat, potatoes, gravy and ice cream adapt to a more wholesome diet and actually learn to like it?
Yes, if they are stuck eating it for six months without barbecued ribs and fries to tempt them, a demonstration study among sailors has shown.
Given no choice during a six-month tour at sea, the 380-member crew of a Navy ship, the destroyer Scott, not only endured a menu that followed American Cancer Society nutritional guidelines, but benefited from it and even enjoyed it.
Most experienced significant health benefits and more than half said they liked the food.
Forty-four percent said they would stick to a similar menu back on shore.


Ex-Officer Pleads Guilty to Rape And Sex Abuse of Stepdaughters
A former New York City police officer under investigation in the killing of his first wife, pleaded guilty yesterday to charges that he raped and sexually abused his second wife's two young daughters, the Bronx District Attorney said.
The former officer, Robert Fioretti, 42 years old, faces 5 to 15 years in prison after admitting that he raped his 12-year-old stepdaughter and touched his 13-year-old stepdaughter sexually, Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx prosecutor, said in a statement.
The maximum sentence for rape is 8 1/3 to 25 years.


El Paso Refinery L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Deane Montgomery Is Dead at 82; Taught Theoretical Mathematics
Prof.
Deane Montgomery, a leading theoretical mathematician who taught at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, N.J., for more than three decades, died on Sunday at his home in Carolina Meadows, a retirement community in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 82 years old.
He died in his sleep, apparently from heart disease, said Rachel D. Gray, a spokeswoman for the institute.


New Islander Bosses Make Torrey an Offer
Bill Torrey, the dominant executive of the Islanders throughout their 20-year history, has been asked by the team's incoming ownership group to remain as general manager in a somewhat diminished role.
But his new bosses want to know in the next few days whether he will stay.
If he doesn't, they must seek his replacement in time to prepare for the June entry draft and other off-season moves to restructure and re-invigorate the floundering franchise.
"We're talking to him and we're waiting for it to be resolved," said Stephen Walsh, who will become one of two co-chairmen of the team when and if the partial sale and transfer of the franchise is approved Friday afternoon by the National Hockey League's Board of Governors.


Tulane Coach Honored
PERRY CLARK of Tulane was named coach of the year yesterday by the United States Basketball Writers Association.
Perry took Tulane from the ashes of a point-shaving scandal to national rankings and the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in just three years.
The Green Wave is 21-8 this season and won the Metro Conference regular-season title. (AP)


Son Succeeds Father As H &amp; R Block Chief
H &amp; R Block Inc., the country's largest tax preparation company, announced yesterday that Thomas M. Bloch had been named chief executive, succeeding his father, Henry W. Bloch.
"I have worked for this my entire career," said the senior Mr.
Bloch, who will remain chairman of the board.
"It is nice to build something up and then be able to pass the running of the company on to someone in the family."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; PRESIDENT VISITS CLINTON COUNTRY
President Bush traveled to Gov.
Bill Clinton's home state today for a quintessentially Presidential show of authority on the day Mr.
Clinton received a major lift toward the Democratic Presidential nomination.
It was also a day on which Mr.
Bush handily won two primaries, which the White House said "virtually assured" his nomination, opening the way for him to concentrate on the fall election.
While Michigan and Illinois held pivotal primaries, Mr.
Bush gave the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, to one of its richest men, Sam M. Walton, the founder of the Wal-Mart discount chain, at its world headquarters here in this Ozark Mountains town, population 10,825.


Two Giant Banks Plan To Merge
Midland Bank P.L.C., Britain's third-largest bank, and the parent of the giant Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation announced today that they had agreed to merge.
The merger would create a bank that would rank about 10th in the world, with assets of more than $270 billion and capital, or shareholders' funds, of about $12 billion.


Market Place; Exxon Is Facing A Tougher Year
Last year was the most profitable ever for the Exxon Corporation, mostly because of stunningly high earnings from its European and Far Eastern refining operations when prices for jet fuel and kerosene rose sharply during the Persian Gulf war.
But 1992 is shaping up as much tougher for Exxon and the other oil giants.
Analysts expect first-quarter earnings to drop by 50 percent for Exxon and even more for most other global oil companies.


Theater in Review
Lamb's Theater  130 West 44th Street Manhattan
By Robert Nassif Lindsey; directed by Scott Harris; musical staging by Janet Watson; set by Peter Harrison; costumes by Michael Bottari and Ron Case; lighting by Don Ehman; musical director, Joshua Rosenblum; assistant scenic designer, Steven E. Johnson; sound by Jim Van Bergen.
Presented by Lamb's Theater Company, Carolyn Rossi Copeland, producing director.
WITH: Reed Armstrong, Mimi Bessette, Louisa Flaningam, Mark Goetzinger, Sarah Knapp, Alfred Lakeman, Judy Malloy, Marni Nixon, Tracy Spindler and Pippa Winslow.


When U.S. Helped Poor College Students
To the Editor:
Proposing that President Bush should increase Government programs to help needy students attend private colleges, Samuel Hynes (Op-Ed, Feb. 29) cites the G.I.
Bill, which provided one month's college tuition for each month a World War II veteran served on active duty.
He could have mentioned National Youth Administration assistance for poor college students, predating the war.
Through that agency, the Federal Government provided money to colleges, which hired needy students to perform needed chores on campus.
The work ran the gamut from cleaning urinals to washing test tubes and setting up lab experiments.


Security Council Weighs Role in Somali Civil War
The United Nations Security Council embarked today on a new peacekeeping operation aimed at ending the civil war raging in Somalia and delivering desperately needed supplies of food and medicine for its starving and impoverished people.
The Council voted unanimously to send experts to the wartorn nation on the Horn of Africa to study the possibility of sending United Nations military observers to enforce a cease-fire that two of Somalia's warring factions agreed to last month.
The Council also voted to assess the possibility of bringing in massive aid supplies under United Nations protection.


Review/Film; Front-Line Soldiers in the War Against AIDS
The aptly titled "Voices From the Front," opening a one-week engagement today at the Film Forum, is a vivid, impassioned report on the war against AIDS as it is being fought by members of the People With AIDS Coalition, Act Up and other advocacy groups.
Robyn Hutt, Sandra Elgear and David Meiesan jointly produced, directed and edited the film, which is both a call to arms and a record of the war to date.
Though the film presents statistics and personal stories that are harrowing, it has an invigorating evangelical fervor that recalls the long-lost time of militant trade unionism.


Food Company Accused Of Selling Tainted Items
A Mississippi company and two former executives of it have been indicted on Federal charges that they knowingly sold egg products tainted with salmonella bacteria.
The indictments, handed up by a Federal grand jury in Jackson, Miss., earlier this month, were made public on Monday by Agriculture Department officials.


How to Press North Korea
Despite a flurry of pledges in recent weeks from North Korean leaders that they are nearly ready to allow nuclear inspections, officials in Seoul and Washington say they are mired in a game of diplomatic hide-and-seek in which no one really knows how much time is left.
The officials say they are likely to let the negotiations play themselves out until June or a little beyond, the time North Korea and South Korea set Saturday for the first inspections to establish that neither side is developing or deploying nuclear weapons.


So Long, Grim Slugger: It's a New Card Game
Baseball and other trading cards are taking on a striking new look, thanks to upstart companies that have jazzed up designs long considered by many fans to be about as exciting as a routine ground ball.
Gone are dull-colored cards with lackluster photographs that seemed straight out of a high school yearbook -- the smiling rookie or grim slugger, each with a bat glued to the shoulder.
In their place are bright colors, action shots, multiple images, even cards with photos on both sides.
Bewildering Variety
Brash new card makers like the Upper Deck Company have been so successful that they have forced the giants dominating trading cards -- Topps and Fleer -- to change their look as well.


A Knife, a Fork and a Pen
More than 50 authors will act as hosts at breakfasts, lunches, brunches, cocktail parties, dinners and receptions at more than 50 restaurants in the Book and the Cook festival this year.
Most restaurants offer special fixed-price meals, and reservations should be made directly with them.
"Wines, Waters and Beers of the World," a day of lectures, workshops and tastings, will be held on Saturday from noon to 6 P.M. at the University of Pennsylvania's Museum of Archeology and Anthropology, at 33d and Spruce Streets.
The cost is $25 in advance and $30 at the door.


A Flood of Illegal Aliens Enters U.S. Via Kennedy
Taking advantage of bureaucratic paralysis, hundreds of illegal immigrants are entering the country through Kennedy International Airport every week, even after it is determined that they lack the proper documents.
In the last six months, Kennedy, more than any other airport in the country, has been flooded by travelers with forged papers, tampered passports or no passports at all who walk off their planes and ask for political asylum.
They may be illegal, but most of them simply vanish into the immigrant world.


Quotation of the Day
"The fat lady hasn't sung -- but she's sure doing her sound checks." -- RONALD H. BROWN, chairman of the Democratic National Committee.  [ A18:1. ]


Housing and Output on the Rise, Spurring Talk of Recession's End
Government reports on industrial and housing activity today provided what many analysts regard as conclusive proof of economic recovery.
"The long recession is over," asserted Lawrence A. Hunter, chief economist for the United States Chamber of Commerce.
"The jump in February housing starts and industrial production -- in addition to markedly improved business confidence and retail sales -- signal a clear turning point for the economy."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.N. SETS NEW DEADLINE FOR IRAQ
The United Nations has given Iraq until March 26 to come up with a detailed plan for destroying a long list of equipment and buildings used for constructing and repairing its banned ballistic missiles.
A1  AN ISRAELI EMBASSY IS BOMBED
A powerful explosion, apparently caused by a car bomb, destroyed the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires, reportedly killing at least 6 people and wounding almost 100.
A1  BUSH COMPLAINS OF AID LOOPHOLES
President Bush told key Congressional leaders he could not accept their compromise on loan guarantees for Israel because it contained too many loopholes.
A11
Israelis pondered their ties with the United States.  A11  2 STABBED TO DEATH IN JAFFA
A Palestinian brandishing a sword and a kitchen knife went on a stabbing rampage in Jaffa, killing 2 people and wounding 19 before he was shot to death.
A10
The P.L.O. is considering declaring a federation with Jordan.
A10  BIG TURNOUT IN SOUTH AFRICA
White South Africans turned out in large numbers to vote in a referendum that will decide whether they want to share power with the country's blacks.
A8  U.N.
TEAM TO STUDY AID TO SOMALIA
The United Nations Security Council voted to study sending peacekeepers to maintain a cease-fire in Somalia's civil war and shipping in desperately needed food and medicine.
A9  HARD-LINE MOVE IN RUSSIA FIZZLES
An attempt by hard-line former Communists to revive the old Soviet Parliament turned farcical as only 217 former deputies showed up, less than a fourth the number predicted by organizers.
A3
Washington fears a "brain drain" of Russian arms experts.
A6  SMOG EMERGENCY IN MEXICO CITY
With the smog over Mexico City approaching a record for danger, the Government closed schools, ordered industries to reduce operations and restricted private cars.
A5  2D ARMS CARGO TO IRAN REPORTED
A second North Korean ship believed to be carrying Scud missiles or components delivered its cargo to Iran on Friday after United States officials concluded that they had no authority to stop it, officials said.
A12  Bangkok Journal: Thai politicians are out buying votes.
A4  Sudan's army is gaining ground against rebels in the south.A9  News Analysis: North Korea may be stalling on atomic inspections.
A13  A new ambassador hopes to improve Japan's image in the U.S.
A13  National A14-19, B6  A SWEEP FOR CLINTON AND BUSH
Governor Clinton took an enormous step toward the Democratic Presidential nomination with convincing victories in the Illinois and Michigan primaries.
President Bush also carried both states, denying Patrick J. Buchanan the level of protest support he had achieved earlier in the campaign.
A1  THE ARKANSAS EXPRESS
News analysis: The results in Illinois and Michigan put Governor Clinton in the fast lane toward nomination, leaving former Senator Tsongas and former Governor Brown to squabble over who could better pick up the pieces should the Clinton campaign unexpectedly crash.
A1
Brown scored well with a diverse group of voters in Michigan.  A18
On the day of Clinton's sweep, Bush forayed into Arkansas.  A19
Campaign fund-raising lags far behind that of 1988.  A19  THE ECONOMY BRIGHTENS
The Government reported that housing starts and industrial output spurted in February, providing what many analysts saw as conclusive evidence of recovery.
A1  3 IN CABINET OVERDREW
Defense Secretary Cheney, Labor Secretary Martin and Agriculture Secretary Madigan said they overdrew their accounts at the House bank when they served in Congress.
The three other former House members now in the Cabinet said their House bank accounts had been free of overdrafts.
A16
To prosecute for the overdrafts would be difficult.  A16  TRADING IN WORTHLESS STOCKS
The common stock of Continental Airlines Holdings is officially worthless.
Yet for more than six weeks, over the company's objections, the American Stock Exchange has permitted Continental shares to trade on the exchange floor.
And although the Continental case is described by traders as particularly egregious, it is not an isolated one.
A1  H.U.D.
PROGRAM UNDER FIRE
A significant part of a $3-billion-a-year Federal program intended to help needy communities is spent in ways that provide them few benefits and sometimes enrich private interests, Congressional investigators say.
A16  SENATE INVESTIGATOR RETREATS
The special counsel trying to determine who disclosed sexual-harassment accusations against Clarence Thomas backed away from his demand for records of two reporters' home telephone calls.
A14  LOBBYISTS AND A LOGJAM
Leading members of Congress say that change in health care has been retarded by conflicting messages from a growing number of lobbyists representing all facets of the industry.
A17  Capitol Hill Journal: Where two worlds collide.
A14  At the beating trial, the prosecution rested.
A14  A company was indicted in a tainted-egg case.
A14  Elderly blacks on Medicare lack heart-bypass treatment.
B6  A NASA advisory panel warned of safety compromises.
B6  In a "Star Wars" setback, a rocket failed at its task.
B6  After eight years, a vilified Boston child slayer was freed.
B6  Education B7  A Maryland program helps minority students pursue science in college.
Four state universities are charged with allocating money unfairly.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  The rich, the poor and food.
C1  Writer heralds the unsung.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C14-20  Debating the fate of a Frank Lloyd Wright building in Tokyo.
C15  Theater: "Death and the Maiden" on Broadway.
C15  Sports B8-14  Baseball: Yanks put Espinoza on waivers.
B9  Basketball: Bulls beat Nets.
B9  Obituaries D22  Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A20  Mr.
Clinton tightens the vise.
Russia, Ukraine and divorce.
March the mischievous.
The Senate's leak madness.
Letters A20  Thomas Geoghegan: Labor's choice -- Kohl for President.
A21  Brock Yates: Gentlemen, cross your fingers.
A21  Flora Lewis: Le Pen is everybody's problem.
A21


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Bell &amp; Howell Co., Skokie, Ill., and Ascom, a telecommunications concern, agreed that Bell &amp; Howell would acquire Ascom's Hasler KM8 mail inserting business. *
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., said its board had declared a 3-for-1 stock split payable on May 22.


Metropolitan Diary
SPRING
The first night of the first day That winter was over, people took walks And sat on their stoops and porches.
Lovers got used to holding hands again And children played by streetlamp light.
We rummaged in the closet For baseball gloves, light jackets, And the secret places where we'd stored Our daydreams.
Everyone walked outside To moonbathe, forgetting what They'd been angry about inside.
I stumbled on a shadow, Took root in the curb strip, And sprouted shiny and green again. -- LEWIS GARDNER
. . .
Elizabeth Hunter is in a cubicle at her health club toweling her hair.
She hears a woman in the outer room say, "Sasha finally put her foot down yesterday."
A second woman exclaims, "It's about time!" Ms.
Hunter stops toweling so she won't miss the next part.
Then she hears the first woman say to a third person, "My dog, Sasha, had her foot operated on three weeks ago, and I've been waiting for her to put her foot down."
Ms. Hunter resumes toweling.
. . .
BUYING GLOVES
I recently went to Saks Fifth Avenue for a glove sale.
Recession or no recession, customers were two and three deep in front of the counter.
I made my way up to the boxes piled high with gloves of all styles, colors and sizes.
After digging through several of them, I found exactly what I wanted.
I waited --and waited -- for the salesclerk to accept my purchase but was repeatedly bypassed by more aggressive bargain hunters.
While waiting, my mind wandered back to when I was a child accompanying my mother to the same store to buy gloves.
We sat on chairs in front of a low, well-polished wood counter.
A salesclerk appeared immediately; she politely asked what she could show us.
My mother stated her desire, and the woman brought out a small cushion on which my mother rested her elbow, hand and raised fingers.
The woman measured the width of my mother's palm with a tape measure, turned to a wall covered with tiny drawers and headed straight to the desired size and color.
She inserted an instrument resembling a wooden curling iron into each finger of one glove and gently stretched it.
Once again my mother put her elbow on the cushion and raised her hand.
The clerk put the glove on, easing it down from the finger, not pulling or stretching the cuff.
Her expertise was such that my mother usually bought the first pair of gloves shown.
My reverie was interrupted by, "Miss! Miss! Do you want these gloves? There are lots of people waiting." -- CAROLINE GHANI
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was walking along Central Park South when a disheveled-looking chap approached me and politely asked for some spare change.
He was a pleasant fellow, the day was lovely and, feeling generous, I reached into my wallet and handed him a dollar.
"Thank you, sir," he said, "but could you make that four quarters?"
"What's the difference?" I asked.
"The attendant in the men's room at the Plaza doesn't make change," he replied. -- MICHAEL ROJAK
. ..
Dear Diary:
Snugly ensconced on an Upper East Side corner is a delightful shop featuring doll houses and doll house miniatures.
Decidedly upscale, the shop has an incredible array of small esoterica, ranging from stately formal dining room suites to gaily flowered patio chaises -- earmarked, undoubtedly, for the house in the Hamptons.
It came as no surprise, therefore, when I peered into a display case of gold-fauceted bathroom fixtures, to see neatly arranged on a marble vanity those medicine-chest indispensables for daily living -- tiny soap in a tiny soap dish, a tiny toothpaste tube alongside a tiny toothbrush, tiny tissues, a tiny Band-Aid box and . . . a teeny, tiny bottle of Valium.
Meant, no doubt, to help one through a teeny, tiny crisis. -- SHARI LESSING
. . .
RUBBER BANDS
Rubber bands hold things together things that belong the more, the tighter, Neater than paper clips that pinch or staples that leave scars long as an inch.
Storable on wrists chewable as gum, they quickly uncoil when rudely twisted.
Schoolboys shoot them like Cupid's arrows at girls who keep them for index cards or ponytails or playfully shoot them back. -- AL SPECTOR
. . .
Sheran James is at the Ronnybrook Farm Dairy milk stand in the Greenmarket at Union Square when a girl, about 10 years old, wanders by.
"My mother is over there," the youngster says to the proprietor, pointing to a neighboring vegetable stall.
She buys two quarts of glass-bottled milk, then lingers by the fireboard facsimile of a cow roped to the edge of the stand.
She looks up dreamily at the farmer and sighs.
"Oh, it's so nice to get out of town for a while," she says.
. . .
Metropolitan Diary welcomes contributions of short anecdotes, observations and light verse about life in the New York region.
Unused material cannot be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope.


New NCR Product
The NCR Corporation today is introducing a lighter, more powerful version of the Safari portable computer first announced last year by its parent company A.T.&amp; T. The new machine is called the Safari NSX/20.
It is sold with Microsoft's Windows 3.1 and is powered by an Intel 386 SL chip, weighs 4.9 pounds and has a minimum three-hour battery life.
The company is marketing the machine to large corporate sales forces that must travel frequently.
It was priced at $5,399.
A number of computer makers including Dell, AST and Zenith are all bringing out similar lighter machines.


Public Service Enterprise reports earnings for 12mos to Feb 29


Ross Cosmetics Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Le Pen Is Everybody's Problem
The extreme nationalist right is rising in France to the point where it has become the central issue of national politics.
Regional elections on Sunday will produce a map and a measure of the fever, expected to run as high as 30 percent of the vote in some areas.
French commentators have compared the phenomenon to Patrick Buchanan's surprising showing in the U.S.
Republican primaries.
The campaign slogan of Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front party this year is "the French first."


It Wasn't Business as Usual on St. Patrick's Day


Less for Environment Than Energy in Tax Bill
With energy legislation moving slowly through Congress, independent energy producers and environmentalists have focused on this year's tax bills to win policy decisions.
So far, the producers seem to be coming out ahead.
The success of the independent producers, who won the inclusion of an $800 million tax credit over five years in the Senate tax bill, reflects in part intensive lobbying aimed at the White House.


Chicago Dock &amp; Canal reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Suspect Died of Asphyxiation, Not Cocaine, Pathologist Says
A New York City medical examiner testified yesterday that a car-theft suspect died from asphyxiation, and rejected suggestions by a police officer's lawyer that the suspect was killed by the cocaine found in his body.
The police officer is accused of recklessly or negligently choking the man to death while he and other officers were arresting him in Queens.


At the Lipton, Becker Follows Edberg's Lead
Unless you happen to be Monica Seles, who is singlehandedly keeping the adjective invincible applicable to her sport, the top of the tennis heap has become a very fragile place.
Stefan Edberg, the No. 2-ranked male player in the world, found that out Monday, when a qualifier rated 287 spots beneath him drummed him from the Lipton International Players Championships.
And today, just after the same lesson nearly hit home with Edberg's female No. 2 counterpart, Steffi Graf, on the stadium court, it caught up with Boris Becker in the form of Alberto Mancini of Argentina.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 7 headed "Pittsburgh Journal," about local filmmaking, referred inaccurately to a labor dispute in New York last year between the major motion picture studios and film craft union members.
A reader has pointed out in a letter dated Feb. 29 that the studios boycot ted New York for seven months during a contract dispute over compensation; there was no strike by cinematographers and stagehands.
An accord was reached last summer.


Tokyo Stocks Drift Lower, As Most Investors Stay Out
The stock market moved lower again today, as the generally pessimistic outlook for the battered exchange kept most investors on the sidelines, waiting to see how the Government responds to the erosion in confidence.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 153.32 points, or 0.77 percent, to 19,764.31.
The index fell 317.67 points by the midday close and continued dropping for most of the afternoon, but managed a partial recovery in the last quarter hour of trading.
The close was still lower than Monday's final finish of 19,837.16 -- the first drop below the psychologically important 20,000 barrier in five years.


Eagle Food Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Paul Gavert, Singer, 76
Paul Gavert, a singer and voice teacher, died on March 11 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, said his daughter, Gail, of Manhattan.


Safety Panel Criticizes NASA on Space Shuttle
A NASA safety advisory panel said today that the space agency could be compromising the safety of future space shuttle flights by scaling back improvements in the vehicle's main engines.
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, in its annual report to officials of NASA, questioned the agency's decision to save money by eliminating several engine-improvement programs.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Scholarly Rivalry: Cambridge Noses Vs. Oxford Palates
Before Harvard and Yale, long before Army and Notre Dame, before even the Red Sox and the Yankees, there were Oxford and Cambridge.
Friendly rivals since the Middle Ages, they continue to compete in every field of scholarly endeavor.
And some not so scholarly.
Like wine tasting.
For almost 40 years, the best palates and noses of the two great universities have battled with tasting glass and spittoon to capture what must be the academic world's most prestigious wine title.
Of course, it's probably the academic world's only wine title.


At the Meals on Reels Film Festival, Chicken Soup and a Tasty Frenchman
RANDOM notes while watching random clips from Meals on Reels, the first film festival devoted only to food, which is to be held Saturday at New York University School of Law in Manhattan:
STARVING ARTISTS' COOKBOOK, by Paul Lamarre and Melissa Wolf (video, 41 minutes).
Surreal dishes prepared by artists, some famous, some not.
William Wegman, the art world's reigning dog photographer, demonstrates how to pop vitamins.
He drops vitamin C capsules into a pan of hot oil on the stove, covers the pan, turns up the burner.
He shakes the pan.
Rattling sounds are heard.
He lifts the cover to reveal . . . popcorn.
Oops!
He spills it on the floor.
An off-camera Weimaraner devours it.
Debby Davis, a Bronx sculptor, makes Flashlight Jell-O, using lime gelatin and a loaf pan longer than a flashlight.
The effect is ectoplastic.
M.
F.
K.: A DOCUMENTARY ON THE LIFE of MARY FRANCES KENNEDY FISHER, by Barbara Wornum (video, 45 minutes).
At the age of 83, the master food writer is still a wicked beauty.
In one scene, Mrs.
Fisher, in chiffon and long, sparkly earrings, speaks from her wheelchair to an audience in San Francisco.
Asked whether she reads current food writing and, if so, what she thinks of it, she seems to wince.
"Even in the worst book," she says, waving a microphone, "there is one jewel, the jewel in a toad's head. I just don't have the time anymore to look for it. All these idea books. The story of bread or the story of potatoes. Some editor will say, 'Well, write about peanuts.' And some poor soul does."
HOW TASTY WAS MY LITTLE FRENCHMAN, by Nelson Pereira Dos Santos (film, 80 minutes).
A wry look at eating at the very top of the food chain, cannibalism, by one of Brazil's Cinema Novo directors.
When the film was first released, in 1971, judges at the Cannes Film Festival withdrew it from competition because of its nudity and cannibalism, according to the program notes.
It didn't help that the main item on the menu was French.
Still hungry?
There are 26 other courses in this cinematic feast that celebrates, scrutinizes and satirizes -- in art films, documentaries, commercials, music videos and cartoons -- what, how and why we eat.
The festival is sponsored by City Lore, a New York center for urban folk culture, and the Culinary Historians of New York.
It runs from 11 A.M. to 11 P.M. on Saturday at the N.Y.U. law school, at 40 Washington Square South (between MacDougal and Sullivan Streets).
Tickets are $10, or $6 for students and those 62 and above.
For more information, call (212) 529-1955.
Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, a folklorist, who is a power in both groups, served as the matchmaker as well as the author of the introductory program notes.
"Meals on Reels," she said, "suggests the many ways we organize our social life and cultural values through the malleable and ephemeral medium of food."
Garlic has never been accused of being ephemeral.
GARLIC IS AS GOOD AS 10 MOTHERS, by Les Blank (film, 31 minutes) is a hymn to the culinary and curative powers of the stinking rose.
It visits a garlic festival in Gilroy, Calif., and Chez Panisse in Berkeley for an all-garlic meal.
Screened in Mr.
Blank's "aromaround," which means garlic cooking in the theater.
Audience watching could be an entertainment in itself.
Food critics as well as film critics are expected, along with anthropologists, folklorists, historians and, of course, foodies.
Chefs, too, may drop by to see stars like Paul Prudhomme perform on camera, or in FLYING MORNING GLORY (ON FIRE), by Skip Blumberg (video, 4 minutes), an acrobatic cook in Thailand.
Silliness itself.
A Thai street cook stir-fries morning glory leaves in a wok.
Flames.
The cook yanks the wok from the burner and hurls the morning glory leaves into the air.
Half a block away, a waiter catches the leaves on a platter.
Instant replay follows.
Since the organizers ruled out obvious titles like "Babette's Feast," the festival's director, Eric John, worried at first that there would not be enough food footage for a program.
As it turned out, he had leftovers.
Mr.
John experienced cravings for Cajun cooking -- YUM, YUM, YUM!, by Les Blank and Maureen Gosling (film, 31 minutes).
He contemplated a trip to Gill's restaurant in Brooklyn for a West Indian meal -- RICE AND PEAS, by Karen Kramer (video, 12 minutes).
And he longed to visit the kosher kitchen of a grandmother who sings in Yiddish to the chicken in her pot -- CHICKEN SOUP, by Kenny Schneider (film, 14 minutes).
Only one film was an appetite suppressant: SUMMER OF THE LOUCHEUX, by Graydon McCrea (27 minutes), showing a practice in Alaska of burying fish until it decays.
The festival opens with a 1949 documentary of a slaughterhouse on the outskirts of Paris, THE BLOOD OF BEASTS, by Georges Franju (film, 22 minutes).
The butchers literally whistle while they work.
Steam rises from the blood on the killing floor.
In a sobering look at food production, a changing economy has forced Appalachian women into minimum-wage, part-time, dead-end jobs, in FAST FOOD WOMEN, by Anne Johnson (video, 29 minutes).
Hunger is the theme of two entries.
One, SHAPING THE IMAGE, by Ilan Ziv and Freke Vuijst (video, 29 minutes), explores the role of television in the political exploitation of famine in Africa.
The other, THE FAMINE WITHIN, by Katherine Gilday (film, 90 minutes), examines the reasons behind American women's obsession with weight and dieting, and the sad consequences of bulimia and anorexia.
Surveys mentioned in the film indicate that many women consider losing weight more important than moving ahead on the job or having a satisfying love life, that fear of fat may be more powerful than fear of death.
Finally, from the rusty film cans of yesteryear comes a look at how food has been advertised, promoted and taught since the 1930's.
In A PRESENTATION OF FOOD COMMERCIALS AND INDUSTRIALS, by Richard Prelinger (film and video, 90 minutes), laugh along with "Breakfast Pals, starring Snap, Crackle and Pop." Have your pencils ready for "Let's Make a Meal in 20 Minutes." And, in the light of current nutritional wisdom, hiss "The Four Food Groups."


Angelica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 26


Counsel Retreats on Thomas Disclosures
The special counsel trying to find out who disclosed accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas retreated today from his demand for the home telephone records of the two journalists who first reported the allegations.
Instead, the counsel, Peter E. Fleming of New York, set up a situation in which the Senate Rules Committee would have to decide whether reporters had the right to withhold their telephone records from Senate investigators.


Critic's Notebook; The Laid-Back No-Frills Road To a Music Conference in Texas
At first glance, South by Southwest seems like a typical music industry conference.
It's in a big and moderately fancy hotel, the Hyatt Regency here, the kind of place with glass torpedo elevators, a sky-high central atrium, a vaguely tacky mezzanine restaurant called La Vista and hordes of music industry executives wearing ID badges looming about the lobby.
But there's one thing that sets the conference apart from bigger New York counterparts like the New Music Seminar and the College Media Journal Marathon, and that's Texas.
Since it started six years ago, South by Southwest -- which ran for four days starting on Thursday -- has earned a reputation in the music business for being a more laid-back alternative to the other trade conventions.
It affords the label executives, press representatives and musicians from New York and Los Angeles the chance to plug into a slower-paced life style.
Even the flashiest Austin clubs tend to have ripped upholstery and cheap beer, and there's no subway to deal with.
And people really, honestly have fun.
In Austin, business and pleasure huddle a little closer together.


P.L.O. Suggests Federation Of West Bank With Jordan
The Palestine Liberation Organization is considering declaring a federation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip with Jordan in the hope that the move may help bring about Israeli withdrawal from the territories.
Palestinian officials and journalists said today in telephone interviews that the main idea was to increase the pressure on Israel to hand over part or all of the occupied lands by creating a palatable option of returning the land to Jordan, which Israel recognizes.


Mr. Clinton Tightens the Vise
Even as voters trooped to the polls yesterday, Bill Clinton's critics continued to hammer at his character and raise sharp questions about his ability to win a general election.
When the day was done, however, the voters of Michigan and Illinois had invited a different question: How much longer can Paul Tsongas and Jerry Brown survive as credible candidates?
The message from the Midwest is this: Barring illness or scandal, Americans are likely to be choosing between George Bush and Bill Clinton in November.
Mr.
Clinton achieved impressive margins and is getting ever closer to half the 2,145 delegates needed to win the nomination.
Mr.
Bush, meanwhile, scored decisive triumphs over Patrick Buchanan, who failed to achieve the one-third of the vote to which he had grown accustomed.


Economic Scene; Czech Streetcars None Desire
The tableau might have been reconstructed from some Depression-era photo essay on the collapse of the industrial heartland.
A handful of ill-clad workmen kneel amid untidy piles of parts, dabbing primer on streetcar undercarriages with what look like ordinary household paint brushes.
Others lounge uncomfortably against idle machinery in the unheated shed, as if waiting for orders they do not expect to come.
"This factory," the senior executive from CKD Tatra Ltd. explained with more than a trace of irony, "has produced 24,000 tram cars since 1948 -- more than any other in the world."


Bush Rejects Israel Loan Guarantees


Woman Killed by Car After Surviving Crash
A woman who had walked away unharmed after her car overturned Saturday night was fatally injured minutes later when a junior firefighter on his way to the accident lost control of his car.
Evelyn Houser was driving along a snowy state highway near Waynesburg, 30 miles south of Pittsburgh, when her car struck an embankment, overturned and slid to a stop, the authorities said.


Implants Pit Appearance Against Health
To the Editor:
Readers might look at "Breast Implants: Not for Everyone" (editorial, Feb. 24) in the light of your Feb. 27 report that plastic surgeons want to oust David Kessler, Commissioner of Food and Drugs, for his stand on breast implants.
The editorial makes a point often overlooked: "the great majority of cancer victims forgo breast reconstruction."


Intermagnetics General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23


Knight in No Mood For Awards Dinner
The Indiana Hoosier basketball awards dinner is to Bloomington and the city's Kiwanis Club what the Academy Awards are to Hollywood, and hence Coach BOB KNIGHT's abrupt cancellation of the April 9 affair is a flagrant foul, especially to the organization that has put on the dinner for the last 41 years.
The Kiwanis Club president, CRAIG TENNEY, said on Monday, the day after a 61-59 Indiana loss to Purdue cost Indiana a share of the Big Ten title: "At 9:20 this morning, Coach Knight's secretary called up and canceled the banquet and said we would never have it again and he would reimburse us for all expenses. There was no reason given to us at all. Coach Knight didn't even have the decency to talk to us personally."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.12
4.75
5.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.04
4.09
5.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.22
4.27
5.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.32
7.38
8.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.00
8.06
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.05
9.52
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.78
7.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Presidential Field Raises Much Less Cash This Year Than in '88
This year's Presidential candidates have been able to raise only a fraction of the money that their counterparts raised four years ago.
As a result, analysts say, money seems to be having a far smaller impact on primary races this year than it did in 1988.
A principal explanation for the decline, many fund-raisers say, is the recession, which has made it harder to squeeze money out of donors, especially from political action committees representing industries that are suffering.
Among those with smaller resources are committees representing the automobile industries, realty agents and home builders.


Stop the Senate's Leak Madness
With its subpoenas for phone records, the Senate moved from mischievous hazing of three journalists to invasion of privacy in its fruitless quest for leakers from last year's confirmation of Clarence Thomas as a Supreme Court Justice.
Fortunately, the investigator who issued the subpoenas has slowed the search and will consult the Senate Rules Committee before trying to enforce them.
That gives the committee a chance to bring this crazy quest to a halt.
Unchastened by ridicule over his attempts to question reporters, the investigator, Peter Fleming, issued subpoenas for telephone records of long-distance calls from the reporters' homes and offices.
It's part of an inquiry that from the outset has endangered confidential dealings between reporters and sources, and thus the flow of important information to the public.


Teen-Ager Held in Train Killing
A Brooklyn teen-ager was arrested at his home yesterday in the March 6 shooting death of a 15-year-old boy on a crowded subway car.
Sgt.
Michael Paccione, acting commander of the 70th Precinct Detective Squad, identified the suspect as De Angelo Cross, 17 years old, of 377 East 35th Street in Flatbush, a senior at Erasmus Hall High School.


Endevco reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Clearing House Selects Deutsch
Publishers Clearing House in Port Washington, L.I., yesterday named Deutsch Inc. in New York as its second agency, to handle the much-sought-after creative portion of its estimated $20 million television advertising account.
For the last three years, the creative portion of the account had been divided between Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and an in-house ad staff.
To win the review, Deutsch competed against Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York; Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafelice, Stamford, Conn., and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano, New York.


Campbell Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bridge
A player whose partner defends brilliantly to defeat a game contract is alway happy.
But he is particularly delighted and relieved when he had begun with an unfortunate opening lead and put the defense in jeopardy.
The diagramed deal was played Sunday in the New York Swiss stage of the Grand National Teams.
Sitting East and West were August Boehm and Alan Miller, who won the event along with John Roberts, John Solodar, Tom Smith and George Tornay.


Personal Health
AMERICAN women have far more to fear from the men they know and once loved than from any stranger on the street.
Domestic violence is the leading cause of injury and death to American women, causing more harm than vehicular accidents, rapes and muggings combined.
Each year an estimated six million women are beaten by the men they live with, and 30 percent of women who become homicide victims die at the hands of men with whom they have a "family" relationship.
While there are some cases of domestic violence in which the wife is the abuser as well as problems of abuse among gay couples, in the overwhelming majority of cases, women are the victims at the hands of their men.


Knick Alarm Clock Sounds Just in Time
Midway through the third quarter, it appeared the Knicks could have won tonight's game in their sleep.
But 10 minutes later, they were fighting desperately to avoid a nightmare.
The Magic cut the Knicks' 22-point third-quarter lead to 1 point with seven and a half minutes left as New York was held to one field goal in an 8-minute-27-second span.
The Knicks temporarily lost their aggressiveness and their poise, and it nearly cost them the game.


East Europe Astir on Ex-Communists
The dismissal of thousands of state officials in Eastern Europe's formerly Communist countries has set off an impassioned debate between those who favor legislation to disqualify former Communists from public-sector jobs and human-rights proponents who say the laws establish collective guilt and deny adequate safeguards and rights of appeal.
The sharpest reaction came in a statement last week by the International Labor Organization, which criticized a recent Czechoslovak law screening Government and state-industry officials.
A report by the office's governing body in Geneva found that job disqualifications under the law "constitute discrimination on the basis of political opinion" and said that appeals boards established by the law "do not fully meet the relevant requirements" of international conventions against discrimination.


CHRONICLE
Streets in East Harlem can be desolate and neglected, but the people, especially the young, are overflowing with vitality.
That's the message of a photography exhibit, "East Harlem 1988-1992," which opens today at the Union Settlement Gallery, 237 East 104th Street.
Taking part in the show are 86 photographers, ages 12 to 21, who have put together a very personal portrait of their neighborhood.


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


As the Rich Get Leaner, The Poor Get the French Fries
IT was called "The Gourmet Revolution," "The Dietary Revolution," "The Awakening of American Taste." And now the revolution is complete.
Sun-dried tomatoes and extra-virgin olive oil, once rationed to a chosen few, are now displayed in supermarkets and widely distributed.
The exotic cuisines that people traveled the world to sample are now as close as the local frozen-food department.
"I knew it had peaked last year when a Midwestern menu made a pun on 'blackened redfish' and offered 'reddened blackfish,' " said Michael Batterberry, the editor of Food Arts magazine, a trade journal published in New York.
"And then there are those prepared chicken entrees in the grocery that come complete with fake grill marks and a packet of mesquite flavoring for that fresh-grilled taste."


No Headline
N.H.L.
Penguins Top Oilers Kevin Stevens and Ron Francis scored late in the third period as the Penguins came back to beat the Edmonton Oilers, 6-5, last night in Pittsburgh.
Stevens's second goal of the game and Francis's game-winner came less than a minute apart as the Penguins improved to 7-2 in their last nine games and moved within 2 points of the second-place Devils in the Patrick Division. (AP) Capitals 6, Blues 4: Dino Ciccarelli had two goals, including the go-ahead score with 17:01 left, as Washington won on home ice.
Don Beaupre had 34 saves for the Capitals, who moved within 5 points of the first-place Rangers in the Patrick Division.
St.
Louis played its second straight game without Brett Hull, who has back spasms. (AP)


Check Abuse Prosecutions Would Face Difficulties
Legal experts said today that behind the uproar over the House bank was a sobering law-enforcement reality: If the lawmakers who abused check-writing privileges are ever subject to prosecution, Government lawyers are likely to have an intimidating task.
The possibility of criminal prosecutions stemming from the scandal was raised on Monday when a spokesman for the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, Jay B. Stephens, said Federal prosecutors were conducting a preliminary inquiry to determine whether the transactions at the bank involved criminal wrongdoing.


Tapes Crucial to Prosecution Pick Up Gotti Saying 'I'm Innocent'
John Gotti told a lawyer in a taped conversation replayed by the defense yesterday that he was not involved in the murder of Paul Castellano, a central charge in his racketeering-murder trial.
In the conversation, which the Government taped in 1989 with a bug hidden in the hallway of the Ravenite Social Club, Mr.
Gotti spoke to a lawyer, Gerald L. Shargel, about the possibility of being arrested for the Castellano murder.


No Plans to Interfere: Inquiry on Three Mets Is Left Up to the Law
Major league baseball is purposely not conducting its own investigation into the sexual-assault allegations filed against three members of the Mets by a New York woman.
One reason given is that baseball officials do not wish to interfere with the activities of law enforcement officials.
But there is also precedent in baseball tradition, established long ago to prevent such private investigations for fear of jeopardizing the constitutional rights of those under investigation in the legal arena.


SUDANESE TROOPS PUSH INTO SOUTH
Fortified by far larger numbers of soldiers than before and new heavy weapons from Libya, Iran and China, the Sudanese Army is moving through the southern Sudan in its strongest effort yet to win the decade-long civil war there, according to diplomats and aid workers.
The army took Pochala, an important center in the eastern Sudan on the Ethiopian border, a week ago and on Friday bombed Kapoeta, the major town held by the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army.


Amcast Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 1


Bangkok Journal; It's Business as Usual in Thailand (Votes for Sale)
It is election time in Thailand, which means that many of the country's major political parties and politicians are out on the campaign trail not to win votes, but to buy them.
The leader of Chat Thai, one of the nation's largest political parties, insists that he does not buy votes.
But he was spotted several days ago leaving 500 baht, or about $20, to pay for a 50-cent bowl of steaming noodles and bean curd at a noodle stand in southern Thailand.
After leaving such a large tip, he may well have been hopeful of the startled vendor's vote.


Keough, Recovering From Surgery, Watches a Replay
Less than 24 hours after undergoing emergency brain surgery to relieve pressure from a blood clot, Matt Keough today watched a television replay of the batted ball that struck him in the right temple.
"He turned it up so he could watch it," Keogh's wife, Jeana, said.
"It didn't show the ball hitting him because they were focused on the batter. But then it showed Matt lying on the ground."


The Swan Song Swings When Freddie Plays It
GOOD Lord willing and the creek don't rise, Freddie Moore will steal the show for the last time this Friday night.
It will happen during the band's spirited rendition of "Tiger Rag." At exactly the point where you expect a precipitously sliding trombone, the band will jerk to a stop.
Suddenly, Mr.
Moore, his eyes bulging in mock fright, will issue a wonderful grunt.
"Hold that tiger!" the old man will shout.
"Don't let him go!"


Agreements Don't Bar West Bank Settlements
To the Editor:
Walid Khalidi's article on the legality of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip (Op-Ed. Feb. 19) rests on the claim that the so-called Green Line, the armistice demarcation line of 1949, constitutes the eastern boundary of Israel.
He writes that unless the United States stops shilly-shallying on the issue, there can be no peace in the area.
The first difficulty with Professor Khalidi's argument is that the armistice agreements expressly declare that the armistice demarcation lines are not political boundaries, but can be modified by agreement when the parties move from armistice to peace.
This provision -- which Mr.
Khalidi does not mention -- was put into the agreements at the insistence of the Arab states.
It is an important part of the background of Security Council Resolution 242, which calls on the parties to establish "secure and recognized" boundaries when they make agreements of peace and provides that those boundaries need not be the same as the armistice lines.


CHRONICLE
The Duke of York, second sone of QUEEN ELIZABETH of Britain, was reported by a London newspaper yesterday to be separating from his wife, popularly known as Fergie.
The Daily Mail said Buckingham Palace was preparing to announce that PRINCE ANDREW and the Duchess, the former SARAH FERGUSON, wer to part after nearly six years of marriage.
There was no immediate comment from the palace.


Series of Pacts to Keep Toon No. 2 Among Receivers
Al Toon has agreed to a series of three one-year contracts with the Jets, believed to be worth a total of about $4.2 million, that will keep him as the second-highest-paid receiver in the National Football League.
Only another fluid, sure-handed receiver, Jerry Rice of the San Francisco 49ers, earns more than Toon, whose 74 receptions were fifth in the American Conference last year.
Toon, though, produced no touchdown catches in the regular season, finally scoring in the playoff game against the Houston Oilers.


60-Minute Gourmet
A GREAT cook can make a fine meal with a sow's ear.
Somebody said this once, although the source's name has disappeared.
There is much truth to it.
My colleague and friend Jacques Pepin once demonstrated this by going into a supermarket with only $10 and coming out with ingredients for a three-course meal for four.
And steak was the main course!
Not filet, of course, but a shoulder cut that he tenderized and grilled.
I was thinking of this recently when I was buying chicken legs for testing a recipe.
Most cooks take the legs for granted, serving them as part of the whole bird or maybe Buffalo style for an appetizer.
There is a good deal of moist meat on legs, and since they are so cheap you can serve two or more per person.


Jordan May Not Play in Olympics
Embroiled in a dispute with the National Basketball Association and USA Basketball over Olympic marketing rights, Michael Jordan acknowledged tonight there is a chance he might not play in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
"I want to play," Jordan said before the Chicago Bulls played the Nets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, "but if it comes to a point where they feel they can't compromise, if it's going to be the way they've made it out to be, that's going to be tough to swallow.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia misstated his margin of victory in the 1990 Congressional election.
It was 974 votes.


Shoney's Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks to Feb 16


It's Official: Herman's Is On the Block
Herman's Sporting Goods, the nation's largest chain of sporting-goods stores, was formally offered for sale by its British owner yesterday.
Herman's, which opened its first store in New York City 75 years ago, was acquired in 1989 by Isosceles P.L.C., a British buyout concern, as part of its takeover of the Gateway supermarket chain.


Turnout Heavy as South Africans Vote on Change
White South Africans turned out in large numbers today to vote in a referendum that will decide whether they want to share power with their black countrymen.
Before the crucial vote, many political analysts agreed that a high participation rate, including whites normally indifferent to politics, could signal support for the mandate President F. W. de Klerk has requested to negotiate a future for South Africans that is not based on race.


Bank Yields Show Mixed Trend for Week
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit went in mixed directions again last week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, which tracks bank rates
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday, "This is the fifth consecutive week that short-term certificate of deposit yields have remained flat, while yields on longer-term accounts such as the two-and-a-half-year and the five-year C.D.'s continue to rise slightly."


India Will Buy Airbus Planes
Indian Airlines, the state-run carrier, announced plans today to buy 12 more A-320 aircraft from the European consortium Airbus Industrie for nearly $1 billion.
The purchase of the additional planes was stalled for nearly two years after an A-320 crashed in southern India in 1989, killing more than 90 people.
The crash raised concerns about the safety of the jetliner and prompted the Government to ground all A-320's.


Pioneer Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


March the Mischievous
There are times in life when it is impossible to take the weather any way but personally.
If it rains on their wedding day, for instance, the bride and groom may fear, perhaps with reason, that the sky is spitting spite and malice.
If a gust blows one's umbrella not only inside out but halfway up the street, it is only natural to curse the wind.
And with this month of March turning into a nastier tease than usual, it is only human to suspect that we are being toyed with.
Laughed at.
Punished.
For having the gall to think that spring would be a little soon this year.
The thing is, we were set up.
Nothing happened the way it was supposed to.
The snow shovels never got an outing; it was never so chill that going out without a hat or a scarf was a disaster; and last week's warm rains were downright Aprilish.
So of course we were lulled.
Fooled.
Snookered.


Stock Is Worthless, But It Finds Buyers On a Top Exchange
Under a recently negotiated bankruptcy plan, the common stock of Continental Airlines Holdings is officially worthless.
Even the company says so.
Yet for more than six weeks, over the company's increasingly strident objections, the American Stock Exchange has continued to permit Continental shares to trade on the exchange floor.
Investors, apparently unaware that the company has negotiated a plan that will wipe them out, have paid as much as $1.50 apiece for more than seven million shares over the last week.


MCI Wins Contract For Air-Control Link
The Federal Aviation Administration has awarded the MCI Communications Corporation a 10-year, $558 million contract to provide long-distance service in a new communications network linking the nation's air traffic control system.
Known as the Leased Interfacility National Airspace Communications System, the network will replace one provided by A.T.&amp; T. That system went down in September, paralyzing the air traffic control system in New York when a key switching center in Manhattan failed for several hours.


Poll Says Home Rule Could Bend To Ward Off Sprawling Growth
New Jerseyans are willing to give up one of the state's most hallowed political traditions, control over local land-use rules, to keep sprawl from eating up too much open space, according to a recent Rutgers University opinion poll.
They are also generally satisfied with the way their state has grown in recent years, the poll suggests, and believe more growth is important for economic reasons.


Long Island Landfill Trial Is Postponed by Subpoena Challenge
A trial to determine the fate of three landfills on eastern Long Island that the state wants to close has been postponed while an appeals court rules on whether the State Environmental Commissioner will be forced to testify.
The trial had been scheduled to begin today in Riverhead.
But after an exchange of pretrial challenges, the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn said late Monday that it would rule on whether the Commissioner, Thomas C. Jorling, could be subpoenaed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Conclusive proof of economic recovery -- that is what analysts see in Government reports on industrial and housing activity.
Housing starts rose 9.6 percent from January.
And output at factories, mines and utilities climbed 0.6 percent.  [ Page A1. ]


INSIDE
3 in Cabinet Had Overdrafts
The Secretaries of Defense, Labor and Agriculture said they overdrew on their House bank accounts when they served in Congress.
Page A16.
H.U.D.
Program Under Fire
A multibillion-dollar Federal effort intended to help needy communities sometimes enriches private interests instead, investigators say.
Page A16.
More United Way Questions
Already faced with national erosion in confidence, the United Way for New York is being forced to look at its executives' compensation.
Page B1.
You Are What You Eat, Still
The socially correct, high-status foods today are fresh and healthful and beyond the reach of many poor people.
The Living Section, page C1.


Prosecution in Beating by Police Rests
Prosecutors today rested their case against four white Los Angeles police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King, a black motorist, without calling Mr.
King to testify.
Many people following the trial had assumed that the testimony of Mr.
King, 27 years old, would be a centerpiece of the prosecution's case.
The two Los Angeles County deputy district attorneys handling the case, Terry L. White and Alan Yochelson, refused to explain their decision not to call him; they have entered into an agreement with defense lawyers not to discuss the case with reporters.


Ozan Marsh, Pianist, 71
Ozan Marsh, a pianist and teacher who specialized in the music of Liszt, died on Sunday morning at Phoenix General Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Tucson, Ariz.
He died of pneumonia, said his son, Richard, of Tempe, Ariz.


Gay, Irish and Sad as Marchers Go By
When Anne Maguire woke up yesterday, she feared it would be the saddest St.
Patrick's Day of her life.
As a member of the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, she was banned from marching in the big parade that meant so much to her as a celebration of her heritage, and she knew she would spend the day registering her scorn.
To her, anyone who marched in the parade was "bigoted" and "homophobic." She just hoped there would be no ugly confrontations, no violence.


Eating Well
Unlike the reception scene in "Goodbye, Columbus," hardly any of the 2,000 guests at the Voice of America's 50th birthday party last month were out of control.
No trampling of the less hale to get to the long lines of aluminum tables, suitably draped and buckling with food from 46 countries.
It is customary for employees from each country to which the Voice of America broadcasts to prepare a feast for colleagues on their national day.
This year, to mark half a century of broadcasting, the feast was consolidated.


NORTH KOREA SHIP DELIVERS TO IRAN
A second North Korean ship believed to be carrying Scud missiles or components delivered its cargo to Iran on Friday after United States officials concluded that they had no authority to stop it, Defense Department officials said today.
The Bush Administration threatened last week to board another North Korean freighter suspected of carrying Scud missiles to Iran, only to have the vessel elude Navy warships and successfully deliver its cargo to Bandar Abbas in Iran, just inside the Persian Gulf.
American intelligence officials believe the missiles are ultimately bound for Syria.


Police Expand Inquiry in Mets Case
The investigation into allegations that three members of the Mets raped a woman here last year has been expanded, authorities said today.
"Now we have some new names that have surfaced today," said Lieut.
Scott Bartal, a spokesman for the Port St.
Lucie Police Department and an officer involved in the investigation.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a Federal panel's recommendations to bolster Russia's scientific complex misattributed a comment that temptations were increasing for Russian military scientists to look for jobs abroad, and that the American Government should act immediately and aggressively.
It was made by the panel's chairmen, not by President Bush's science adviser, Dr.
D.
Allan Bromley.


DWG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Corrections
An article in Science Times on March 10 about vitamins misstated the recommended dietary allowance for vitamin E. As the chart with the article noted, it is 30 milligrams; it is not 8 micrograms.


Arson Destroys Amish Barns and Cattle in Pennsylvania


I.B.M. Offers New Help Line
The International Business Machines Corporation will introduce telephone support services today that are intended to provide quick answers for users of the company's most advanced personal computer products: the PS/2 machine and peripherals, and the OS/2 software operating system.
The service, called Helpware, will be based in Atlanta and will provide a nationwide toll-free number from which callers can get information on such topics as learning to use I.B.M.'s computers and software, or how to finance them.


N.F.L. Trims Its List of Candidates for the Two Expansion Teams to Seven Cities
Baltimore, Memphis, St.
Louis, Charlotte, N.C.; Jacksonville, Fla., and Oakland and Sacramento in California survived the cut today as the National Football League owners narrowed the field for the two expansion teams to be named later this year.
The new list will be reduced to five when the owners meet again May 20-21 in Pasadena, Calif.
The final entrants could be named as early as October and begin play as early as the 1994 season.


American Stores to Make Its Vice Chairman President
The American Stores Company, one of the nation's largest supermarket retailers, said yesterday that its vice chairman, Victor L. Lund, would succeed J. L. Scott as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Scott and Mr.
Lund will serve as co-chief executives during a transition period that is expected to be completed by the end of the year.
Mr.
Scott, 62, then plans to retire, but he will remain on the board.


Macy (R.H.) &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Food Notes
For St. Joseph's Day
Tomorrow is the Feast of San Giuseppe, or St.
Joseph, a mid-lenten holiday celebrated with particular panache in Sicily.
Joseph, the husband of Mary and the patron saint of the family, is revered as the protector of the needy, the homeless, orphans and unwed mothers.
These days he's a saint worth encouraging.
And that's not all.
He is also the patron saint of pastry makers, so typical dishes for his day are often fried and sweet.
Sugar-dusted zeppole fritters are perhaps the best known.
Many Italian food shops and bakeries are preparing zeppole and other special foods.
Large, puffy zeppole and sfinci (pronounced SPHIN-gee), puffs filled with cream, are $2.50 each at Grace's marketplace, 1237 Third Avenue (73d Street).
Grace Doria, the co-owner, is also making St.
Joseph's bread filled with onions, raisins, anchovies and olives, at $8 a pound.
Zeppole and sfinci are $1.25 each at Veniero Pasticceria, 342 East 11th Street, at De Robertis Pasticceria, 176 First Avenue (10th Street) and at Alba's, a paradigm of gaudy, gooey excess at 7001 18th Avenue, Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
At La Guli, 29-15 Ditmars Boulevard, Astoria, Queens, they are $1.50 each.
Another typical Sicilian dish for the holiday is the savory pasta con le sarde, made with long tubes of thick pasta dressed with sardines, raisins, capers, pine nuts, fennel and olive oil.
Ideally, the sardines should be fresh, not canned, and the fennel wild.
Fresh sardines, $5.99 a pound and available Thursdays and Fridays, and wild fennel from California, $4.98 a big bunch are at Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (Ninth street).
Prepared pasta con le sarde is $9.50 a pound.
Balducci's also has zeppole and sfinci, $2.25 each.
Tasting Kosher Wines
On Tuesday from 6 to 8 P.M., the International Wine Center, 231 West 29th Street, is holding an informal tasting of more than 30 kosher wines from France, Italy, Israel, California and New York.
The cost is $20.
For reservations: (212) 268-7517.
Open House at Adriana's
Adriana's Bazaar, 2152 Broadway (75th Street), will hold an open house with food and jazz tomorrow from 7 to 11 P.M.
Rochelle Zabarkis, the owner of this unusual shop, which sells herbs, spices and condiments from around the world, said she was having trouble meeting expenses.
So she is giving a party, modeled on Depression rent parties, to drum up support from neighbors and the cooks who depend on what she sells.
The party is free and there is no obligation to contribute. Free Tips and Recipes
This month the Williams-Sonoma stores are offering a free 20-page booklet, "Fresh, Light and Fast," filled with cooking tips and a dozen recipes for reducing the use of fats in cooking.
The booklet is available at Williams-Sonoma stores or by writing to the company at Post Office Box 7456, San Francisco, Calif. 94120.
Helping to Relieve Hunger
The annual Taste of the Nation events organized by Share Our Strength to raise money for hunger-relief programs will be held March 29 to April 5.
More than 4,000 chefs in 100 cities across the United States and in Puerto Rico, Canada and Greece will be preparing dinners, parties, tastings and buffets this year.
Proceeds go to charities, with 70 percent going to organizations in the city in which the event is held, 10 percent to agencies in the state and 20 percent to national and international groups like Oxfam.
American Express is underwriting all expenses.
In New York on March 30, there will be a party on the World Yacht vessel New Yorker at Pier 62, 23d Street and the Hudson River.
The party begins at 7 P.M., and the yacht will take a one-hour sail at 10 P.M.
Tickets are $125 each, with sponsorship categories from $250 to $5,000.
For information: (212) 382-5766.
Benefits are also being held in Harrison, N.Y.; Huntington, L.I.; Hartford, New Haven, Mystic and Westport, Conn.; Wyckoff, Tenafly, Jersey City, Princeton and West Orange, N.J.
For information about the events in these and in other cities: (800) 220-4767.
Touches of Tuscany
Likitsakos Market, 1174 Lexington Avenue (80th Street), has introduced some spectacular new homemade ravioli that suggest the striped marble of Renaissance churches in Tuscany.
Brown and white striped triangular ravioli are filled with a mushroom puree, gold and black triangles are filled with smoked salmon, and ovals banded in pink, black and white contain a lobster and crab combination.
The ravioli are $7.99 a pound.
PASTA IS GOING TO COLLEGE
ABOUT a dozen Italian restaurants will dish up their specialities at a buffet dinner Monday night in the kitchens of the hotel and restaurant school at New York City Technical College, 300 Jay Street (at Tillary Street), Brooklyn.
The benefit event, from 6:30 to 9 P.M. is to raise money for refurbishing the school's dining room.
Among the restaurants whose chefs will be on hand at the buffet are Felidia, Remi, Vivolo and Caffe Bondi in Manhattan, Galileo in Washington and Bacco's in Waterbury, Conn.
Chefs from Italy are also participating.
Tickets are $75 and can be reserved by calling (718) 260-5630.


U.S. Shoe Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Real Estate; Kansas City Considering a New Mall
Despite a nationwide slowdown in the construction of new shopping centers, developers here are moving forward with a plan for a new mall within blocks of Country Club Plaza, a 70-year-old regional shopping center.
The use of the 17-acre site has long been a sensitive issue in Kansas City, partly because of fears that a second commercial center might undermine Country Club Plaza, which is an object of civic pride and a local landmark.
The proposal will come before the City Council for approval of tax-increment financing, which helps to offset development costs.
Money for this type of financing comes largely from the property taxes generated by major new projects.


CLINTON WINS BIG VICTORIES IN 2 MIDWESTERN PRIMARIES; BUSH INCREASES G.O.P. EDGE
In a big stride toward the Democratic nomination, Gov.
Bill Clinton won commanding victories in the Illinois and Michigan primaries today and dealt a serious blow to former Senator Paul E. Tsongas.
The gains of Mr.
Clinton edge him toward the halfway mark in the number of delegates needed to wrap up the nomination.
The losses of Mr.
Tsongas were heightened by his placing a weak third in Michigan, behind both Mr.
Clinton and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California.
Big Leads in Delegates


Stunned by Editor's Death, Paper Draws Threats
Since the execution-style slaying of their former editor in chief last week, staff members of the city's largest Spanish-language daily newspaper have begun to feel they are on the front lines of a war with an unknown enemy.
Death threats began to come into the switchboard at the paper, El Diario-La Prensa, almost immediately after the news of the death of the editor, Manuel de Dios Unanue, hit the streets.


Russia and Ukraine Head for Divorce
Russia and Ukraine, the core of the new commonwealth that replaced the Soviet Union only in December, are veering sharply apart.
Ukraine wants to maintain an alarmingly large army of its own and is refusing to surrender all its nuclear arms to central control.
It is also bent on economic policies that could damage trade with its commonwealth neighbors.
Russia, not timid about asserting its own nationalism, is fomenting separatism in Ukraine's Crimea region and seeking a huge share of existing military resources.


Bush Tells Congress 'No' on Aid to Israel
President Bush told key Congressional leaders that he could not accept their proposal for providing loan guarantees to Israel because it included too many loopholes that would enable Israel to continue building settlements in the occupied territories.
The President said he was ready to grant up to $10 billion in guarantees on the condition that Israel freeze all new settlement construction in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip -- something the Congressional proposal would not immediately mandate.


Bankruptcy Filing By Clio Enterprises
In the latest twist to a saga that has captivated and dismayed Madison Avenue, Clio Enterprises Inc., sponsor of the Clio Awards for advertising excellence, filed yesterday for protection under the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The filing had been expected for several months.
In September, Ruth L. Ratny, editor and publiser of Screen magazine in Chicago, announced that she had obtained rights to the Clio from the owner, Bill Evans.
Since then, Wayne L. Deas, a financial adviser who had been representing Mr.
Evans, had said he was likely to file for bankruptcy in order to seek buyers other than Ms.
Ratny for the firm's assets.


Whites Vote on the Political Future of South Africa


Police Say Woman Made Up Robbery
The manager of a fast-food restaurant in Westbury has been arrested and charged with faking a robbery, the Nassau County police said.
The manager, Flora Petersen, 29 years old, of Westbury, called the police to say she was robbed after she had closed a Taco Bell restaurant early Monday, said Detective Robert Raymond.
She said a man with a gun had approached her as she was walking to her car at 1:20 A.M. and forced her back into the restaurant, Detective Raymond said.


MANY ISRAELIS SEE LOAN AID AS LOST
Although high-level negotiations were still under way in Washington, some senior Israeli officials and newspapers wrote what amounted to obituaries today for the $10 billion in United States loan guarantees that Israel has requested.
This left Israelis pondering the economic, political and diplomatic consequences, both for the country and for the Middle East peace talks, a process that some argued would not be enhanced if Israel felt it could no longer rely on its chief ally.


Going Back to Classics To See How Words Work
Ted Nellen is an iconoclast when it comes to Latin and Greek.
That's "iconoclast," from the Greek "eikon," a figure or image, and "klaein," to break.
As Webster's New World Dictionary defines it, "one who attacks and seeks to destroy widely accepted ideas, beliefs, etc."
Any of Mr.
Nellen's ninth grade students at Murry Bergtraum High School for Business Careers in lower Manhattan could have figured that out.


The Pop Life
Helmet Gets Rich
In the first big record deal since the surprising success of Nirvana, an obscure alternative rock group that vaulted to stardom with the hit album Nevermind (Geffen) in January, the New York-based band Helmet has been signed by Interscope, a West Coast label.
Helmet, which is being lumped into the still-amorphous alternative rock category, is led by the guitarist and singer Page Hamilton, who was in the composer Glenn Branca's rock band and was also a member of Band of Susans.
Helmet, which mixes guitar noise and experimentation with heavy metal overtones, has been one of the more talked-about bands in the industry.
According to the group's lawyer, George Regis, more than a dozen labels had been wooing the band, betting on the continuing success of alternative rock.


A Building by Wright Incites Debate in Tokyo
The building, dilapidated but distinctive, still stands on a quiet back street.
Inside, the signature stone work, lamps and window designs are intact and the original furniture, though battered and worn, remains much as Frank Lloyd Wright left it.
Most remarkable is that this is not a museum.
The Jiyu Gakuen, or the progressive Freedom School, was designed by Wright in 1921 for a token fee as a way of encouraging a new egalitarian spirit in Imperial Japan.
The handsome structure became a poignant symbol of the brief flowering of Western-style liberalism in the prewar era.
Today, Jiyu Gakuen remains a symbol, but of how soaring land values are reshaping Japan's urban landscape and of how little experts say is being done by the Government to preserve the country's modern architectural heritage.
There are concerns that Wright's building, which the school no longer uses for classes, may be razed because the land underneath has grown so valuable.


Kimmins Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 ISRAELIS KILLED IN TEL AVIV ATTACK
A Palestinian brandishing a sword and a kitchen knife went on a stabbing rampage in Jaffa today, killing 2 people and wounding 19 before he was shot to death.
The attack was the latest in a convulsion of Arab-Jewish violence that has racked Israel and the occupied territories in recent weeks as Middle East peace talks have stalled.
The past month has seen a surge of fatal incidents; 8 Israelis and at least 12 Palestinians have been killed.


Blacks in Science Program Shatter Stereotype
On a recent afternoon at the University of Maryland Baltimore County, virtually the only sounds in a classroom came from chalk skipping over a blackboard, scrawling a profusion of mathematical expressions, symbols and formulas.
Many of the 13 students in the class peered up from their notes with preoccupied looks.
But for Lance Hester and Gary Young, electrical engineering majors in a special black scholarship program, the blackboard jumble seemed rather standard fare.


From Rebels to Sonics
TIM GRGURICH, JERRY TARKANIAN's top assistant at Nevada-Las Vegas for 12 years, will move on and become an assistant with the Seattle SuperSonics.
He has had several offers in the past, but remained with the Runnin' Rebels out of loyalty to Tarkanian, a close personal friend.


New Top Management For Hambrecht &amp; Quist
In a management realignment yesterday, Hambrecht &amp; Quist, the San Francisco investment banking firm, named Daniel Case, its executive vice president in charge of investment banking, to be president and co-chief executive.
William R. Hambrecht, who had been president, will become chairman and continue as co-chief executive.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist, which was founded in 1968 by Mr.
Hambrecht and George Quist, who is deceased, was the first investment banking firm to specialize in emerging growth companies.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Bank Ltd., New York, a unit of American Express Co., named James A. Jacobs executive director and head of its New York office.  *
Bausch &amp; Lomb Pharmaceuticals, Tampa, Fla., a unit of Bausch &amp; Lomb, named Thomas M. Riedhammer president.


Adolfo Odnoposoff, Cellist, 75
Adolfo Odnoposoff, a cellist and professor emeritus at the University of North Texas in Denton, died on Friday at the Denton Regional Medical Center.
He was 75 years old and lived in Denton.
He died of heart failure, said his brother-in-law, Ben Huberman.


Theater in Review
Bernie's Bar Mitzvah  24 Karat Club 327 West 44th Street Manhattan
Written and directed by Howard Perloff; costume design, Dot Liadakis; production stage manager, Terry J. Moore.
Presented by Mr.
Perloff.
WITH: Ian Bonds, Carolyn Beauchamp, Benjamin Blum, Barney Cohen, Laura Covello, Tiffany Garfinkle, Bob Garman, S. Rachel Herts, Marjorie F. Orman, Louis Levy and Howard Segal.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Randsworth Trust, a failed British real estate company, misstated the investment lost by the JMB Realty Corporation in Randsworth.
It was $:42 million, or about $70 million.


Private Interests Are Said to Benefit From U.S. Plan for Needy
A significant portion of a $3-billion-a-year Federal program intended to help needy communities is spent in ways that provide them few benefits and sometimes enrich private interests, Congressional investigators say.
The program, run by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, is supposed to build housing, raze slums, create jobs or provide other community benefits, primarily to those with modest incomes.
But the investigators say many of program's projects fail to do so and are offering as examples low-interest loans to a minor-league hockey team in Troy, N.Y., a Saudi sheik in Miami and corporate giants like Sears.
A Congressional subcommittee on Wednesday will discuss how one nonprofit group outside Philadelphia incurred more than $5 million in illegal expenses, including $10,148 for a dinner at a golf club, $3,258for model airplanes and a $345 limousine ride.


First American Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Express Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Clearing House Selects Deutsch
Publishers Clearing House in Port Washington, L.I., yesterday named Deutsch Inc. in New York as its second agency, to handle the much-sought-after creative portion of its estimated $20 million television advertising account.
For the last three years, the creative portion of the account had been divided between Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and an in-house ad staff.
To win the review, Deutsch competed against Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York; Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafelice, Stamford, Conn., and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano, New York.


5 People Hurt in a Brooklyn Restaurant Shooting
In an apparent drug dispute, five people were shot yesterday afternoon inside a Jamaican restaurant in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
Two, including one female employee and one male patron, were critically injured in the shooting at 12:45 P.M.
All five, including three other men who were eating lunch at the one-room restaurant at 209 New Lots Avenue, were taken to Kings County Hospital or Brookdale Hospital for treatment, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.


Irish March, With Protests But No Clash
The Irish marched up Fifth Avenue yesterday in a sea of green and a blare of bagpipes and brass bands, but this year's homage to old Erin was mixed with rancor.
And for the first time in decades the New York City St.
Patrick's Day parade did not include the Mayor.
An hour before the official procession sponsored by the Ancient Order of Hibernians stepped off, several hundred gay and lesbian Irish and their supporters held their own march, protesting the Hibernians' decision to exclude a gay group from the parade.
The demonstrators marched from 59th Street north past the reviewing stand, chanting, shouting, carrying defiant banners and escorted by motorcycle police in riot gear.


Three Bush Officials Admit Writing Overdrafts in House
Three of President Bush's Cabinet officers acknowledged today that they overdrew their accounts at the House bank dozens of times while serving in Congress in the late 1980's and 1990's.
The three Cabinet members -- Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Labor Secretary Lynn Martin, and Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan -- disclosed and explained their overdrafts in separate and nearly simultaneous announcements.
In quick succession, three other former House members who serve in the Cabinet, as well as several others who hold lesser posts in the Administration, declared that their House bank accounts were free of overdrafts.


Belding Heminway reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pittsburgh Transit Strike Makes Commuters Scramble


As Injury List Dwindles, Devils Seek Turnaround
This is not the time of year for a team that wants to contend for the Stanley Cup to lose five of six games, to score one goal in 24 manpower advantages and to lose to the worst of the 22 teams in the National Hockey League.
But that is precisely what the Devils have done.
As a result, a great deal of uncertainty surrounds their future as they look to the last 10 games of the regular season.


When Food Experts Share Recipes, a Little Picking Is Natural
LAST month, eight food experts gathered to discuss the aftermath of the food revolution over a potluck dinner in Manhattan.
Each represented a cadre that had influenced the change in American eating habits.
There were emissaries from the convenience front and healthy-eating advocates; several guests embodied the counterculture's move toward the mainstream; others spoke for the food industry.


Bankruptcy Filing By Clio Enterprises
In the latest twist to a saga that has captivated and dismayed Madison Avenue, Clio Enterprises Inc., sponsor of the Clio Awards for advertising excellence, filed yesterday for protection under the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The filing had been expected for several months.
In September, Ruth L. Ratny, editor and publiser of Screen magazine in Chicago, announced that she had obtained rights to the Clio from the owner, Bill Evans.
Since then, Wayne L. Deas, a financial adviser who had been representing Mr.
Evans, had said he was likely to file for bankruptcy in order to seek buyers other than Ms.
Ratny for the firm's assets.


Clinton in Driver's Seat; Nomination Now Seems to Be His to Lose, But Foes Still Hope He Trips in New York
The double-barreled Midwestern showdown put Bill Clinton in the fast lane toward the Democratic Presidential nomination today and left Paul E. Tsongas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. to squabble over which one could better pick up the pieces if Mr.
Clinton should crash.
Unless he spins out of the race, it will be hard to deny Mr.
Clinton the rest of the delegates he needs, because the proportional system awards large blocks of votes to both winners and runners-up.
It will be all but impossible to overtake him if he can keep putting together broad biracial coalitions like the ones that swept him to victory last week and this, in the Sun Belt and Rust Belt alike.
New York's Democratic primary on April 7 now takes on fresh meaning.
After Mr.
Clinton's triumphs by thumping margins in both Michigan and Illinois, it may offer the last chance for his challengers to stop him.
"It's almost a done deal," said John Marino, the New York Democratic chairman, who often expresses the viewpoint of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The nagging questions about Mr.
Clinton's personal life, most recently his financial affairs and those of his wife, Hillary, probably represent a larger threat to the Arkansas Governor's progress than rival candidates do.
They are trying to convince people that he is not electable, and in the meantime they are staying in the contest in the hope that some new revelation will bring him down.
Hoping for a Stumble
"Every morning Bill Clinton gets out of bed," said a senior figure in the Tsongas campaign, "he faces the possibility of some media disaster unfolding that day. We would be fools to get out at this point. You stay in, you soldier on, you try to remain a constructive alternative, so if . . . "
President Bush held Patrick J. Buchanan to only a quarter of the vote in Illinois and Michigan as the Republican protest continued to fade.
Mr.
Buchanan's purse is almost empty, to judge from his small-scale television campaign in Michigan, and he now plans to cut back his campaign, bypassing most tests to concentrate on the June 2 California primary.
He hopes he can lay the groundwork there for a conservative crusade in 1996.
That approach amounts to a concession that the President is going to be nominated again and clears the way for Mr.
Bush to be more Presidential.
He spent Election Day in Clinton-land, traveling to Bentonville, Ark., to present a medal to Sam Walton, the retailing wizard, and talking about the American dream instead of chasing votes.
Next Friday, the deadline Mr.
Bush has set for Congressional approval of his economic package, will pass, giving him the opportunity to redefine himself as the implacable foe of a do-nothing opposition Congress, a role that won President Harry S. Truman a lot of votes in 1948.
But Mr.
Bush still has plenty of problems.
In Illinois, a state that has gone with the winner in nine of the last 10 Presidential elections, a Chicago Tribune poll last week showed Mr.
Clinton beating him, and Mr.
Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, tying him.
It indicates that only a third of the electorate thinks he can solve the nation's economic problems.
There were also strong rumblings of anti-incumbent feelings in Illinois, and they cannot have cheered the President much.
Senator Alan J. Dixon and Representative Gus Savage were beaten, while Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the hitherto untouchable chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, had to resort to heavy advertising for the first time in his career to pull out a victory.
A lot will change between now and November, of course.
But in swing states like this, Mr.
Bush must find a way to convince people that he is not an economic klutz.
He needs most desperately to find the formula among the blue-collar voters of various Eastern European ethnic groups who for the last five or six elections have backed Republicans for President.
In Michigan, where there are large numbers of such "Reagan Democrats," he has a very long way to go; a Detroit News poll last week found that 94 percent of Democrats, an unheard-of majority, had lost faith in his economic stewardship.
The task may well be beyond Mr.
Bush or any President.
Many of the jobs lost in the recession that has devastated the American automobile industry have probably been lost forever, which is a politically unspeakable truth.
Credibility for Brown
That kind of weakness in an incumbent makes Democratic politicians keen for the hunt.
In normal circumstances, they would be closing ranks around Mr.
Clinton, judging him a big winner after his 10 victories in two weeks.
But they are not; they are worrying about Mr.
Clinton's vulnerability in the general election, a vulnerability that encourages the claims of the also-rans.
For the moment, Mr.
Brown has the better of the argument, in terms of credibility if not delegates, in which he trails Mr.
Tsongas.
The former California Governor's advantage results from his strong second-place finish in Michigan, an economically devastated industrial state where he demonstrated strong appeal to union members and ethnic voters.
It was by far his best showing in a major contested primary.
Mr.
Brown plans to take his low-cost insurgent campaign to all the remaining industrial states, and his fund-raising has improved to the point where he was able, for the first time this year, to run a television commercial in Michigan.
He is building toward the California primary, but he is also talking about putting together a permanent reform movement.
Dismaying for Tsongas
A third-party candidacy cannot be ruled out, in the view of some Democrats who have watched Mr.
Brown turn himself almost overnight into a populist evangelist denouncing big business, free trade, high taxes and the kind of opulently financed campaigns that he once specialized in.
Mr.
Tsongas finished second in Illinois.
Mr.
Brown made little effort here, but Mr.
Tsongas apparently still failed utterly to sell himself to any significant number of blacks or blue-collar whites.
The actual figures in polls of voters leaving the booths today were dismaying for the Tsongas camp.
In Illinois and Michigan, only about 1 black voter in 10 backed Mr.
Tsongas.
Likewise with blue-collar voters; Mr.
Tsongas won only 1 in 10 in Michigan, only 2 in 10 in Illinois.
Granting the former Senator's strength among independents, well-educated technocrats and suburbanites -- all of whom are important in building an eventual majority coalition -- it is hard to see how he can win in November, if nominated, unless he can greatly broaden his appeal.
Eyes Toward New England
But Connecticut, back in Mr.
Tsongas's native New England, is the next primary test, followed by Vermont a week later and New York (plus Wisconsin and Kansas) a week after that.
The former Massachusetts Senator has enough money to carry on that long, aides say, and try to restart his effort by reaching out to less well-off voters.
Ted van Dyk, who has signed on as an adviser to Mr.
Tsongas in the last few days, conceded that a failure in New York would dry up the flow of dollars quickly.
Still, said Mr. van Dyk, a longtime political strategist, "It will take Bill months to get an absolute majority of delegates, and there's at least a 50-50 chance, in my mind, that he'll be blown out of the water before he accomplishes that."
Many members of the Democratic establishment welcome Mr.
Tsongas's determination to persevere, and some welcome Mr.
Brown's searing attacks on Mr.
Clinton.
But Jody Powell, who was President Jimmy Carter's press secretary and helped plan the strategy of his two Presidential races, said the party would be "much better off getting things settled early," so it could turn its attention to President Bush.
Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, himself a candidate for President four years ago, urged party leaders tonight to fall in behind Mr.
Clinton.


Dissolve Bridgeport? No One Embraces the Idea
Until this month, Lee A. Samowitz was little known beyond the Bridgeport district that he represents in the Connecticut General Assembly.
But thanks to a recent legislative proposal that could be characterized as somewhere between radical and off the wall, the 39-year-old Democrat has been cast into the limelight.
Mr.
Samowitz has been a lifelong resident of Bridgeport and lives in the middle-class Black Rock district, but if his proposal were to be enacted, he and Bridgeport's 140,000 other inhabitants would suddenly become residents of the adjacent towns of Trumbull, Fairfield and Stratford.


At Least 6 Die as Blast Destroys Israel's Embassy in Buenos Aires
A powerful explosion, which the Argentine Government described as a terrorist attack, destroyed the Israeli Embassy in downtown Buenos Aires today.
At least 6 people were reported killed and more than 100 others, including 13 children from a nearby school, were wounded.
[ Interior Minister Jose Luis Manzano put the official casualty toll at 6 dead and 135 wounded, Reuters reported from Buenos Aires.
Mr.
Manzano said that an earlier statement by President Carlos Saul Menem that 10 people had been killed was incorrect. ]


Mrazek Says His Checking Was Proper
Seeking to prove that every unhappy Congressman is unhappy in his own way, Representative Bob Mrazek said yesterday that he was never among those who abused their accounts at the House Bank and that he resented suggestions and "unfair leaks" that have lumped him with those who did.
Mr.
Mrazek, who stood at a news conference at the Warwick Hotel in Manhattan in front of a blue Mrazek for Senate placard, said he had no intention of abandoning his campaign.
He alternated between indignation and humor while discussing the impact of the burgeoning House Bank affair on his reputation and his long-shot run for the Senate. 'That Was Not Me'
"There were members of Congress who would write checks, large checks, that they were not able to cover," said Mr.
Mrazek, a Congressman from Huntington, L.I.
"That was not me.


Macy Reports That It Lost $671.6 Million in 2d Quarter
With bankruptcy lurking outside the revolving doors during the holidays, Macy's tried desperately to raise cash by selling its wares at a minuscule profit.
It didn't work, and now the retailer has tallied up the dire results of that last-ditch effort.
Citing the write-offs required when that sales effort failed, R. H. Macy &amp; Company reported yesterday that it lost $671.6 million in its second quarter.
In the period last year, it earned$78 million.


U.N. Demands an Iraqi Plan By March 26 to Scrap Arms
The United Nations has given Iraq until March 26 to come up with a detailed plan for destroying a long list of equipment and buildings used for constructing and repairing its banned ballistic missiles, United Nations officials and Western diplomats said today.
The deadline, which carried at least an implicit threat of the use of force, was given last week to Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, Iraq's special envoy here, by Rolf Ekeus, the Swedish chief of the special commission set up to oversee the elimination of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.


Willcox &amp; Gibbs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Express to Trim European Operations
Underscoring its long-term difficulties in Europe, the Federal Express Corporation has said it will significantly scale back its operations there.
Its plan to halt delivery between countries in Europe starting May 4, a move resulting in a $254 million charge, is the second restructuring by the company in just over a year.
In February 1991, the company drastically cut its operations in Britain, cutting 25 percent of its staff and taking a $121 million charge against earnings.


Treasury Issues Increase in Price
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose and interest rates fell in thin, volatile trading yesterday, despite a brace of strong reports that provided additional evidence of life in the economy.
A report showing that housing starts jumped by 9.6 percent in February, to their highest level since March 1990, was much stronger than analysts had expected and caused traders to push prices down sharply in the moments after the data were released.


Lawson Mardon reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Report Cards on Schools Show Some Improvement
The State Education Commissioner, John Ellis, released the second annual "report cards" on New Jersey schools today, saying that there had been improvements but too few of them to keep the state competitive.
The report cards grade each of New Jersey's 555 public school systems in three major areas: finances, teacher-to-student ratio and student performance on national tests like the Scholastic Aptitude Test.


Capitol Hill Journal
Whether it be a mugging or a gathering of the homeless, if it occurs on the Capitol steps or in the dome's shadow, the event is well on its way to becoming a statement about crime or poverty in America.
The Capitol is a potent national symbol with the facility to enlarge and reshape just about anything that occurs nearby.
And there is much to reflect in Capitol Hill's residential section, 400 square blocks in its broadest definition, in the southeast quadrant of the city.


Dow Up 19.68 on Favorable Economic Data
Stocks closed with strong gains yesterday on the heels of new economic data that gave further evidence of an economic recovery and a manageable inflation rate.
A slight bounce back in the Tokyo market from its steep selloff the previous day also helped lift American shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 19.68 points, to 3,256.04.
Traders said equity gains were underpinned by a firm bond market, which managed to erase its own earlier losses.


Sasser Sitting for Now; That's How It Stands
The mental snapshot from 10 days ago stays with Mackey Sasser.
Sasser, first baseman's glove in hand, irony at his feet, had just taken a throw from Charlie O'Brien in an intrasquad game and put the tag on Todd Hundley.
Sasser, the No. 3 catcher, considers himself to have a stronger arm than O'Brien, the No. 2 catcher.
He considers himself to wield an immeasurably more dangerous bat than Hundley, the current No. 1 catcher.
And so he considered the picture worth a sad laugh because Sasser believes that in the comic mix of catchers, he should have been the last one wearing a first baseman's glove.


CHRONICLE
Why is it that Washington breeds mystery writers?
"Because everyone in Washington sees himself as the hero, and of course, the villain is always the guy behind the tree," said the latest practioner of the genre, MARILYN T. QUAYLE, a lawyer and the wife of the Vice President.


Agreements Don't Bar West Bank Settlements; Everything to Lose
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal defends the West Bank policies of the Likud Government of Israel in "Mideast: Forgotten Realities" (column, Feb. 25) and says there has been a "demonization of Israel in the United States." I think Mr.
Rosenthal is confusing opposition to the policies of the Shamir Government -- which rules by a slim margin -- with hostility to Israel.
Abba Eban, former Foreign Minister of Israel, made this difference clear in a Feb. 24, 1988, Op-Ed article.
He wrote:


For a Hibernian, Relief and Dismay
Brian F. Sullivan is the quiet man of Greenpoint, one of the few remaining Irish-Americans in that mostly Polish, working-class Brooklyn neighborhood.
Homosexuals are "weirdos" in Mr.
Sullivan's book, "an affront" to the Roman Catholic Church and the organization he belongs to, the Ancient Order of Hibernians.
No one was more relieved that gay Irish-Americans were barred from marching in the parade or more certain that they didn't belong in it.
Mr.
Sullivan didn't wear a Kelly-green tam or a "Kiss Me, I'm Irish" T-shirt or even a shamrock corsage yesterday.
For Mr.
Sullivan, who is president of Sixth Division of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, St.
Patrick's Day is a serious, sometimes solemn occasion.
He wore a gray wool suit, a green and orange ceremonial sash and a benevolent expression that grew sour when he contemplated local politicians, whom he labeled "hypocritical jerks, mostly."  'Culmination' of His Year
For Mr.
Sullivan, who grew up poor and is proud of it, the annual St.
Patrick's Day parade is what he calls "the culmination" of his year, a day for demonstrating ethnic pride.
There aren't many other such high points in his life.
As he rather glumly put it: "I don't think we Irish have political clout in this city. Years ago, we did. Then everybody ran to the suburbs."


New Japanese Envoy Seeks to Ease Tensions
The new Japanese Ambassador to the United States says that one of the fictions he wants to dispel when he takes up his duties later this month is that of Japan as a musclebound economic colossus challenging American leadership.
"I don't think most people in Japan feel we are a seven-foot-tall economic giant looking down on the United States," the diplomat, Takakazu Kuriyama, said in a recent interview.
"I don't think we have an image of the United States becoming a second-rate economic power."


METRO DIGEST
KENNEDY AIRPORT: AN OPEN BORDER Taking advantage of bureaucratic paralysis, hundreds of illegal immigrants are entering the country through Kennedy International Airport every week, even after it is determined that they lack the proper documents.
In the last six months, Kennedy, more than any other airport in the country, has been flooded by travelers with forged papers, tampered passports or no passports at all who walk off their planes and ask for political asylum.
They may be illegal, but most of them simply vanish into the immigrant world.
B2.
GOTTI ON TAPE: 'I'M INNOCENTS.' John Gotti told a lawyer in a taped conversation played by the defense that he was not involved in the murder of Paul Castellano, a central charge in his racketeering-murder trial.
"If, if I'm gonna get pinched," he told his lawyer on the tape, "I';ll break their (obscenity). When you're innocent, it's easy enough. I'll win on the merits. But this case, I'm innocent. I'll win it. I ain't worried about it." B3.


Agreements Don't Bar West Bank Settlements; Father of the Revolution
To the Editor:
"The Courage to Make Peace" (editorial, March 10) states that Menachem Begin transformed Israel in two important ways -- by leading Likud to power and by making peace with Egypt.
True enough.
But it's like analyzing George Washington's contribution to America by referring only to his Presidential years.
Menachem Begin led the first Hebrew revolution in 2,000 years.
On Feb. 1, 1944, as commander in chief of the Irgun Zvai Leumi, he issued a proclamation of revolt, promising a "war to the end" with the British mandatory regime in Palestine, "which hands our brothers over to Hitler." The proclamation demanded that the British immediately transfer power in Palestine to a provisional Hebrew government.
"There will be no retreat. Freedom -- or death."


Conflicting Aims in Booming Health Care Lobby Help Stall Congress
Leading members of Congress say they are swamped with conflicting messages from a growing number of lobbyists and lawyers representing all facets of the health-care industry.
Moreover, no one expects those trends to be reversed in the next decade as the Government assumes a bigger role in financing health care.


Book Notes
Oddities in 'Curiosities'
The box of odd objects bought at a Paris auction in Allen Kurzweil's debut novel "A Case of Curiosities" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich) is almost as curious as the case of files the author collected while researching his book.
There is the file labeled "Hands, Amputated," crammed with bizarre stories from current events and historical sources about dismembered limbs, which Mr.
Kurzweil used in building his main character, Claude Page, an 18th-century watchmaker whose finger is lopped off by a surgeon who was only supposed to remove a wart.
That file includes a story about the moving of Des cartes's body from Stockholm to Paris 16 years after his death in 1650 and the French ambassador who cut off and kept the great philosopher's right pointer because he wanted the finger that had written the words "Cogito, ergo sum."


A Writer Who Heralds the Unsung And Ferrets Out the Hard-to-Find
HEMINGWAY may have called Paris a movable feast, but as far as Ed Levine is concerned, New York will do just fine.
He has a roving palate and is ready at the drop of a hat to follow up reports of the perfect bagel on the Upper East Side, the ultimate fried chicken in west Harlem or superb Italian sausage in Corona, Queens.
The other day he was waiting for a slice of pizza at Rizzo's in Astoria.
He was not alone in appreciating the shop's unusual thin-crust Sicilian pie covered with vibrant homemade tomato sauce, creamy top-quality mozzarella and a touch of Romano cheese.
James Marciano, an ice cream distributor from Canarsie, Brooklyn, was buying four slices.


Secretary General Offers Turkey U.N. Support for Quake Relief Operations


Jordan's Takeoff Cancels Nets' Flight of Fancy
The jump shot went to the bottom of the net with 9 minutes 5 seconds left in the fourth quarter.
Drazen Petrovic pumped a fist and glanced at the scoreboard, which revealed the rather startling news that the crippled New Jersey Nets were leading the Chicago Bulls, 74-65.
It was the old college try by the Nets, who played without Derrick Coleman and Sam Bowie and only wished that this game had been 40 minutes long.
In the final 9:05, they were outscored, 13-9, by Michael Jordan and 25-5 by the Bulls on the way to a 90-79 defeat at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Nassau's Mortgage Crunch; Backlog in Record Keeping Compounds Fiscal Problems
Millions of dollars in mortgage taxes and recording fees are stashed in envelopes in the Nassau County Clerk's office, rather than on deposit in banks, because layoffs have created a three-month backlog in the recording of deeds and mortgages.
Coming at a time of fiscal crisis that has forced widespread cutbacks in Nassau County government, the unusual backlog has deprived local governments of desperately needed revenue from mortgage taxes.


Region's United Ways Review Spending Practices
Already dealing with an erosion of confidence following disclosures of extravagance at the national level, the United Way organization for the New York region is being forced to re-examine how it compensates its executives and distributes donations among its chapters.
The United Ways of Tri-State, a partnership of 35 United Way affiliates in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, has been buffeted in recent weeks by a controversy over a $3.3 million lump-sum pension payment to its former president, the threatened defection of one of the chapters and a call by the current president for a review of executive salaries.


Drug Treatment Doesn't Reduce Homelessness
To the Editor:
"Addiction in the Homeless Shelters" (editorial, Feb. 20) highlights the need to expand housing programs to include other social services.
It is disturbing, however, that in response to the Cuomo Commission's report of high levels of substance abuse in the shelter system, you suggest more drug treatment "might efficiently reduce homelessness." Such a linear notion implies that substance abuse can cause chronic homelessness, rather than viewing substance abuse as a manifestation of the extreme powerlessness of the poor and socially disenfranchised.
As an intern at a shelter in East Harlem, I have seen that for substance abusers, the negatives are often far outweighed by the positives of drug and alcohol use.
Rewards, such as pleasure, stress reduction and linkage to social networks are powerful in a situation of little personal control, impoverishment and often danger.
Coupled to such psychosocial rewards is a context where drugs have become easily available and frighteningly affordable.
In Harlem the standard cost of getting high on crack is $3.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Brown's Supporters: a Diverse Group
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California finished a strong second in the Michigan Democratic primary today because he scored well with a diverse group of voters: blue-collar workers, people with postgraduate degrees and those whose primary interest was the environment.
But from the surveys of voters leaving the polling places, it was difficult to discern a dominant pattern to the Brown vote, and his relative success in Michigan may have been due more to his advertising on television for the first time than to his personality or any particular position he took on issues.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Larry Nance of the Cleveland Cavaliers $2,500 for flagrantly elbowing Dikembe Mutumbo of Denver in a game on March 15.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Activated Walter Davis, guard, from the injured list.
Signed Steve Scheffler, forward, and placed him on the injured list.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Named Tim Grgurich assistant coach.
Football National Football League  NFL -- Fined the Buffalo Bills $5,000 because Thurman Thomas failed to show up at a media session prior to the Super Bowl.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed James Saxon, fullback, and Doug Wellsandt, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Al Toon, wide receiver, to a series of three one-year contracts.
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Dave Johnson, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Optioned John DeSilva, pitcher, and Rico Brogna, first baseman, to Toledo of the International League.
Optioned Rudy Pemberton, outfielder, to London of the Eastern League.
Sent Steve Ontiveros, pitcher, and Steve Carter, outfielder, to their minor league camp for reassignment.


Blue Jays Welcome Veteran Free Agents
Some people view Jack Morris and Dave Winfield as the missing links, but those people apparently aren't members of the Toronto Blue Jays.
The Blue Jays, sensitive to the suggestion that they need outside help to reach the heretofore unattainable, readily welcome the addition of the two veteran free agents.
Just don't suggest that they have lacked anything or anybody in their effort to get to the World Series.


New York Should Have Only One Primary Day
To the Editor:
In April, registered New York State voters who are affiliated with a political party will be asked to vote in the Presidential primary.
In September the same voters will have the opportunity to go to the polls again to vote for nominees for Congress and the State Legislature.
The State Legislature could help municipalities save significant dollars by scheduling only one primary in Presidential election years, instead of two.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about Braun A.G. of Germany referred incorrectly to the company's profit outlook for this year.
Company executives say they expect worldwide profits to rise substantially in 1992.
The article also misstated Braun's 1991 profit.
It was $145.3 million.


United Way Stops Paying Salary of Ousted Leader
The United Way of America announced today that it was no longer paying the $390,000 salary of its former president, William Aramony, who resigned under pressure last month.
The announcement, by the group's interim president, Kenneth W. Dam, came more than a week after the organization revealed that Mr.
Aramony was still receiving a salary while the details of his severance package were being worked out.


Sports of The Times; The Coaches Make Hoops So Special
THE players come and the players go, but the same coaches are with us from decade to decade.
Striding the sidelines like so many Captain Ahabs, these imperfect authority figures make college basketball so special because you can actually see what they do.
No college basketball coach would dare echo Casey Stengel of the 1949 Yankees and say, "I never coulda done it without my players," but they do outlast their players, at least most of them.
As the best teams in the country prepare for the national tournaments, it will be Dawn Staley of Virginia and Alonzo Mourning of Georgetown and all their colleagues performing on the court.
But next year Staley will be gone, and so will Mourning, while Pat Head Summitt of Tennessee, with three national titles already, may still be prowling the bench area with leonine command, and Bobby Knight of Indiana, with his three championships and counting, will probably still look ready to explode with rage.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Beyond Beer and Sun Oil: The Beach-Blanket Bazaar
Once, the makers of suntan lotions and beer pretty much had spring break to themselves.
Now they are practically being crowded off the beach by a lengthening list of mainstream marketers that find frolicking college students a receptive audience for pitches about cars, movies, fragrances, even shampoo.
The trend, which began about a decade ago, has been accelerating, as a glance at the names involved in spring break 1992 would attest.
Among them: Chanel and Jovan, for fragrances; Chevrolet, for its Geo line; Procter &amp; Gamble, for Pringles snack chips and Prell shampoo, and Columbia Pictures, for various films due later this year.


Books of The Times; For President Bush, A War of One's Own
George Bush's War
By Jean Edward Smith
325 pages. Henry Holt. $24.95.  Mr. Bush's War
Adventures in the  Politics of Illusion
By Stephen R. Graubard
208 pages. Hill &amp; Wang. $20.


Theater in Review
First Is Supper  American Jewish Theater 307 West 26th Street Manhattan
By Shelley Berman; directed by Andre Ernotte; set by James Wolk; costumes by Muriel Stockdale; lighting by Howard Werner; sound by Bruce Ellman; production stage manager, David Horton Black; assistant lighting designer, Laura Manteuffel; associate artistic director, Lonny Price.
Presented by the American Jewish Theater, Stanley Brechner, artistic director.
WITH: Barbara Andres, Blaze Autumn Berdahl, Donald Christopher, Louis Falk, Nile Lanning, Patricia Mauceri, Marilyn Salinger and Mark Zimmerman.


Dome Turf Cited
The Pontiac Silverdome's artificial turf was in "dangerous and defective condition" and caused the injury that left MIKE UTLEY paralyzed from the chest down, a lawyer for the Detroit Lions offensive lineman said.
KENNETH SILVER, a Bloomfield Hills, Mich., lawyer, made the allegation in a March 13 letter to a lawyer representing the Pontiac Stadium Building Authority.


Number of Cellular Users Is Up 40%, Industry Reports
Despite a recession that has hit many of its affluent and middle-class customers, the cellular telephone industry continued to post record gains in the number of subscribers and annual revenue, the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, its major trade group, said yesterday.
By the end of 1991, cellular subscribers totaled 7.56 million, up more than 40 percent from 5.28 million at the end of 1990, according to the group's semiannual survey.
Revenue in 1991 totaled $5.71 billion, up about 25 percent from $4.55 billion in 1991.


Tribute to a Composer
A benefit tribute to Earl Robinson, who composed songs like "Joe Hill," "Ballad for Americans" and "The House I Live In," is to be held Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets.
The performers are to include Pete Seeger, Josh White Jr., Richie Havens and the Hudson Chamber Symphony Chorus.
There will also be video excerpts from a forthcoming documentary, "Earl Robinson: Ballad of an American," by Bette Jean Bullert, a Seattle film maker.
Mr.
Robinson was born in Seattle and died there in an automobile accident in July 1991 at the age of 81.
Proceeds from the concert are to benefit the film.
Tickets are $12 and are available at the Village Gate box office, Tuesdays through Fridays after 1 P.M.


Norman Out of Nestle
GREG NORMAN tested his ailing right knee in a brief practice session yesterday and promptly withdrew from the $1 million Nestle Invitational, which will be played this week in Orlando, Fla.
Norman is recovering from arthoscopic surgery on the knee. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; Illinois Senator Is Defeated by County Politician
A politician little known outside Cook County rode a wave of anti-incumbency sentiment Tuesday to an upset victory over Senator Alan J. Dixon in the Democratic primary and a chance to become the first black woman to serve in the United States Senate.
With little money and few endorsements, Carol Moseley Braun, the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, took the nomination, winning support from blacks, women and progressives as Senator Dixon and a third candidate, Alfred Hofeld, a personal injury lawyer, split the remaining vote.


The Ultimate Portable-Phone Plan
An ambitious proposal by Motorola Inc. for a global cellular telephone network recently cleared its first big regulatory hurdle.
But the company's plan, which entails building the world's most complex satellite system, continues to engender both awe and skepticism in the telecommunications industry.
Awe, because only a company of Motorola's standing in communications and electronics would hazard so vast a project, a constellation of 77 satellites arranged in an orbital scheme of Copernican complexity.
Skepticism, because even Motorola might not solve the daunting financial and technical problems of building an airborne A.T.&amp; T. and then finding customers for it.


MEXICO'S CAPITAL IS FELLED BY SMOG
With a gray-brown blanket of smog over this city and air-quality readings approaching new lows, the Government closed the schools today, ordered industries to cut their operations sharply and banned almost half of all cars from the streets.
Many of the 16 million residents of this huge metropolis merely shrugged.


Tradition of Inequity; States Are Urged to Show Less Favoritism To University Systems' Flagship Campuses
A series of lawsuits and court decisions charging discrimination have put pressure on states to distribute more fairly the money they give to various campuses in state university systems.
The equitable financing issue, now being contested in four states, is steeped in both tradition and bias.
In most states, legislatures for decades have given more money to one university than others in the same system, arguing that the state needs a showcase institution of higher education.
But civil rights groups and individuals who have brought lawsuits in Mississippi, Texas, Alabama and, three weeks ago, in New York assert that these states' allocations for public university systems are rooted in racial and ethnic discrimination.


Review/Theater; Close, Hackman and Dreyfuss In 'Death and the Maiden'
In "Death and the Maiden," the new play at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, the Chilean writer Ariel Dorfman tells the story of a Latin American woman, Paulina Salas, who is thrown together by chance with a man, Dr.
Miranda, whom she believes to be the police-state thug who repeatedly raped and tortured her 15 years earlier.
Paulina ties up and gags Dr.
Miranda in her living room, threatens him with a gun, then puts him on "trial" for his presumed crimes, not the least of which was pumping electric current through her body to the accompaniment of the Schubert quartet that gives Mr.
Dorfman's play its double-barreled title.
Given this tale -- one born of the author's own experiences as a witness to the horrors of the Pinochet dictatorship in Chile -- it is no small feat that the director Mike Nichols has managed to transform "Death and the Maiden" into a fey domestic comedy.
But what kind of feat, exactly?
History should record that Mr.
Nichols has given Broadway its first escapist entertainment about political torture.
He has also allowed three terrific actors, welcome recruits to the stage, to practice artistic escapism of their own.
Glenn Close (Paulina), Gene Hackman (Dr. Miranda) and Richard Dreyfuss (as Paulina's husband, Gerardo) all display their most charming star personae in lieu of acting, as if they were running for public office instead of animating characters locked in a harrowing struggle for survival.


A Dim, Intimate Venue for Jesters
NO sunlight enters the new Caroline's Comedy Club, which opened March 2 in the basement of 1626 Broadway (at 50th Street) in Manhattan.
It is always night in the 10,000-square-foot space.
The club, now in its third location, was designed by Paul Haigh, the architect who designed the facade and public rooms of the Royalton Hotel in Manhattan, and his wife, Barbara, an interior designer.
Caroline Hirsch, the owner of the club, wanted an intimate nightclub lounge.


Walton: Analyst For the 90's?
A storied name from March Madnesses past will be a familiar voice for CBS today when Bill Walton, of U.C.L.A.'s 1972 and 1973 championship teams, teams up with Sean McDonough to call the Georgetown-South Florida game at 2:45 P.M. (Eastern time) and the L.S.U.-B.Y.U. game at 8:10 P.M. from Boise, Idaho.
Walton and McDonough will also call the day's other first-round games, Florida State-Montana and Indiana-Eastern Illinois, which aren't the primary games that the network will broadcast in the New York market, plus Saturday's two second-round games.


CHINA WILL KEEP TRADE PRIVILEGES
The Senate failed today to override President Bush's veto of legislation that would have required China to release political prisoners, curb arms exports and end import restrictions if it wanted to keep its favored access to the United States market.
The Senate vote was 60 to 38, or 7 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to override the veto.
The vote makes it unlikely that restrictions will be imposed on imports from China this year and possibly for years to come.


Getting Ready for Round One


Polish Government Completes a Budget Approved by I.M.F.
Struggling to restore its credibility among Western financial institutions, Poland's Government put the finishing touches today on a budget that proposes sharp cuts in social spending and education.
Finance Minister Andrzej Olechowski announced on Tuesday in Washington that the budget had received tentative approval from the International Monetary Fund.
President Lech Walesa and senior Government ministers met today for a final review before the budget goes to Parliament next week for what is expected to be a stormy debate that will test the shaky coalition Government of Prime Minister Jan Olszewski.


Closing In on Myanmar's Murderers
At last, the world has lost patience with Myanmar's murderous State Law and Order Restoration Council, known by the sinister-sounding acronym Slorc.
By heeding urgent pleas from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and Bangladesh's Prime Minister to ratchet up the diplomatic pressure, President Bush could help recover the human rights of a badly abused people.
Action is proceeding on two fronts.
The U.N. plans to dispatch a mission to Myanmar, formerly Burma, next month to address the causes of the vast refugee tide now swamping its neighbor Bangladesh.
And the Foreign Relations Committee demands tough new policy measures as a condition of Senate confirmation of Parker Borg as ambassador to Myanmar.


64 Teams Start Coast-to-Coast Quest for a Spot in Minneapolis
From one end of the continent to the other, college basketball teams have set out for the national collegiate tournament that will begin today at four first-round sites.
They leave behind the security of cozy gymnasiums or giant arenas, the seniors among them walking away from emotional ceremonies that are already clippings in scrapbooks and videotapes on shelves.


Home Video
'Fievel Goes West'
Everybody in the video business sees better days ahead for Fievel Mousekewitz.


Direct-Response Firm in a Shift
Fox MMJM Direct, a direct-response agency affiliated with the Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell advertising agency in New York, has recast itself and renamed itself Fox Pavlika &amp; Partners.
The agency will continue to handle direct marketing for Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell, but will now serve other agencies as well.
Neil S. Fox continues as president and chief executive.
Holly Pavlika, formerly vice president and creative director, has been named executive vice president and creative director.


Florio to Veto School Bill After Elections
Gov.
Jim Florio thumbed his nose at the Republican legislative majority today by informing its leaders that he would allow school budget elections to go ahead as scheduled on April 7 and a day later would veto their bill to change the date to April 28.
The Governor's parliamentary maneuver appears to render the new Republican majority powerless, at least for the moment, to win the time to revise the school aid formula, which the Republicans say lavishes more money on urban districts than they can spend effectively.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about writers who herald relatively unknown restaurants misidentified the publisher of the new edition of "Roadfood," by Jane and Michael Stern.
It is HarperCollins.


In Brooklyn, the General Store Recycled
NED GEESLIN and Stefan Doering are liberated young men.
They are vegetarians, they write only on recycled paper, and they allow their wives to help support the two households.
But the two men are not idle.
Last October, they opened Earth General, a store at 72 Seventh Avenue (Lincoln Place) in Park Slope, Brooklyn, selling 2,500 environmentally sensitive products that range from clothing to light bulbs to cat litter.


Stanford Hid No Data From Government
To the Editor:
In "Crown Jewels at Risk" (editorial, Feb. 9), you alert readers to a threat to America's scientific future.
You describe as "outrageous" claims by Federal auditors who propose to renege on 10 years of agreements between the Government and Stanford University, a response to charges that Stanford used Government funds to defray the cost of luxuries such as yachts and flowers.
As you point out, the cost of such items is comparatively minuscule, and Stanford repaid them more than a year ago.
They are not a basis for trying to reclaim hundreds of millions of dollars used to create "the foundation of America's technological edge."


ISRAEL SHIFTS WAY OF PICKING PREMIER
Parliament voted today to approve what some Israeli experts view as a historic change in the country's electoral system by passing a law providing for direct election of the Prime Minister.
The change would take effect in elections that are to be held in 1996, and will not be in place for national elections scheduled for June 23.


Blocks Seen to Trade Pact With Canada and Mexico
The Bush Administration is almost certain not to seek Congressional approval of a free-trade agreement with Mexico and Canada this year, although it hopes to conclude talks on a pact in the coming months, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials also said that it seemed increasingly unlikely that there would be a successful conclusion to global trade talks in Geneva this year.
Because the United States and the European Community have been unable to resolve their disagreements over agriculture, many countries have stopped negotiating on other issues in the world talks, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said.


U.S. Issues Flat in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in light, listless trading yesterday.
Bond prices fell slightly early in the session, but recovered after a report on the economy compiled by regional Federal Reserve banks was released.


SOUTH AFRICAN WHITES RATIFY DE KLERK'S MOVE TO NEGOTIATE WITH BLACKS ON A NEW ORDER
South Africa's whites gave President F. W. de Klerk a stunning victory in Tuesday's referendum, approving his moves to negotiate an end to white-minority rule by a margin of more than 2 to 1, according to results announced today.
Of the 2.8 million whites who cast ballots, slightly more than 1.9 million -- 68.7 percent -- voted to give Mr. de Klerk the mandate he had sought.
Only whites were allowed to take part.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common
*
Buckle Inc. has filed for 1.7 million common shares to be offered through William Blair &amp; Company and Edward D. Jones &amp; Company at a price of $15 to $17 a share.
The Kearney, Neb., company sells casual apparel for young people through 86 stores in 12 states.
*
Simpson Industries of Bingham Farms, Mich., has filed for 1.8 million shares of common to be offered through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette and Paine Webber Inc.
Ratings
*
Delta Air Lines has received BBB+ ratings for $100 million of 8.5 percent notes, due 2002, from Standard &amp; Poor's, as well as for $200 million of 9.25 percent debenture, due 2022.
The rating service said Delta, the nation's third-largest carrier, benefited from a "solid competitive position, modern fleet, positive labor relations and a good service reputation."
*
N.J.
Transportation Trust Fund Authority won an AA rating for $220.7 million in transportation system bonds, 1992 series A, from Standard &amp; Poor's, which also affirmed the authority's AA rating on $220.7 million transportation bonds of the series A 1986 issue
*
Federal Express Corp. faces a review of its senior debt rating of Baa-3 for possible downgrading by Moody's Investors Service, along wiith some of the delivery company's other ratings.
Moody's said it had concerns about the recent restructuring of the European operations of the company, which has its headquarters in Memphis.


Phone Fear
Two weeks ago, I received the strangest call.
I was sitting in my apartment when the phone rang and a woman unknown to me began shouting into the receiver.
She told me that she was fed up with my hang-up phone calls and that if I didn't desist she was going to do something about it.
Needless to say, I was taken aback.
But I was also irritated and suggested she was out of her mind.
"Oh, am I?" she said.
"You've hung up on me six times. Your phone number's on my Caller ID. I'm looking at it right now."


Some B-1 Bombers Ordered Grounded Because of Cracks
Fourteen of the nation's 97 B-1B bombers have been grounded because of tiny cracks in their landing gears, and the number may rise because one in three bombers has not yet been inspected for the problem.
Of 65 B-1B's inspected Tuesday at the four Air Force bases where the bombers are stationed, 63 were found to have the cracks, said Capt.
Barbara Claypool, a spokeswoman here at headquarters of the Strategic Air Command.
She said that if repairs were required the cost would be "minor."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SOUTH AFRICAN WHITES BACK TALKS


Coke's Chief Paid a Million Shares in '91
If Roberto C. Goizueta wants to buy the world a Coke these days, he certainly has the means.
As the chairman and chief executive of the Coca-Cola Company, Mr.
Goizueta received an enviably lavish compensation package last year.
The centerpiece was a million shares of restricted stock, which, as of yesterday's close on the New York Stock Exchange, had a value of $81 million.


Regional Bank Rates
Following are average annual effective yields, in percent, on money-market accounts and C.D.'s offered on March 18,1992 by the 10 largest banks and savings institutions in each of the 10 largest metropolitan areas.
New York
3.58
3.65
Los Angeles
3.70
3.91
Chicago
3.65
4.00
San Francisco
3.65
3.91
Philadelphia
3.73
3.89
Detroit
3.71
3.93
Boston
3.70
3.98
Houston
3.62
3.87
Dallas
3.57
3.83
Washington
3.71
4.05
Bank Rate Monitor Index*
3.66
3.90
*Annual effective yields offered by 100 large institutions in the 10 largest U.S. markets. (Source: Bank Rate Monitor, N. Palm Beach, 33408)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Woman in the News; Storming Senate 'Club': Carol Elizabeth Moseley Braun
Five months ago, Carol Moseley Braun was an obscure Cook County officeholder watching, like women across the country, the divisive Senate hearings over the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the United States Supreme Court.
Like many other angry women, she was disgusted by what seemed to her an elitist, white men's club.
"Women were saying, 'Where are the women?' " Ms.
Braun said in an interview today.
"Minorities said, 'Where are the minorities?' Workers said, 'Who are these millionaires? These aren't regular Joes.' "


For Geese, Flying South May Be a Thing of the Past


Vote Sought On Gasoline In California
A group of oil companies that oppose California's strict new requirements on gasoline moved yesterday to block the rules with a statewide referendum.
The move, prompted in part by concern that similar rules would be introduced elsewhere in the nation, would apparently be the first electoral test of whether people think that changes made in gasoline to reduce air pollution are worth the higher price.
The group plans to ask the California Legislature to put a measure on the ballot that would require another analysis of benefits and costs before proceeding with the rules, which the California Air Resources Board recently approved and are to take effect in 1996.
The referendum would be phrased broadly to cover all environmental rules, said a spokesman for Texaco, one company involved.
The spokesman, David J. Dickson, said the goal was to address "structural problems" in the California economy, which he said was being hurt by high costs for environmental compliance.
Conspicuously Absent
ARCO, California's biggest gasoline marketer, was conspicuously absent.
ARCO has voluntarily reformulated some of its gasoline and supported the Air Resources Board in its plans to enforce stricter rules.


Market Place; A Surprise Belies Chambers's Surge
Wall Street loves growth, and until yesterday it appeared that the Chambers Development Company was providing it.
Then Chambers changed its accounting policies and said profits were far below what it had previously reported, and its stock price promptly fell more than 60 percent.
The company's class A shares went from $30.25 each at Tuesday's close to a low of $8.25 yesterday, before they rebounded to close at $11.25.
Trading volume reached 16.6 million shares, or about a quarter of the total on the American Stock Exchange.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Tired but Upbeat, Tsongas Shrugs Off Midwest Losses
He spoke the words of a winner, of "message" and "electability," and he called himself an "agent of change." But as Paul E. Tsongas endured television interview after interview in a hotel suite here on Tuesday night, his face told a different story.
Even hot tea couldn't keep him from fading as reporters battered him with questions about whether he would stay in the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination after finishing poorly in the Illinois and Michigan primaries.
On the verge of nodding off, Mr.
Tsongas warned network producers in the room that he had to go to bed soon.
"You'd better get me while I'm awake," he said.


Slaying of a Restaurant Owner Is Tied to Crime Family Warfare
The body of a man who the police said was a member of the Bonanno crime family was found in the trunk of a stolen car yesterday, and officials were investigating whether the shooting was tied to a struggle for control of the Colombo crime family.
The man, Sebastiano (Sam) DiFalco, 47 years old, of 161-51 85th Street, in the Howard Beach section of Queens, was the owner of Giannini's Restaurant, at 60-12 Eliot Avenue, in Maspeth, Queens, which the police said is frequented by members of the Bonnano family.


Hansen's 29 Lead A Romp by Rutgers
In the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's basketball championship tonight, Tanya Hansen of Rutgers got her birthday present and her coach, Theresa Grentz, reached a milestone.
As a result, the 1,435 spectators who cheered wildly as Rutgers whipped Southern Mississippi, 93-63, in a Mideast Regional game at the Louis Brown Athletic Center, will get just what they had been chanting for throughout most of the second half: "Tenn-e-ssee, Tenn-e-ssee."


EXECUTIVES
*
American International Group Entertainment Inc., Boston, a unit of American International Group Inc. that handles property and liability risks for the entertainment industry, named Robert R. Brace president. *
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co., New York, a unit of Bear Stearns Companies, hired Robert Andrew Baer Jr. as a senior managing director to be co-head of its financial institutions group.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Black 47 Lone Star Roadhouse


METRO DIGEST
THE F.A.A. GETS TOUGH
The Federal Aviation Administration is threatening to block plans to build mass-transit links to the region's three main airports unless the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey abandons efforts to strengthen jet-noise restrictions at the airports.
For months, the F.A.A. has been trying to discourage the Port Authority from taking a tougher stand on noise at the airports than the Federal agency demands, but it has made little headway.
In linking the mass transit plan to the noise-control dispute, the F.A.A. is hoping to bolster its position.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY TAKING ON GRAVANO?


Edge on the Power Plays Just Keeps Islanders Even
The Rangers were taking turns jabbing their sticks into the head and shoulders of Islander center Ray Ferraro.
John Vanbiesbrouck knocked him in the helmet.
Joe Cirella bonked him in the side.
Brian Leetch zapped him in the back.
The Rangers were killing another penalty, one of seven Islander manpower advantages on the long night.
They were shoving Ferraro away from the crease, away from a chance to tip in a power-play goal.


Despite Frantic Appeals, Helmsley Gets Four Years
An all-out effort to keep Leona M. Helmsley out of jail, with platoons of lawyers filing appeals and public relations people trying to get out her side of the story, apparently ended in failure yesterday when a Federal judge ordered her to serve a four-year prison sentence for tax fraud.


Giants Sign Amsler
GREG AMSLER, a former all-New Jersey running back at Seton Hall Prep who went on to Tennessee and then to the Phoenix Cardinals, is on his way home.
He was signed by the Giants as a Plan B free agent.
Amsler, the Cardinals' eighth draft pick last year, hurt his ankle during training camp and finished the seaason on the practice squad. (AP)


New Video Releases
Herdsmen of the Sun
1988. Interama. $59.95. 52 minutes. French with English subtitles. No rating.


Return to Lotus For a Marketer
When Frank A. Ingari left the Lotus Development Corporation in 1990, he was not pleased with the software company's management structure, which was in turmoil.
Yesterday, Mr.
Ingari surprised industry analysts by returning to Lotus as vice president of marketing.
In his new position, Mr.
Ingari is responsible for the marketing of Lotus's products, which include spreadsheet, graphics, word-processing and communications software.
He will also direct the company's corporate communications operation.
Mr.
Ingari will report to Robert Weiler, senior vice president of Lotus's North American business group.


Hewlett and Convex In $18 Million Accord
The Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it would buy 5 percent of the Convex Computer Corporation for about $18 million and that the companies would exchange technologies.
As part of the arrangement, Convex will use Hewlett's chips in a line of supercomputers being developed.
Convex will also adopt Hewlett's precision architecture RISC technology, a process that speeds computation by relegating more tasks to software.
Convex will use Hewlett's chips in machines based on massively parallel processing, an approach to supercomputing that gangs hundreds or thousands of microprocessors together to solve complex problems.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; CLINTON STRATEGY TO DEFUSE RUMORS
The Clinton campaign, concerned that questions about the candidate's character could be the last remaining hurdle to his nomination, is taking a number of steps to try to defuse the issue before the April 7 New York primary.
Throughout the campaign, the Arkansas Governor's aides have assembled notebooks full of background information on competitors like Paul E. Tsongas, Bob Kerrey, Edmund G. Brown Jr. and President Bush.
Now, they are trying to face down their most critical enemy: rumors about Bill Clinton himself.


Inquiry of Mets Winds Down
A police official said today that the Port St.
Lucie Police Department hoped to complete by late next week their investigation into a woman's allegation that she was raped by three New York Mets last March.
"If everything goes as planned and our investigators are complete with what they need to do, we hope to be able to go to the state attorney next week," Lieut.
Scott Bartal told reporters during a brief news conference in front of the Police Department headquarters.


Leona Helmsley Is Ordered to Serve 4 Years


After a Day's Work, Johnson Gets Benefits
There is little about playing third base or shortstop that Howard Johnson could equate with his new position in center field.
But Mets Manager Jeff Torborg figures Johnson should be able to find a use for the explosive jumps he has used to steal 105 bases in the past three seasons.
Last Friday, Torborg huddled with Johnson to discuss the importance of going after balls in the outfield with the same sort of instinctive move that he used on the basepaths.


Fitch and Nets Make Do Despite Injuries
Sam Bowie could be out a week or more with a sore leg.
Derrick Coleman is day to day with a sore ankle.
Kenny Anderson is wait and see with a groin injury.
But for Nets Coach Bill Fitch, it's a can't-wait situation.
With exactly one month left in the regular season and the Nets in playoff contention for the first time since 1986, Fitch must focus on who he has.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut; Clinton Taking the Campaign to Tsongas Turf: Connecticut Is Looming as Vital Battleground
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, fresh from decisive victories Tuesday in Illinois and Michigan, laid the groundwork today for his campaign in Connecticut, the backyard of Paul E. Tsongas, which is reeling from the effects of the depressed economy.
Mr.
Tsongas, badly battered by a second-place finish in Illinois and a third-place effort in Michigan, raised the stakes for himself today.
The former Massachusetts Senator proclaimed at a news conference in Hartford that Connecticut was now a "must win" state for him.


Panel Revises Cause of Air Accident That Killed 9
The National Transportation Safety Board today revised its findings about why the cargo door of a United Airlines Boeing 747 ripped open in flight near Hawaii in 1989, sweeping nine passengers to their deaths.
The board no longer contends that the door was improperly latched before takeoff because of damaged locks that should have been detected by inspectors.
It concluded instead that a faulty switch or wiring in the door's electrical control system moved the door's latches back open after the door was properly locked.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption yesterday about a backlog in the Nassau County Clerk's office rendered the name of the County Clerk incorrectly.
He is Harold W. McConnell.


Biggest Maker of Breast Implants Is Said to Be Abandoning Market
After months of criticism, the leading maker of silicone gel breast implants, the Dow Corning Corporation, has decided to bow out of the implant business, Government officials said today.
The company had no comment but scheduled a news conference for 9 A.M.
Thursday in Washington.


A Step Forward for Meulens, but Pitchers Still Losing Ground
Although the Yankees apparently settled their shortstop problems by giving the job to Mike Gallego and releasing the moody Alvaro Espinoza, their problems in pitching and at third base are still unsettled.
Even though Hensley Meulens hit a grand-slam homer today and also made a neat diving stab at third while the Yankees were losing to the Expos, 10-9, at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, neither one of the pressing problems on the mound or at third seems ready to disappear very soon.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Pledges to Go On, but at Quiet Pace
In the wake of a two-state thrashing at the hands of President Bush, his conservative challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan today all but conceded the nomination but said he would continue his insurgent campaign, though at a slower, and quieter, pace.
"He appears to be headed for the nomination, and only celestial intervention could interrupt that process," Mr.
Buchanan said of the President at a news conference at Dulles International Airport near here upon his return from Michigan, where he was soundly beaten in the primary by Mr.
Bush.


House Looks Beyond Bank Scandal
Bruised by the House bank scandal, the Democratic leadership is trying to regain its footing by speeding action on several pieces of legislation and by creating a new management to change the way the institution is run.
Democratic strategists expressed relief -- mixed with glee -- that at least three members of the Bush Cabinet acknowledged that they had overdrawn their accounts when they served in the House.


Celebration of a Gift
Seventy years ago, 12-year-old Judith Kaplan stood before the congregation of her father's synagogue in Manhattan and made history.
As she read from the Hebrew Scriptures on that day, she became the first bat mitzvah, a woman coming of age, as Jewish men had done on their
bar
mitzvahs since the Middle Ages.
"It all passed very peacefully," Judith Kaplan, now Judith Kaplan Eisenstein, recalled the other day.
"No thunder sounded. No lightning struck."


President's Plan Seeks to Create a Market for Cars That Pollute
Pressing its drive to cut the cost of complying with Government regulation, the Bush Administration today announced a series of initiatives in the transportation sector that includes a "cash for clunkers" program, under which states and companies can meet Federal clean-air requirements by buying and scrapping the old vehicles that generate the most pollution.
The buy-up of old cars, to be left largely to market forces under guidelines to be established by the Environmental Protection Agency, could begin within a few months.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Primaries Drawing Fewer Blacks as Overall Turnout Declines
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas picked up about three-quarters of the black vote in Tuesday's Democratic primary in Illinois, but the black turnout in this state was much lower than it was four years ago.
That has been the case in much of the country this year, and Democrats will be hurt in November if blacks continue to stay away from the polls.


G.O.P. Senators Balk on Transit-Financing Deal
In a rare public break with party leadership, a group of Republican Senators from New York City said yesterday that they would not support the transit-financing plan hashed out last week because it was unfair to the city.
The plan, tentatively agreed to by leaders of the Democratic-controlled State Assembly and the Republican-controlled Senate, was intended to preserve the city's $1.25 bus and subway fare until the end of 1992, at a cost to the city of $25 million more than it had budgeted for.
While it was a blow to the city, the agreement represented a triumph for suburban legislators, who successfully blocked efforts to transfer a $90 million surplus from the commuter railroads to the city's transit system.


McCormick &amp; Company Names Chief Executive
McCormick &amp; Company, the leading American marketer of spices and seasonings, yesterday named Bailey A. Thomas chief executive.
Mr.
Thomas, who remains president, succeeds Charles P. McCormick Jr., the grand-nephew of the company's founder.
Mr.
McCormick is also chairman, but he plans to retire at the end of the year and Mr.
Thomas is expected to succeed him in that position as well.


Cato Seeking to Retire Debt
The "death put" debentures of the Cato Corporation, a women's apparel retailer based in Charlotte, N.C., will be retired soon, if the company has its way.
The subordinated debentures, bearing 10 1/2 percent interest and maturing in 1996, carry the unusual provision that if an initial holder dies, such debentures can be tendered at face value, even if the market price is below par.


William J. Voute Is Dead at 53; Former Salomon Vice Chairman
William J. Voute, a former vice chairman of Salomon Brothers who helped lead the company's expansion as a major international bond trader, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y., and Gulf Stream, Fla.
He died of cancer, which had been diagnosed two weeks earlier, a family spokesman said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Industry Begins to Rethink The Importance of Awards
As the contretemps over the Clio Awards continues, imperiling the advertising industry's best-known prize, there are indications that its problems are affecting not only other awards but the industry's predilection for measuring success by the statue.
Since June, when the Clios collapsed amid disrupted and canceled ceremonies, industry executives have been rethinking a belief that awards validate their work.


Abroad at Home; A New South Africa
A political-science theory used to have it that no group holding absolute power in a modern society would ever give it up short of physical overthrow.
Thus Jeane Kirkpatrick propounded that Communist totalitarianism in any country could not be ended by political means.
The theory was shattered as to Communism by the Gorbachev years and the fall of the Soviet Union.
Now something just as dramatic has happened in South Africa: The whites who had absolute power in that society have voted to give it up.


Socialism Makes Everybody Equally Poor
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with Andrew Schotter in "Improve Capitalism. Use Some Socialism" (Op-Ed, Feb. 29).
He calls for more socialism to deal with poverty and health care problems.
Mr.
Schotter gives us an excellent example of a mother of four, stating that "the economic battle for her is probably lost."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Brown and Tsongas Search For Victory in Connecticut
More in hope than in expectation, Paul E. Tsongas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. began a dogged pursuit of votes in Connecticut yesterday, following a pair of decisive defeats at the hands of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas in the Midwest on Tuesday.
Both hope they can use the Connecticut primary next Tuesday as a political trampoline to gain some energy for the big event, the New York primary two weeks later, which may be their last chance to halt Mr.
Clinton's powerful progress toward the Democratic nomination.
Confident, almost cocky, the Clinton entourage holed up in Little Rock, Ark., for rest and reassessment, and the front-runner will not arrive in Connecticut until late this afternoon..


Stocks Mixed in Busy Day; Dow Off 1.79
Stocks were narrowly mixed in heavy trading as investors with no fresh data to direct them had little incentive to buy, locking the market in a narrow range most of the day.
The Dow Jones industrial average barely moved, closing at 3,254.25, down 1.79 points.
Even though the Federal Reserve's "beige book" report, a summary of economic activity, saw some improvement in economic conditions, it had no more impact on the market than Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady's comments that a recovery is under way.
Analysts said that while these might have provided some relief, the market was still waiting for a pickup in corporate earnings.


NBD Bancorp of Detroit Agrees to Buy Indiana Bank
NBD Bancorp of Detroit, which owns the National Bank of Detroit and is the largest banking company in Michigan, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the largest banking company in Indiana, the INB Financial Corporation, which owns the Indiana National Bank and five others in the state.
The purchase, for about $850 million worth of NBD stock, is the latest in a long series of acquisitions by financially strong banking companies in the area that are battling for Midwestern supremacy.
At a time of slow loan growth, many banks are looking for merger partners that would help them increase profits by eliminating duplications in computer systems, headquarters staff and branches.


Quotation of the Day
"Today we have closed the book on apartheid." -- PRESIDENT F.W. DE KLERK.
[ A1:6. ]


Pull Up A Guitar, Have a Seat
HARD ROCKER is a rocking chair in the shape of an electric guitar -- a fender, actually -- made by Stephen Perrin, a furniture designer in Timonium, Md., known for his humorous chairs.
Last year he made a chair in the shape of the Empire State Building.
"I thought of the name for this chair before I designed the piece," Mr. Perrin said.


The Road To 'Howards End'
For turning out meticulous period studies, there may be no better practitioners than the film-making team made up of the director James Ivory, the producer Ismail Merchant and the screenwriter Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.
Last week their latest collaboration, "Howards End," adapted from the E. M. Forster novel, opened to favorable reviews.
Here are some of the team's other films on tape.
SHAKESPEARE WALLAH.
An English actress (Felicity Kendal) touring India has a cross-cultural affair with a rich playboy (Shashi Kapoor). 1965.
New Line. $29.95. 2:00.
Blackand white.
No rating.


Capriati Soundly Beats No. 1 Seles in Lipton
It was a continuation of the latest countertrend of the game: patient tennis punished power tennis in the heat of the day on the beachside hardcourts at the Lipton International Players Championships.
Jennifer Capriati, her hair straggling and her 15-year-old cheeks puffing like bellows, chased down nearly every shot top-seeded Monica Seles tried to slam past her and gained revenge for her "nightmare" United States Open semifinal loss to the world's No. 1 player with a decisive 6-2, 7-6 (7-5) upset victory this afternoon.


3 Big Advertisers Get New Agencies
Three large international advertisers have named new agencies on their accounts.
DHL Worldwide Express, Brussels, yesterday named Ogilvy &amp; Mather, London, as its lead agency for coming campaigns in 75 countries in Europe and Africa, following a review that was one of the most competitive in Europe so far this year.
In addition to Ogilvy and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, London, the incumbent, eight other shops vied for the $25 million account, including the Leo Burnett Company, Lintas Worldwide and Young &amp; Rubicam.


Walter Gerstgrasser, Book Clubs' Chief, 58
Walter Gerstgrasser, a board member of the Bertelsmann international media company and head of its large book and record club operations, died March 8 in Paris.
He was 58 years old and lived in Paris.
He died of a heart attack, a company spokesman said.


Not All Bounces Are Bad
The scandal at the House Bank is generating a storm of criticism out of proportion to the sins committed.
Whatever sloppiness occurred -- and whatever shady acts may have been performed by a few -- the scandal threatens to tar unjustly the reputations of scores if not hundreds of representatives whose offenses appear minor.
Perks like the bank are galling because they reflect a self-indulgent legislature that is often sorely out of touch with the real world.
But as voters ponder the overdrawn checks of their own representatives, they need to discriminate carefully between major abuses or even crimes, if there were any, and minor transgressions.


Art or Furniture? A Little of Both.
IT'S not everyone who gets to keep her socks in a work of modern art by John Cederquist.
Suzi Schiffer does.
But then, Ms.
Schiffer, a freelance television news producer, happens to be married to Franklin Parrasch, a devotee of avant-garde art furniture and a dealer in the kinds of pieces that make visitors to his gleaming new gallery, at 588 Broadway (near Prince Street)in SoHo, wonder who could ever want to live with these things.


When in Seville, Paint as Sevillians Do
WHEN American designers want to sell their clothes abroad, they think of opening shops in Tokyo, London, Paris.
But Nicole Miller, a New York designer, decided on Seville.
Last Saturday, Ms.
Miller opened what she said is the first free-standing store belonging to an American designer in Seville.


UConn Hopes Center Can Step Forward
Unless Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun changes his mind again, Dan Cyrulik will be the man of the moment tonight when the Huskies play Nebraska in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Southeast Regional in Cincinnati.
And Calhoun hopes the moment endures into minutes, about 25 of them.
Cyrulik, a backup center, is the probable replacement for Rod Sellers, a co-captain who has played in 127 consecutive games for the Huskies, every one since his freshman season began in the autumn of 1988.


Stanford Names Chicago Provost As Its President
Stung by more than a year of scandal, Stanford University yesterday named a new president, Gerhard Casper, a German-born scholar of constitutional law and the provost at the University of Chicago.
Mr.
Casper will succeed Donald Kennedy, who announced last July that he would resign at the end of this academic year so that Stanford could recover from several damaging incidents that occurred during his 12-year tenure, the most serious of which are assertions by Federal auditors that the university overcharged the Government by up to $231 million for indirect costs of doing Government research.


Calendar: Monuments And Stained Glass
Stone and Metal Time and Life Building, eighth-floor auditorium, 1271 Avenue of the Americas (50th Street); (212) 889-6960.


3 Candidates Reach Out To Cuomo, Who Demurs
As the Presidential campaign headed for New York, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said that all three Democratic candidates had tried to reach him by telephone today.
Mr.
Cuomo, who says he does not plan to endorse a candidate before the April 7 primary, said he spoke with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California but said he had missed calls from Paul E. Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts.
He said he had no expectations that the candidates would visit him, as several candidates did in 1988.


Beaten Driver Depicted As Combative by Medic
A paramedic testified today at the assault trial of four Los Angeles police officers that Rodney G. King was "combative and uncooperative" and appeared to have only minor injuries after being beaten by the officers.
But her account weakened under questioning by a prosecutor and was contradicted by another defense witness.
Terry L. White, the Los Angeles County deputy district attorney who is leading the prosecution, repeatedly challenged the testimony of the paramedic, Kathleen Bosak, who transported Mr.
King to a hospital after the beating.
Mr.
White, who had been reserved in presenting the prosecution's case, was animated and sarcastic on the first day of the defense presentation, producing the liveliest exchanges yet in the two-week-old trial.


Corrections
The Parent and Child column in The Home Section on March 5, about teaching children to be tolerant of their imperfections, misstated the university affiliation of Dr.
Michael Lewis.
He is director of the Institute for the Study of Child Development at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


Robert Volkening, Stockbroker, 87
Robert Volkening, a retired Wall Street broker and financial analyst, died on Sunday in Princeton Hospital in Princeton, N.J.
He was 87 years old and lived in Meadow Lakes, a retirement community in Hightstown, N.J., where he moved in 1988 after 50 years as a resident of Summit, N.J.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his family said.


Growing
WHEN the mercury hit 16 degrees this week and I couldn't plant my peas, I went to the Museum of Modern Art and stood for a while in front of "The Dream" by Henri Rousseau.
A naked woman sits on a plush burgundy couch in the middle of a jungle of exotic flowers and wild animals, where a man -- some Orpheus type -- plays the flute.


F.A.A. Warns Port Authority On Transit Links to Airports
The Federal Aviation Administration is threatening to block plans to build mass-transit links to the metropolitan region's three main airports unless the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey abandons efforts to strengthen jet-noise restrictions at the airports.
For months, the F.A.A. has been trying to discourage the Port Authority from taking a tougher stand on noise at the airports than the Federal agency demands, but it has made little headway.
In linking the mass-transit plan to the noise-control dispute, the aviation agency is hoping to bolster its position.


Events: Flower Show And Lectures for Spring
American Gardens
Enid A. Haupt Conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.


INSIDE
New President for Stanford
Stanford University chose Gerhard Casper, a scholar of constitutional law who is the provost at the University of Chicago, to lead the school out of a period of turmoil.
Page A16.
Transit Union Rejects Pact
New York City bus and subway workers rejected a new three-year contract, raising the possibility of slowdowns or other disruptions.
Page B1.
They Done It
A new entry in Washington's power-novel steeplechase is a mystery by Marilyn Quayle and her sister.
Washington at Work, page B9.
The State of the Projects
As a new leader takes command of New York City's public housing, often considered the best in the country, she faces increasing complaints of crime and disrepair.
Page B1.
Banks Taking a Plaza Stake
In a deal with his creditors, Donald J. Trump has agreed to turn over 49 percent of the Plaza Hotel to a group of banks led by Citibank.
Page D1.
Fashion from Silicon Valley
The latest in fashion?
Wearable computer accessories like Palmpad, a computer that can be strapped to the wrist or lower arm.
Page D1.


Critic's Notebook; Lessons in Broadcasting: The Power of a Show for Children
For the last three years, ABC has promoted its Friday night lineup of comedies with the initials "T.G.I.F." with great success.
ABC never said it officially, but the tag was clearly supposed to stand for "thank God it's Friday." This year, ABC has come to realize that those initials may have meant something else for millions of American children: "thank goodness it's 'Full House.' "
This season, the powerhouse ABC comedy lineup on Friday has faded perceptibly, if not drastically, as a direct result of the network's decision to move the night's biggest hit, "Full House," to Tuesday from Friday.


Keough Is Improving
MATT KEOUGH, the California Angels' pitcher who underwent emergency brain surgery after being hit in the temple with a foul ball during an exhibition game on Monday, is getting better fast.
His sense of humor, at least, is intact.
That was apparent yesterday afternoon when Keough, who had been moved out of the intensive care unit, explained why he had answered his own bedside phone at the Scottdale Memorial Hospital.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
4.12
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.04
4.04
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.22
4.22
5.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.32
7.32
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.00
8.00
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
9.00
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.79
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Surveys by Fed Find A Bit More Optimism
Adding to recent reports of economic upturn, the Federal Reserve said today that business sentiment nationwide was "moderately more optimistic" than it was at the beginning of the year, although some caution remained.
Based on interviews as recent as last week, the survey, which comes out eight times a year, was noticeably more upbeat than in January, when the Fed characterized economic activity as "lackluster."


U.N. Sending Envoy to Aid Burmese Refugees
The United Nations Secretary General plans to send an envoy to Southeast Asia early next month in an effort to stop the expulsion of the Muslim minority from Myanmar, formerly Burma, to neighboring Bangladesh, diplomats and United Nations officials said today.
The envoy, Under Secretary General Jan Eliasson of Sweden, the senior United Nations official in charge of humanitarian aid, is expected to travel first to Bangladesh to inspect the growing number of Burmese refugees arriving there.


Review/Opera; Presenting A 'Boris' Without Any Frills
Music in what used to be the Soviet Union is up for grabs.
Cultural trains are no longer running precisely on time and elements of the free market are making their way into the conservatory, the opera house and the concert hall.
Who can tell which companies may fold, what opportunities may open, or how much this culture may fall prey to all the uncertainties that haunt us in the West?
At any other time, the St.
Petersburg National Opera's production of "Boris Godunov," presented at the New York State Theater on Tuesday night, would merely have inspired gratitude for its directness and simplicity.
The production, part of a trilogy of Pushkin-inspired works being presented during the next three weeks, even showed what a provincial, fairly low-budget Russian opera company could pull off without the hindrance of sophisticated sets or elaborate directorial conceits.
This was a grand opera, humbly presented.
I found the result enervating; the solidity of the singing matched the traditional logic of the staging.


23 in Council Assail Delay On Recycling
A bipartisan group of 23 City Council members rebuked Mayor David N. Dinkins's efforts to slow the city's recycling program yesterday, setting the stage for a showdown over whether the city will meet court-ordered deadlines on collecting certain quantities of paper, glass, metal and plastic.
At a City Hall news conference yesterday, the Council members vowed to vote against any amendments to the city's recycling law that would scale back or eliminate mandatory targets for collecting recyclable materials.


Surgery for Wilson
At the same hospital today, San Francisco Giants left-hander TREVOR WILSON will be operated on for a benign tumor on a rib.
He will miss his opening-day assignment in Los Angeles on April 6, but could be pitching again as soon as three weeks.
"This is a routine surgical procedure," Giants team physician Dr.
WILL STRAW said yesterday after the existence of the tumor was confirmed.
The tumor in the 10th rib on Wilson's right side was discovered in X-rays taken Monday, Straw said.


St. Peter's Stumbles Against Connecticut
Coming into tonight's opening-round game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tournament, Connecticut coach Geno Auriemma theorized that the glitz and glamour surrounding the Big East could inspire an underdog St.
Peter's team.
"They sometimes develop an inferiority complex in the M.A.A.C. because they read so much about the Big East," said Auriemma, who guided UConn to the women's Final Four last year.
"So I'm sure St. Peter's will be fired up against us."


The Latest in Computer Couture
In one of the strangest fashion events this season, a gaggle of models will saunter down the runway at a Manhattan hotel today, showing off the latest in ready-to-wear designs.
Not party frocks or swimsuits.
Personal computers.
The mock fashion show is being staged by the Grid Systems Corporation, of the Silicon Valley school of design, displaying a computer called the Palmpad that can be strapped to the wrist or lower arm.
Suitable for business or casual dress, the device leaves the hands free for other tasks when the computer is not in use.


Ousted Haitian President Meets U.S. Black Congressional Leaders


Rising Poverty Threatening Elite 'Projects'
Evelyn McClendon practically beamed as she surveyed her meticulously neat two-bedroom apartment in the St.
Mary's Park Houses in the South Bronx.
She has lived there, in apartment 8A, since the day the project opened 34 years ago.
"People in New York hear the word 'projects' and they think rundown and nasty," she said recently.
"But it's not that way here at St. Mary's. It's terrific and I've always enjoyed it.


Tax-Free Fund Yields Up; Taxables Are Mostly Stable
Yields on both tax-exempt and taxable money market funds are beginning to reflect the overall rise in market yields, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
The report, issued yesterday, collects figures on tax-exempts for the week ended Monday and on taxables for the week ended Tuesday.


Afghan President Agrees to Step Down
NEW DELHI, March 18 --
President Najibullah of Afghanistan said tonight that he would resign as soon as an interim government was formed under a United Nations peace plan and that he would then take no further part in the political life of his country.
The President's statement, broadcast on Afghan radio and television, marks a breakthrough in a rapidly developing effort by the United Nations to end more than 13 years of war between Afghanistan's Soviet-installed Government and Islamic rebel groups.


Rejected Builder Sues New York
A major construction company filed suit yesterday against New York City, asserting that city officials unjustly linked the company to organized-crime figures in canceling a $1.2 million contract for work on a new jail annex.
The suit by the Leon D. DeMatteis Construction Company of Elmont, L.I., is the first major challenge to a new system of reviewing city contractors.


Washington at Work; On a Dark, Stormy Republican Night
Senators do it.
Journalists do it.
Even the alienated daughters of former Presidents do it.
So Marilyn Quayle and her sister said, let's do it, let's write a book.
"Embrace the Serpent," by Marilyn T. Quayle, the Vice President's wife, and her older sister, Nancy T. Northcott, is due out from Crown Publishers on April 3, the latest entry in this year's Washington celebrity power-novel steeplechase.


Corrections
A brief article on the Media Business page on Tuesday about editorial changes at Lear's magazine referred incorrectly to the strength of the magazine's annual newsstand sales.
Sales rose 18.5 percent in 1991 over the previous year.


Corrections
An article on Monday about spending by charities misstated the pay of two corporate executives cited to illustrate differences between the charitable and corporate worlds.
The 1990 salary and bonus for Edward Brennan, chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company was $978,854.
The 1990 cash compensation for Morton L. Mandel, chairman and chief executive of the Premier Industrial Corporation, was $441,000.
The article also incorrectly rendered the name of a lawyer who specializes in legal aspects of nonprofit groups.
She is Marion Fremont-Smith.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Instant Arbor
Q.
I have a small garden and would like to add an arbor for roses or clematis.
Since I don't want to build one, where can I buy one? -- Leon Evans Jr., Germantown, Pa.


YUGOSLAV GROUPS REACH AN ACCORD
Leaders of three ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed early today to a European Community plan that could pave the way for the central Yugoslav republic's independence.
The plan, accepted by Muslim Slav, Serbian and Croatian leaders, would transform Bosnia and Herzegovina into an independent country divided into three ethnically defined regions whose outlines have yet to be determined.
The republic would retain its current borders.


New Haven Is the Target of Inquiry
Federal investigators swooped down on this city's municipal offices this week, taking away boxes of documents that may figure in a fraud inquiry focusing on the rehabilitation of a rundown commercial area.
It is the third Federal investigation of a major Connecticut city's government in three years, and some here are wondering why the state seems suddenly to be a favorite target for United States attorneys.


Reporter's Notebook; The Race to Keep Pace With Pop
So this is "Thirtysomething." That's Hope and that's Michael, and over there, that's Melissa.
It's a relief, finally, to see this show and its characters in person, now on the Lifetime cable channel week nights at 11 o'clock.
I am thirtysomething.
My husband is thirtysomething.
We have thirty something-like jobs and an adorable thirtysomething-life-style child appropriately named Alex.
Although come to think of it he was born when I was twentysomething.
I wonder if that somehow disqualifies me from being a true thirtysomethinger.


Review/Theater; Desperate for a Reason to Live
John Guare's "Six Degrees of Separation" may be best remembered as a post-crash bonfire of the vanities, a savagely funny unmasking of all kinds of Manhattan impostors of the late 1980's.
But what made the play moving to me and timeless was its story of one woman's heroic search for authenticity -- for love and rebirth -- amid all that fraudulence.
At evening's end Mr.
Guare left us not with satirical laughter but with the image of a sadder but resolute Stockard Channing, in the role of the society wife Ouisa Kittredge, as she yearned to revisit the Sistine Chapel and reach once more toward the hand of God, as she desperately hoped to hold on to the real passion she had briefly tasted in an encounter with a vanished con artist.
"Four Baboons Adoring the Sun," Mr.
Guare's new play at the Vivian Beaumont and a fair bet to be the most controversial play of the season, puts the same great actress on the same stage in the same rending, do-or-die quest for some transcendent reason to go on living in a universe where there are too many degrees of separation between any two people.
But everything else is wildly different, as if a beloved old folk tale had been set down in the middle of a mad dream.
The least of the differences is Ms.
Channing's new character, Penny McKenzie, a suburban housewife who has left her husband to marry an old collegiate flame, an archeologist named Philip (James Naughton).
The other shifts in the landscape are so dramatic that even before the house lights dim the audience knows it is being shoved into an alien world.


Japan Sets Lower Ceiling for Auto Exports
In an election-year gesture to the United States, Japan today announced a big reduction in its ceiling for automobile exports, saying it would limit exports to 1.65 million a year, down sharply from 2.3 million now.
While the move marks a significant concession by Japan, its impact on the reeling American automobile industry is likely to be limited.
In part because of the depressed auto market and in part because of the increasing number of cars manufactured at Japanese "transplant" factories in the United States, Japan exported only about 1.76 million cars to the American market in 1991, or only 110,000 above the new ceiling.
That was the fifth consecutive year that Japanese exports to America fell below 2.3 million, the level that has been in effect since the mid-1980's.


PENTAGON CHARTS MILITARY OPTIONS FOR BOMBING IRAQ
The Pentagon has given President Bush a set of military options for a graduated bombing campaign to force Iraq to eliminate its remaining weapons of mass destruction in compliance with the United Nations cease-fire resolution that ended the Persian Gulf war.
Administration officials, who are reticent in discussing military planning so as not to appear to be prejudging United Nations Security Council decisions, emphasized that President Bush has not made any decisions on the timing or the targets of any attack.
But there is a wide view among military leaders that Mr.
Bush is predisposed to use force soon if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq does not meet the United Nations demands.


Tickets Might Cost Less, New Islanders Group Says
The new management of the Islanders does not plan to raise ticket prices for at least one season and might lower the price of many seats in Nassau Coliseum.
The four-man group that will operate the team and own part of it is scheduled to travel to Chicago today to meet with the National Hockey League Board of Governors tomorrow.
If the board approves the partial purchase of the team, the group of Long Island investors will control a minority ownership of the franchise but will direct all its operations.


Japan Has Learned From Bypassed Giants
To the Editor:
In "How Economic Empires Are Born" (Op-Ed, Feb. 25), Jean Strouse finds in the relationship between the United States and Japan echoes of the economic confontation between Britain and the United States in the late 1800's.
Writing of Andrew Carnegie's long-term view, she asks, "Sound familiar?" This question recalls a statement by John Maynard Keynes in his "General Theory": "Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist."


New Video Releases
The Doctor
1991. Touchstone. $92.95. LD, $39.99. 2:23. CC. PG-13.


Marta Istomin Named To Head Music School
Marta Casals Istomin has been appointed president of the Manhattan School of Music, the school's chairman, Gordon K. Greenfield, announced yesterday.
She succeeds Peter C. Simon, who left the school to become director of the Royal Conservatory of Music in Toronto in September.


Spring Is Here, So It's Time to Scrub
CLEANING a house, according to David Eason, is an art.
"Anybody can take a dustcloth and run it along a windowsill," said Mr.
Eason, who owns Dirtbursters, a cleaning service in Manhattan and New Milford, Conn.
"But we want to make it to look like you could have a party."
Spring cleaning season is here, and a variety of cleaning services are gearing up.
Customers with regular cleaning help often want a service to do heavy cleaning each spring.
Residents also call cleaning services for a grand once-over before moving into a new apartment or house.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ed Blackwell The Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
CMS Gas Marketing Co., Dearborn, Mich., and Natural Gas Services Inc., Owensboro, Ky., will market natural gas and other services in six states. *
ITT Teves, a unit of ITT Automotive, Auburn Hills, Mich., will build a plant in Morgantown, N.C.


Armand D'Amato Is Arraigned; Says Fraud Trial Will Clear Him
Armand P. D'Amato declared, "I'm innocent, and that will be proved," as he was arraigned today on Federal fraud charges in connection with $120,500 the Government said he was paid to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Talking to reporters on the steps of the Federal courthouse here, Armand D'Amato said he "felt good" about going to trial and having a chance to defend himself against charges stemming from a case that has been under scrutiny by Congressional and criminal investigators for several years.


Israel Vows 'Painful Punishment' for Bombing in Argentina
Israel intensified security measures at its embassies throughout the world today, and pledged that "painful punishment" awaited the terrorists responsible for the bombing that devastated the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires.
But Israeli officials said tonight that they could not verify assertions of responsibility issued in Lebanon by a pro-Iranian fundamentalist organization, Islamic Holy War.


Measure Allowing Royalties On Cable May Cause Rift
In a move that could jeopardize the support of television broadcasters for cable television regulation, House Democrats will introduce a measure on Thursday to let Hollywood producers have a direct stake in program royalties that cable operators would be required to pay television stations for carrying their signals.
Broadcasters provided crucial support when the Senate passed a tough cable television bill in January, and they are expected to be important when the House takes up the issue in the next few weeks.


Union Rejects Pact for Buses And Subway
New York City bus and subway workers decisively rejected a new three-year contract yesterday, sending union leaders and transit officials back to the negotiating table and raising the possibility of work slowdowns and other disruptions by discontented transit workers.
By a ratio of nearly 2 to 1, members of Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union turned down a tentative agreement that union leaders and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority reached in January.
The mail ballots, submitted over the last two weeks, were counted yesterday.


Former B.C.C.I. Executive Says Bank Wooed Jackson
A former executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International told Congress today that the bank's efforts at wooing worldwide political figures included paying several thousand dollars in luxury hotel bills in Paris for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.
Nazir Chinoy, former head of the bank's French and African operations, said bank officials hoped Mr.
Jackson could lure the deposits of African nations.
Mr.
Jackson, quoted by The Washington Post, acknowledged that B.C.C.I. paid about $11,000 for his accommodations during two visits to Paris in 1985.
But he said he had never had a business relationship with the bank.


If Only, an Inventor Says, He Could Invent Capital
For more than a decade, Wilbert Murdock has struggled to market his inventions -- gadgets ranging from a computerized golf club that corrects mistakes in the swing to a motion analysis system that could help doctors and coaches provide better treatment for sports and other injuries.
Name a problem and the self-described "George Washington Carver of technology" will offer inventive suggestions to do the work faster and quicker.
But his degrees in bioengineering and constant tinkering have yet to rig up a solution to his biggest hurdle -- lack of capital.


Japan Keeps Ban on Birth Control Pill
In an unusual attempt to control private behavior, Japan announced today that it would keep a longtime ban on birth control pills, in spite of findings that the pills are safe.
A Government panel said the pill would discourage the use of condoms and lead to an epidemic of AIDS.
Officials in the Health and Welfare Ministry, citing recent reports of growing cases of AIDS in Japan, said it would be better not to lift the ban on the pill from "the viewpoint of public hygiene."


Analysts Consider Recovery Too Weak To Make Jobs Yet
For all the robust gains showing up in recent economic reports, most economists say that the evidence available so far is not sufficient to demonstrate that a strong enough recovery is under way to generate new job growth.
Unless job growth resumes soon, they say, there will not be enough additional family income to sustain the jump in consumer spending that began 60 days ago.
That could mean a renewal of the recession or, at the very least, a continuation of the stagnation that has plagued the American economy for three years.
A similar surge in consumer spending last spring, also hailed as the first stage of a recovery, came to a halt in August after failing to increase jobs.


Socialism Makes Everybody Equally Poor; Change the Terms
To the Editor:
Andrew Schotter's call for improving capitalism through the judicious use of socialism without fear of ideological taint (Op-Ed, Feb. 29) would be more believable if he had advocated first abandoning terms that bear the heavy ideological burden he would like to forget.


Lawmakers in Trenton Say Report Shows Huge Budget Shortfall
Citing a study by the Office of Legislative Services, legislators said today that lower-than-expected tax collections would create a combined $521 million shortfall in the state budget for this fiscal year and the year that begins in July.
"We will urge the Governor to take immediate action to begin to eliminate the structural deficit," said Assemblyman Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, a Republican who is chairman of the Assembly Appropriations Committee.
The Assemblyman hinted but would not say directly that layoffs might be required.
"It is the responsibility of the Governor to make reductions to his current budget that will bring it into balance."


Agency Says Marijuana Is Not Proven Medicine
Responding to a Federal appeals court ruling that the Government was using illogical criteria in prohibiting the use of marijuana for medical purposes, the Drug Enforcement Administration said yesterday that "far too many questions remain" for experts to "fairly and responsibly" conclude that the drug is safe.
In a 46-page clarification of Federal policy, Robert C. Bonner, chief of the agency, said, "Lay testimonials, impressions of physicians, isolated case studies, random clinical experience, reports so lacking in details they cannot be scientifically evaluated and all other forms of anecdotal proof are entirely irrelevant."


Debt Deal For Trump On Plaza
Donald J. Trump has reached an agreement to turn over 49 percent of his interest in the landmark Plaza Hotel in Manhattan to a group of banks led by Citibank, people involved in the talks said yesterday.
The nearly completed deal is one of the last in a long line of debt restructurings that Mr.
Trump has reached with his creditors.
It would cancel $125 million of Mr.
Trump's personally guaranteed debt, plus accrued interest, and would give the developer more favorable terms on the remaining $300 million of mortgage debt.


Guidelines Are Needed In Treating Labor Pains
To the Editor:
Your March 6 front-page report on recommendations for pain-care management by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research addresses the common problem of inadequate pain control in medical settings.
But you do not discuss what is probably the most common and severe pain patients endured -- labor.


A Market for 'Pennies' and 'Shells'
Amid hundreds of red, white and blue balloons and talk of American competitiveness, the American Stock Exchange's Emerging Company Marketplace got under way yesterday, giving an exchange listing to 22 small companies -- mostly former penny stocks.
Many of the companies had seen their prices rise sharply in the days before they began trading on the Amex, and the price increases continued yesterday in their first exchange trading.
In some cases, the stocks were trading at several times what insiders paid for shares only weeks before.


In New Jolt, Honda Loses
The Honda Motor Company, already struggling to recover from sales slumps in the United States and Japan, was jolted today by the sudden resignation of one of its most vital executives for health reasons.
The executive, Shoichiro Irimajiri, was president of Honda of America in the 1980's and the chief architect of Honda's manufacturing operations in the United States.
He is credited with turning them into one of Japan's biggest overseas manufacturing success stories.


Essay; Blaming The Victim
Terrorists are blowing up Israeli embassies.
A fanatic urged on by Iranian mullahs slashes and kills Israeli schoolchildren.
In Washington, George Bush declares that unless Israel knuckles under to his demand that only Arabs and no Jews be permitted to move to the West Bank, refugees from the former Soviet Union will have to shift for themselves.
This terror-bombing, throat-cutting and arm-twisting is supposed to give Israelis the confidence necessary to take risks for peace.


BANGLADESH CHIEF VISITS WASHINGTON
A year after taking office in the first peaceful and democratic transfer of power in Bangladesh, Prime Minister Khaleda Zia came to Washington this week to ask the Bush Administration, Congress and international bankers not to overlook one of the most vulnerable nations in the rush to create a new world order.
The year has been a cruel one for Prime Minister Zia, only the second woman to head a modern Islamic country.
Weeks after her Government was installed, Bangladesh was struck by a devastating cyclone that killed more than 100,000 people.


Alhambra Gathers Treasures From 1492
When King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella first entered Granada after the last Arab kingdom in Spain surrendered on Jan. 2, 1492, it is said that they marveled at the beauty of the fortified Palace of Alhambra and the treasures it contained.
Yet in the centuries that followed, while the legacy of almost 800 years of Arab presence on the Iberian Peninsula could still be seen in Spain's language, architecture and music, the official version of history recorded the fall of Granada as a great Catholic victory over the infidel.


HOME IMPROVEMENTS
MOST door chimes are simple in design and easy to fix.
Because they draw only a small current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- there is little danger of shock when you need to make repairs.
But it's not a bad idea to turn off the power to the system before investigating.
To do so, trip the circuit breaker or remove the fuse involved; then, make sure you follow these repair procedures in the order given:


Bridge
The life of Peter Pender, who was a world champion in 1985 and a popular pesonality, made a major impact on the bridge world.
His death in November 1990 from AIDS-related causes has now made a significant impact on a wider world.
His will left $2,260,000 to the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
This is the largest donation ever received by the foundation.
"The generosity of Mr. Pender has been remarkable," said Dr.
Mathilde Krim, one of the organization's founders.
"Even in death we value his concern and compassion for other people."


Nicholls Finds a Niche Far From Bright Lights
They called him Broadway Bernie for his flamboyance and popularity when he was with the Rangers.
Now that he is in Edmonton and beginning to like that part of the world, he might be called Northlands Nicholls.
Bernie Nicholls was extremely reluctant to report to Edmonton and Northlands Coliseum after the Rangers traded him to the Oilers on Oct. 4 for Mark Messier.


Instant Replay Hardly Infallible
There was a comedy show during radio days in which a political pundit was described as being "80 percent accurate 90 percent of the time."
The same could be said about instant replay, which expired yesterday after six seasons -- a victim of a string of controversial calls in recent seasons and a growing feeling that football games shouldn't be decided by impersonal machines with zoom lenses.


Cuddle Up, Little Ones
TAWNY MOYER named her quilt company U.S.
Bankey because she believes adults occasionally revert to childhood.
Ms.
Moyer derived the name from childrens' mispronounciation of the word blanket, so that to say her company's name aloud is to speak in baby talk.
The comforters, she said, "are like adult security blankets."
They certainly are: her whimsical comforters are printed with cowboys, horses and cactuses, and come in small and large sizes for both adults and children.


Sports of The Times; No Replay On N.F.L.'s Wrong Call
Do you remember Rob Lytle's fumble? Actually, his fumble that was ruled not a fumble?
In the 1977 American Conference championship game, the Denver Broncos were leading the Oakland Raiders, 7-3, in the third quarter when the Bronco running back fumbled at the Raiders' 1-yard line.
Jack Tatum recovered.
Raider ball.
Or so everybody watching television thought.
They saw the fumble.
They saw the Raiders recover it.


Miami Journal; When a City Newspaper Is the Enemy
Since January, two of this city's most powerful institutions have been engaged in an increasingly bitter war of words.
The latest salvo is an advertisement appearing on the sides of dozens of buses here.
In bold black letters on a yellow background it says in Spanish: "I don't believe The Herald."
The advertisement, which is also scheduled to appear on billboards, is sponsored by the Cuban American National Foundation, an influential Miami-based lobbying group that says it speaks on behalf of more than one million Cuban-Americans who want to see Communism ousted from their former homeland.


San Diego State Decides Not to Hire Tarkanian
JERRY TARKANIAN lost his bid to become the coach at San Diego State yesterday.
The job went to TONY FULLER, an assistant coach at U.C.L.A.
For Fuller, a 33-year-old former Pepperdine assistant, the move from Los Angeles to San Diego will involve an element of family deja vu.
At U.C.L.A. he reported to head coach JIM HARRICK.
At San Diego State he will supervise Harrick's son, JIM HARRICK JR..
The younger Harrick, who took over as the Aztec's interim coach when JIM BRANDENBERG was dismissed last month, will return to his previous job as a San Diego assistant.


Yeltsin Says Ukraine Will Give Up Nuclear Arms
The Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, said today that he had been assured that Ukraine's battlefield nuclear weapons would be transferred to Russia by July as planned.
But there was no confirmation from Kiev that the Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, had reversed his order to halt the move.
According to the news agencies Itar-Tass and Interfax, Mr.
Yeltsin told Russian members of parliament that Mr.
Kravchuk had told him on Tuesday by telephone that he would meet the July 1 deadline for moving all tactical weapons to Russia for destruction.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Regulators Are Urged to Cut New York Telephone's Rates
New York Telephone, one of the nation's largest local telephone companies, is under fire for rates granted more than a year ago, and state regulators are being asked to roll back the company's most recent rate increase by 85 percent.
The New York State Consumer Protection Board, a state agency that represents consumers before state regulators, petitioned the Public Service Commission yesterday to reduce the carrier's rates by $212 million and freeze them at that level through December 1993.
The consumer board's proposal represents a cut from the $250 million increase granted by the commission, over the protests of the consumer board and others, in December 1990.


New Indictment Cites Talk of Killing Gravano Family
As Salvatore Gravano was preparing to become the chief prosecution witness against John Gotti, his former boss in the Gambino crime family, three organized-crime figures were talking about killing Mr.
Gravano's wife and two sons, according to Federal law-enforcement officials.
Their conversation is mentioned in a Federal racketeering indictment that was unsealed yesterday in Newark with the arrest of 11 men in New York, New Jersey and Massachusetts.
One of those arrested was James Martorano, 50 years old, of Quincy, Mass., who was identified by Federal officials as a captain in the New England-based Patriarca crime family and the organization's liaison with the New York-based Genovese crime family.


14 TO 20 ARE DEAD IN EMBASSY BLAST
Argentina's Interior Minister said today that a Ford Fairlane packed with 220 pound of plastic explosives was the cause of the blast on Tuesday that destroyed the Israeli Embassy, killing at least 14 people and most likely more than 20, while wounding 252.
"There is almost 100 percent certainty that it was a car bomb," said Jose Luis Manzano in comments to Radio America.
He said the car was parked just outside the entrance to the Israeli Embassy on Arroyo Street and exploded at 3 P.M.


Parent &amp; Child
TODDLERHOOD is a time of untempered boldness.
Many 2-year-olds will run into the street or reach out to grasp a sharp knife without hesitation.
They will turn over a cup of juice or throw food on the floor within seconds of hearing a parent's "Don't!" Their recklessness and apparent defiance, which so often stymie parents who are trying to discipline them, hint at how children this age think differently from adults and even preschoolers .
That's why the toddler years are rife with frustration for parents, who are confused by the many contradictions in their children's behavior.
By understanding the signs and limits of a toddler's intellect, parents can do a better job of protecting a child, and ease their own frustrations as well.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Chieftains Avery Fisher Hall Lincoln Center
In their 29 years together, the Chieftains have become the world's best-known performers on traditional Irish instruments.
Unfortunately, they hardly play traditional Irish music any more.


Next Finds a President In Telephone Industry
Moving to beef up its upper management, Next Inc. yesterday named Peter van Cuylenburg president and chief operating officer.
Mr. van Cuylenburg, a British telecommunications executive, will join Steven P. Jobs, Next's founder, chairman and chief executive, in a newly created office of the president.
Mr. van Cuylenburg, who is 43 years old, will share day-to-day management responsibilities with Mr.
Jobs.
With a public offering planned for later this year, Next has taken a number of steps to bolster its senior management team, including the appointment in January of Marcel Gani, a former Intel executive, as chief financial officer, and the promotion in February of Mike Slade, formerly with Microsoft, to vice president of marketing.


Slain Editor Honored at Mass as Fearless Warrior
A week after the journalist Manuel de Dios Unanue was shot dead in a Queens restaurant, 1,500 friends and colleagues gathered last night in St.
Patrick's Cathedral to remember a man they said was a fearless crusader against drug dealers.
And as the police continued their investigation, many at the service said it was that crusade -- in the pages of the newspaper El Diario-La Prensa, in his magazines or on the radio -- that may have cost him his life.


Woman Ending Fast That Was a Protest Against Deportation
The 82-year-old choreographer Katherine Dunham said tonight that she was ending the fast she began 47 days ago to protest the United States' deporting of Haitians back to their homeland.
In a prepared statement issued from her home in East St.
Louis, Ill., Miss Dunham said she would begin eating again because she wanted to regain enough strength to return to Haiti with the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the island-nation's deposed President, who visited her in East St.
Louis on Monday.


New Video Releases
Other People's Money
1991. Warner. $94.99. LD, $29.98. 1:42. CC. R.


Jack Washburn Dies; Actor and Singer, 64
Jack Washburn, an actor and nightclub singer, died on Sunday at his home in New Hope, Pa.
He was 64 years old.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Diane.


Review/Television; 'Afterschool' Mini-Series on Life at the Mall
Take "Beverly Hills 90210," bring it down a notch or two socially and add a dash of "Fame." That's what the producers of the ABC "Afterschool Specials" seem to be up to with their first mini-series, "Summer Stories: The Mall." The first of three hourlong parts is on this afternoon at 4.
The remaining segments will be broadcast April 2 and 16.
The periodic "Afterschool Specials" series is aimed at younger audiences, placing low budgets and modest production values in the service of lessons -- in some instances, lectures -- on such subjects as sex, drugs and dating.
As the success of "Beverly Hills 90210" on Fox would indicate, younger viewers are receptive to the effort, especially if it features pinup-worthy actors.


So Which Was It?
Everybody knows that SAM WYCHE either quit the Bengals last December or got fired as head coach by general manager MIKE BROWN, but which was it?
That is a question both Wyche and Brown have been wrestling with for the last three months.
The issue is not simply one of semantics.
At stake is $1 million Wyche would be owed on the last two years of his Cincinnati contract if his departure hadn't been voluntary.
Brown and Wyche, now the head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, say they have resolved the matter, at least between themselves, heading off a hearing before Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE.


Review/Dance; Surreal Beach Life Amid the Silences of Unreality
Fish that kick up their hind legs inhabit "Beach Birds," a striking and surreal new work by Merce Cunningham.
The New York premiere of this image-rich piece, distantly inspired by a book James Joyce never wrote, opened the Merce Cunningham Dance Company's two-week season on Tuesday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street).
Mr.
Cunningham's works are sometimes perceived as hermetic, removed from reality.
The paradox is that he and John Cage, his musical adviser, have long insisted that art can incorporate the sights, sounds and processes found in the real world.
Thus, "43, " the Cage score that prompted the creation of "Beach Birds," is full of silence, and Mr.
Cunningham's choreography is full of stillness.


NEWS SUMMARY
Companies
Donald J. Trump will turn over 49 percent of the Plaza Hotel to a group of banks led by Citibank, under an agreement that involves canceling some mortgage debt.  [ Page D1. ]


Frank Shumway, Manufacturer, Sportsman and Philanthropist, 85
Frank Ritter Shumway, a retired manufacturer, philanthropist, sportsman and Presbyterian minister, died March 9 at his Rochester home.
He was 85 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


On Further Review, Instant Replay Dies
National Football League owners voted yesterday to eliminate the instant-replay rule.
Under the rule, officials off the field reviewed questionable plays on TV monitors and had the power to uphold officials' calls or overturn them.
Last season such replays were used on 570 plays, and 90 reversals were made.


New Video Releases
The Fisher King  1991.
Columbia Tri-Star. $92.86.
Laser disk, $39.95. 2 hours18 minutes.
Closed-captioned.
R.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Israeli officials who met in Washington with Senator Patrick J. Leahy about loan guarantees misidentified the Israeli Ambassador.
He is Zalman Shoval.


Instant Replay Goes the Way of the Single Wing
After five one-year renewals and constant consternation over the merits of its use, instant replay as a tool for game officials to review plays was eliminated today for the 1992 National Football League season.
The vote by the N.F.L. owners was 17-11 to keep instant replay, but 21 votes were needed for its retention. .
In the instant-replay system, officials with TV monitors sat in a stadium booth and, upon review of game videotape, confirmed or overturned the on-field officials' calls.
The plays called on for review primarily regarded possession and action governed by the sidelines, goal lines and end lines.


Man Dies After Falling Into Hole in Pennsylvania


Investigation of Patriot Missile Critic Angers Him
A scientific critic of the performance of the Patriot interceptor missile in the Persian Gulf war told Congress yesterday that he was being needlessly investigated by the Pentagon for allegedly disclosing secret information, calling the action an "outrageous and dangerous use of the security system to suppress free speech."
But a Pentagon spokesman defended the inquiry as appropriate and dismissed charges that it was politically motivated.


Corrections
An article on the Health page yesterday about pitching techniques misidentified a pitcher for the Boston Red Sox.
He is Roger Clemens.


Munich Journal; Last Straw? Refugees Occupy Beer's Fabled Field
An open field on the edge of Munich where the fabled Oktoberfest is held each year has been turned into a temporary village for foreign asylum-seekers and is now a symbol of the intense national debate over how Germany should deal with its rising refugee population.
The field, called Theresa's Meadow, has been hallowed ground for Bavarians for more than 150 years.
Hordes of beer drinkers converge here each year for the Oktoberfest, a two-week orgy of drinking, partying and reveling in all things German.
But for the last two months, it has been home to several hundred refugees.


Garden for Live Poets in Los Angeles
THERE are gardens designed for roses, for sculpture and for meditation.
On Saturday, a garden for poetry will open at the Lannan Foundation, a small museum in Los Angeles that exhibits art and sponsors literary readings.
The garden was designed by Siah Armajani, a sculptor who lives in Minneapolis.


Top Guns Will Duel In a West Showdown
Usually, folks here like to brag about wide open spaces.
The city's 125,000 residents are spread comfortably across six miles, going north to south, and 10 miles east to west, while the city itself is tucked neatly at the foot of the Rocky Mountains.
With the desert on its outskirts, this would certainly seem to be a large enough site for one bracket of the West Regional.
But with Indiana's Bob Knight coming in from the Midwest, Georgetown's John Thompson arriving from the East and L.S.U.'s Dale Brown coming in from the South, there are now concerns that Boise may not be big enough.


For the Knicks, Talk Is Best Medicine
The Knicks may be a first-place team, but they haven't played like one lately.
After Tuesday night's 99-86 nerve-racking victory in Orlando, the Knicks talked a better game than they played.
They talked about how satisfying it was to beat the Magic, even though they almost lost a 22-point lead.
They talked about preparing themselves for the playoffs, but lately they have not played with the consistency it will take to win during the playoffs.


Israel Considers Effect of Rebuff by Bush on U.S. Loan Guarantees
Israeli economic planners today began the tough and perhaps painful process of how to rearrange Government spending priorities now that the country's request for $10 billion in United States loan guarantees seems to be dead.
Leading the call for a thorough reassessment was the governor of Israel's central bank, who said that "difficult decisions" lay ahead and that the national budget had to be studied.


Review/Fashion; Past Perfect, Future Tense
Travelers on the seasonal fashion express landed in Paris this week and found themselves entering a time machine that touched down briefly in the 1950's, 60's and 70's before taking off for the 21st century.
Designers in Milan and London have had their say about fall styles.
Now it's time for Paris.
The first designers to parade their latest offerings before the international fashion press and retailers are not the big names generally credited with setting the trends for others to follow.
Their names are hardly household words.
But they do speak for the younger generation and often manage to distill its current interests and preoccupations.


Caroline A. Penney, A Philanthropist, 96
Caroline A. Penney, a philanthropist and the widow of the legendary merchandiser James Cash Penney, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 96 years old.
She died of heart failure, a family spokeswoman said.


Damage to Bush Seen
Some leaders of American Jewish groups predicted today that President Bush would pay in the November election for his demand that Israel freeze settlements as a condition for loan guarantees, which has led to a breakdown in the negotiations over the Israeli aid request.
Other Jewish groups, however, put the blame for the breakdown on Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, saying he put his ideological commitment to building settlements in the West Bank ahead of the need to absorb Russian immigrants.


Review/Film; Idealism And Reality At Hormel
"American Dream" was shown as part of the 1990 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 6, 1990.
The film is at the Angelika Film Center, 611 Broadway, at Houston Street.
Barbara Kopple is well remembered as the director of "Harlan County, U.S.A.," her outstandingly fine and troubling 1977 documentary about a strike by coal miners against a power company in eastern Kentucky.
Now, in her account of another walkout, this time by factory workers at the George A. Hormel Company meatpacking plant in Austin, Minn., Ms.
Kopple has found and illustrated another American tragedy.


SCIENTISTS PRESS EAST-WEST ACCORD
In another sign of relaxation of East-West tensions, the leaders of the nation's two laboratories for the design of nuclear arms told Congress yesterday about a recent visit to Russia in which they toured secret cities once devoted to threatening America with a nuclear firestorm.
Now, the American scientists said, they and their Russian counterparts are discussing ending their long intellectual war and beginning a new era of friendship and collaboration.


Analyzing the Analyst's Couch
BUYING a couch is an emotionally charged activity for most people; it's such a big item, for one thing, such a life-style totem.
But for a psychoanalyst, picking out the Freudian bed on which patients will reveal their fears, fantasies and free associations is more complicated.
The couch plays such an important role that it appears to have a psyche of its own.
Thus the analyst's choice of shape, color and style can prove very revealing.


HOME IMPROVEMENTS
MOST door chimes are simple in design and easy to fix.
Because they draw only a small current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- there is little danger of shock when you need to make repairs.
But it's not a bad idea to turn off the power to the system before investigating.
To do so, trip the circuit breaker or remove the fuse involved; then, make sure you follow these repair procedures in the order given:


Attacks Planned in Newspaper-Phone Company Turf War
The battle between telephone companies and newspapers heated up today, as the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee vowed to introduce "comprehensive" legislation favoring the publishers, and the seven Bell companies prepared a bare-knuckled counterattack.
"There is now a window of time in which Congress can take action to establish competitive safeguards before they fall to the spreading chaos of deregulatory zeal," said Representative Jack Brooks, Democrat of Texas, the committee chairman.
While refusing to spell out details, Mr.
Brooks has made it clear in recent hearings that he strongly favors rolling back a recent court decision and continuing restrictions on the Bell companies' ability to offer information services, as well as to manufacture equipment or enter the long-distance business.


South Africa's Earthquake
President F. W. de Klerk's incredible gamble has paid off.
And a lost white tribe has voted to rejoin the human race.
On Tuesday, South Africa's ruling whites were asked whether they would be willing to relinquish their monopoly on political power.
Their answer: a resounding yes.
Decency and realism not only prevailed but triumphed.
In an 85 percent turnout, whites voted more than 2 to 1 in favor of shaping a new constitution that finally would enfranchise blacks.
Mr. de Klerk's jubilant summary says it all: "Today we have closed the book on apartheid."


And Let Us Also Vote for 'None of the Above'
To the Editor:
I heartily commend your criticisms of New York State ballot rules in "Republicans vs. Democracy in New York" (editorial, Feb. 27) and similar writings on the same subject.


New Pepsi Spots For Magic Johnson
In the latest development in the endorsement career of Magic Johnson following his disclosure that he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, the Pepsi-Cola Company said yesterday that the former basketball superstar would appear in its product advertising sometime during this year.
Pepsi was one of a long list of companies whose relationships with Mr.
Johnson were cast into doubt when he made his disclosure last November.
Previously, Pepsi had said that it was considering a variety of other roles for Mr.
Johnson, including appearances in public-service announcements and visits to schools to discuss AIDS.


Socialism Makes Everybody Equally Poor; Huge Inequities
To the Editor:
Andrew Schotter (Op-Ed, Feb. 29) writes: "In a capitalist system, people are in effect paid according to how much society would lose if it were to do without their services." This is a myth perpetuated by ideologists of the right.
That it is picked up and repeated by one who advocates government intervention to correct inequities that arise when markets allocate resources shows how successful those ideologists have been.


Nassau Clerk's Backlog Includes Civil Judgments
By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO
A 12-week backlog in the recording of deeds and mortgages at the Nassau County Clerk's office extends to the recording of civil judgments, causing a legal nightmare for title insurers, lawyers and ordinary citizens.
"I used to be comfortable doing business in Nassau County," said Gary Seltzer, the vice president of the Topaz Abstract Corporation, a title insurance company based in Garden City.
"Now I quake. The potential for fraud is almost unlimited."


An Evolving South Africa: The Years Under de Klerk
FEB. 2, 1989: F. W. de Klerk is elected leader of the National Party, which has governed South Africa since 1948 on the principle of apartheid, separation of the races with political power reserved for whites.
De Klerk, who has come up in the party and Government as a conventional figure and an apar theid proponent, is a generation younger than President P. W. Botha.
He begins to emerge as a leader more willing than his predecessors to liberalize the country's political system.


Dim View of Economy From Oil Industry
Whatever the tea leaves show in other parts of the American economy, the oil industry said yesterday that the nation was still in recession, with February's refinery output at its lowest level in nearly five years.
Domestic crude-oil production also continues to fall sharply.
But overall demand was up in February compared with last year, because of an anomaly: February 1991 was a depressed month because of the Persian Gulf war.


Improv, in Chapter 11 Protection, Is Still Joking
It is no laughing matter.
The Improvisation on Manhattan's West 44th Street -- grandfather of comedy clubs and spawning ground for a virtual Hall of Fame of comics -- has filed for bankruptcy protection.
The 29-year-old club, a victim of the recession, will stay open for the time being.
Seven comics and a master of ceremonies appeared last night.
The schedule was full for every night this week, the manager, Errol Edwards, said yesterday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; The Rumble of Discontent Rattles Illinois Incumbents
The Illinois primary blew a chill breeze over Congressional incumbents today as a Senator and two Representatives were beaten by challengers and two veteran House members survived with some difficulty.
There was an expected pattern of anti-incumbent voting in the Chicago area, fanned by last week's public disclosures that 355 current and former House members had written thousands of overdrafts on the House bank.
In that clouded political air, three Democrats -- Senator Alan J. Dixon and Representatives Charles A. Hayes and Gus Savage -- were defeated.
And Representatives Dan Rostenkowski, a Democrat, and Philip M. Crane, a Republican, won with less than three-fifths of the vote.


Amex to Halt Trading in Continental
The American Stock Exchange said last night that it would suspend trading in the common shares of Continental Airlines Holdings after the closing bell tomorrow, at the request of the company.
The move came after Continental's shares fell nearly 60 percent in extremely heavy trading yesterday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut; Protest Vote Looms in State Once Vital to Tsongas
Paul E. Tsongas had a hard time firing up his ambling race for the Presidency.
In Connecticut, at least, he may have an even tougher time shutting it down.
"As far as we are concerned, the Tsongas for President campaign is alive and well and it will go forward," said Tom Sullivan, Mr.
Tsongas's state campaign director.
He met today with nearly three dozen volunteers -- all of whom said they would continue to support the man who is no longer running.
Mr.
Sullivan said he had no desire to cancel a Tsongas fund-raising event scheduled for Saturday here.
And next Tuesday, when the state's unhappy voters go to the polls, Mr.
Tsongas, whose name will still be on the ballot, may be the recipient of a lively last rite, a protest vote he may not have received if he had not withdrawn today from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Seeking the Outrage Vote
It is too early to gauge the impact of Mr.
Tsongas's withdrawal here, in part because the Connecticut primary seemed irrelevant a week ago, when the former Senator from Massachusetts was expected to win, and truly important on Wednesday, when it looked as if Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was closing in and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California appeared ready to challenge Mr.
Tsongas for the outrage vote.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American International Group Inc., New York, an insurance organization, named John Fallon chairman of West Coast operations. *
Leslie Fay Cos., New York, named Mary McCrae president of Canadian operations.


On Stage, and Off
Second Stage Change
Robyn Goodman, the co-founder and co-artistic director of Second Stage, has announced her resignation, effective June 1.
Carole Rothman will now be the theater's sole artistic director, and Ms.
Goodman will join the theater's board.
Ms.
Goodman says she has accepted a new position in the entertainment industry but cannot announce it until her contract is signed.


Review/Theater; Tony Randall Directs 'The Master Builder'
Some theater companies take years to develop and refine a distinctive style, but the National Actors Theater has accomplished this feat in a single season.
The latest example of its signature approach to the classics can be found in its production of "The Master Builder" at the Belasco Theater.
The style might be called the esthetic equivalent of the Heimlich maneuver.
The director, whoever he may be, assumes that the classic play at his disposal is near death, or at least thought so by the audience, and must be resuscitated by being pounded out by the actors, with waving arms and often at top volume.
If the actors stand in place while declaiming ("The Crucible" and "The Master Builder"), you're at a drama.
If they are jumping up and down ("A Little Hotel on the Side"), it's comedy tonight.


Bernard J. Lasker, 81, Chairman Of Big Board in '70 Crisis, Dies
Bernard J. Lasker, a former chairman of the New York Stock Exchange and fund-raiser for prominent Republicans like former President Richard M. Nixon and former Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York City, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Greenwich, Conn.


U.S. URGES CITIZENS TO QUIT LIBYA NOW
The United States today urged all American citizens in Libya to leave immediately because an embargo may be imposed by the United Nations and air links may be severed.
France issued a similar warning.


Sounds Around Town
Ehrlich and Saxophone
Marty Ehrlich, New Music Cafe, 380 Canal Street, Manhattan, (212) 941-1019.
The saxophonist Marty Ehrlich always leads some of the more intelligent bands around, with compositions that take advantage of all sorts of musical possibilities.
He works with jazz, but some elements in the music are akin to the experimentalism of new music.
And Mr.
Ehrlich, on everything from clarinet to tenor saxophone, is always an incisive improviser, lyrical and aware of texture.
Shows are tomorrow night at 9 and 10:30.
There is a $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Sounds of Haiti
Zin, and Rara Machine, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
Two of the city's best young Haitian bands, Zin and Rara Machine, get together for your dancing pleasure.
Like many other musicians investigating their musical culture, the members of these bands are going back to older styles, working with voodoo and carnival rhythms.
The mixture of the drum and shiny technology will probably go down as a classic period in their music, and here is a good chance to get it firsthand.
The shows tonight are at 11 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.; there is a $16 cover charge.


Talking Up Areas Outside Manhattan
To entice tourists to visit boroughs beyond Manhattan, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced details of plans for a $250,000 marketing campaign carrying the theme "New York City. Yours to discover."
The effort, to begin next month and run through December, will spotlight two neigborhoods in each of the five boroughs as "tourism development zones." The sites selected, besides Harlem and lower Manhattan, include Coney Island in Brooklyn and City Island in the Bronx.


What's Better for a Cold Bat Than a Hot Corner?
His forte had always been focus: Dave Magadan's ability to summon it and then maintain it.
His at-bats were seminars in precision and patience, his seasonal graphs full of unbroken lines of consistent production.
Then came 1991, when Magadan's ability to concentrate vanished, sending the first baseman for the Mets stumbling through a vicious cycle of momentary success and eventual failure.
His focus came randomly, his trips to the plate became so confusing they were almost hallucinatory.
The chart of his season wound up full of wild swings in effectiveness.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Feb. 12 about relationships and sexuality misstated the academic affiliation of Dr.
Richard J. Cross.
He is emeritus professor of environmental and community medicine at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
A letter from the university, addressed to the writer during his vacation, reached the editors belatedly.


Review/Film; Woody Allen on the Loose in Kafka Country
As Wolcott Gibbs once said to Shakespeare: Kafka, here's your hat.
That's just one of the deliciously eccentric messages being sent out by Woody Allen in his rich, not easily categorized new black-and-white comedy, "Shadows and Fog." Among other things, "Shadows and Fog" contemplates life, death, love, literature, movies, American humor in general, the gags of Bob Hope in particular, the music of Kurt Weill and the changing fashions in B.V.D.'s.


Detroit Unfazed By Japan Move
Detroit's Big Three were not impressed today by Japan's announcement that it would reduce the number of cars it exports to the United States to 1.65 million a year, saying the Japanese are still not playing fair.
And the United States said it did not seek the cut in Japanese car exports.
"It was the Japanese decision on their own," a White House official said.


More on Politics
TAX ACTION -- House and Senate conferees strove to settle terms for a politically attractive tax cut before President Bush's deadline.
Business Day, page D1.
TRADE CONCESSION -- President Bush got campaign help from Japan: a more restrictive limit on its auto exports.
Page D1.
THE ECONOMY -- Do the numbers in a moderate economic recovery add up to a Bush re-election?
Economic Scene, page D2.
MEDIA TEAM -- The Bush campaign lacks an advertising team, but names are being mentioned.
Advertising, page D5.


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  DIVIDING THE UNITED WAY PIE
Wealthier affiliates of the organization that distributes millions of dollars among United Way groups throughout the New York region are increasingly dissatisfied with a system that, they believe, takes too much out of their communities and gives it to poorer urban areas.
B4.


Drug Link Is Focus Of Murder Inquiry
Investigators have not eliminated any of possible motives in the slaying of Manuel de Dios Unanue but were "leaning" toward the conclusion that it was linked to the drug trade, New York City Chief of Detectives Joseph R. Borrelli said yesterday.
Two detectives were scheduled to leave last night for Puerto Rico to pursue other leads.
They planned to talk with authorities investigating a political scandal about which Mr. de Dios had testified.
They also planned to interview Vicky Sanchez, the late editor's girlfriend and mother of his child.
She fled to the island after the journalist was shot to death in a Jackson Heights restaurant March 11.


As Gun Debate Rages, Ammunition Makers Are Quietly, and Busily, at Work
Although making billions of rounds of ammunition annually is a big business and thousands of people are killed or injured by misuse of some of those products, the nation's ammunition industry hums along in quiet obscurity, all but ignored by opponents and supporters of gun control.
In most states, all anyone needs to buy ammunition is a driver's license.
No special records are kept of the purchase, which is just as likely to be made at a K-Mart or a gas station-convenience store as a gun shop.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DETAILS MURKY, FOCUS CLEARER
The details of the South Africa of tomorrow are murky and distant, but power is expected to gain new impetus from the overwhelming vote this week in favor of continuing to dismantle apartheid.
A1  IRAQ INVESTIGATION THWARTED
In 1989 and 1990, while Washington was wooing Iraq to balance the scales with Iran, the Administration repeatedly threw obstacles in the way of investigators examining Iraq's role in a multibillion-dollar bank fraud scheme.
A1  TAKING RISKS WITH IRAQ
The risks of military action to prevent Iraq from backing its cease-fire responsibilities are many, but this time, the U.S. says, Security Council authority is implicit.
A8  SECURITY COUNCIL GIVES A PUSH
The Security Council urged Iraq to reach rapid agreement with the United Nations on arrangements for selling oil to pay for humanitarian supplies and for compensation to Kuwait.
A8  PUTTING ASUNDER A ROYAL PAIRING
Whether it's perceived as a romantic tragedy, a threat to a dynasty or merely the nadir of royal public-relations, the impending separation of the Duke and Duchess of York is juicier than the election news, at least in Britain.
A11  AMERICANS URGED TO LEAVE LIBYA
The Government urged all American citizens in Libya to leave immediately because an embargo may be imposed by the United Nations and air links severed.
A10  FAILURE IN HAITI
Efforts to undo the military coup that ousted Haiti's elected President have all but collapsed after Parliament failed to ratify a settlement, diplomats said.
A3  MARCH OF PROTEST IN ARGENTINA
An estimated 70,000 people, including Argentina's President, marched 10 blocks today to protest the bombing on Tuesday of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires.
A3  TRADING IN INVECTIVE IN FRANCE
Bernard Tapie and Jean-Marie Le Pen are slinging invective rather than discussing the issues as French regional elections near.
A11  VANCE HEADED TO AZERBAIJAN
A cease-fire accord had been reached in the disputed Caucasus enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, and Cyrus R. Vance will travel there as a special U.N. envoy.
A6  Kabul Journal: After a lean winter, survival supersedes peace.
A4  National A12-20, A34, B6  TSONGAS ABANDONS CAMPAIGN
Former Senator Tsongas withdrew from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, a decision that many in his party said all but assured the nomination of Governor Clinton.
A1  PREPARING FOR CLINTON VS.
BUSH
News analysis: The withdrawal of Mr.
Tsongas set the stage for a fight between a self-described agent of "fundamental change" and a longtime champion of the status quo, a fight between a World War II generation and a one that grew up during the Vietnam War.
A1  A TORTUOUS PATH STRAIGHTENS
Two weeks ago Clinton aides believed the campaign was in desperate straits, but now they see a nearly clear path to the nomination.
A20
What led to the day of reckoning for Tsongas.  A14
Brown kept his critical edge sharp and pointed.  A16  MORE UNTIDINESS AT THE HOUSE
The House leadership suffered another embarrassment when the House postmaster resigned amid charges of embezzlement at the lawmakers' post office.
A17
Gingrich and Michel divided further in their triumph.
A17  THE QUIET AMMUNITION INDUSTRY
The nation's ammunition industry has been humming along in quiet obscurity, all but ignored by opponents and supporters of gun control.
A20  BUSINESS STRATEGY FALTERS
Employee leasing, an innovative management technique that is supposed to save small businesses money and provide low-cost health benefits to workers, is backfiring, costing employers, workers and insurers tens of millions of dollars.
A1  DOW EXPLAINS IMPLANT DECISION
The chief executive of Dow Corning Corporation said the company was ending its trade in silicone gel breast implants for purely business reasons, not because it was "hounded out of business" by doubts about the implant's safety.
A12  INCREASE IN ANTI-GAY VIOLENCE
Incidents of violence against homosexuals rose 31 percent last year, according to a survey by a homosexual rights group.
A12  A TOOTHLESS WINTER
Spring arrived before many Americans even reached for their long underwear.
It was the warmest in the 97 years that the National Weather Service has kept records.
A1  FREE TO SPEAK FOR MONEY
A Federal district judge struck down a law that had prevented thousands of low- and mid-level Federal workers from earning outside income for writings and speeches unrelated to their work.
A17  Flawed research at the Environmental Protection Agency.
A13  Law Page B16  There's Yale Law School, and then there are the others
At the Bar Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-32  The sweet smell of nature.
C1  Films about offbeat relationships.
C1  Theater: "The Master Builder." C3  Film: "Shadows and Fog." C6  "Basic Instinct." C8  "Noises Off." C10  Sports B7-14  Basketball: Seton Hall survives scare.
B7  Georgetown advances.
B7  Knicks beat Bucks.
B10  Horse Racing: Arazi's haute training.
B7  Baseball: Magadan keeps trying.
B11  Obituaries A21  Bernard Lasker, chairman of big board in '70 crisis  Paul Ylvisaker, educator and urban planner  Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials A32  If Israel sold Patriot secrets.
Tsongas departs, gracefully.
Now you see it . . .
Brent Staples: Chicago.
Letters A32  A. M. Rosenthal: Evans-Novak &amp; Popeye.
A33  Leslie H. Gelb: The anti-Israeli leaks.
A33  Susan Estrich: Let the mud fly.
A33  From South Africa: White voices, black voices.
A33  Marjorie Garber: Joe Camel, an X-rated smoke.
A33


Art in Review
'Pollaiuolo and Hercules'  The Frick Collection 1 East 70th Street Manhattan Through March 29
This handsome display of eight works is the latest instance of a museum's organizing the sort of concentrated exhibition that focuses attention on an object from its own collection.
The object is a bronze figurine of Hercules attributed to the Italian Renaissance master Antonio del Pollaiuolo, who lived from 1431 or '32 to 1498.
The sculpture came on the art market in the early years of this century, at the same time as another bronze figurine of Hercules, also attributed to him.
The second work belongs to the State Museums of Berlin.
In this exhibition, the two sculptures have been brought together for the first time, along with several prints, drawings and paintings associated with the artist that depict Hercules and other warriors.


Report in California Recommends Customizing High School Studies
Rejecting the traditional "shopping mall" approach of most high schools, a state-sponsored study group today recommended that California students be asked to take two years of a tougher core curriculum, then customize their studies in the last two years to better prepare them for college or the workplace.
The report, the result of a two-year study by a 69-member High School Task Force, proposes routing juniors and seniors into "majors" that would be organized either by career fields, like health care, or by academic disciplines, like the humanities.
These focus areas could lead to college, further technical training or directly into a job.
Students would have the option of changing paths.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; In TV Age, Tsongas Built A Campaign on His Book
In the end it was not enough to win, but Paul E. Tsongas deserves to be remembered for a remarkable achievement in the television age.
He based a political campaign on a book that he wrote himself.
Few voters read it, of course, but the mere existence of "A Call to Economic Arms" gave Mr.
Tsongas credibility and helped inspire a battle of the books.
He and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas took their campaigns to the reference desk of local libraries in New Hampshire, where voters could compare Mr.
Tsongas's work with Mr.
Clinton's "A Plan for America's Future."


House Postmaster Swept Out as Inquiries Widen
The Postmaster of the House resigned today as the embarrassing spotlight on abuses at sloppily managed House institutions swung from the lawmakers' bank to their Capitol Hill post office.
The resignation of Robert V. Rota, the top official at the House post office, was announced by Thomas S. Foley, the House Speaker, who sought to portray the departure as a long-planned voluntary retirement.


A Long Road Back For Tulane and Coach
There are no manuals for college basketball coaches who want to revive teams that have been reduced to scandal-tainted rubble and then remained dormant for several years.
Maybe Tulane Coach Perry Clark can work on one in his spare time.
Clark would be an eminently qualified author on the subject, having taken over the Tulane basketball program on July 16, 1988.
It had been disbanded by the university three years earlier because of a point-shaving scandal during the 1984-85 season.


Review/Opera; A 'Coq d'Or' That's Plain But Not Bad To Look At
Cultural adversaries for so much of this century, Russian and American music have tended to sin in the same directions: toward love of size, the pursuit of technique for its own sake, the confusing of pressure and intensity with beauty.
Indeed, when the Bolshoi Opera brought "Eugene Onegin" to New York last year, many listeners were unhappily surprised to find Tchaikovsky's delicate domestic drama smothered, and all but lost, in a gargantuan set and sprawling production.
For operagoers knowledgeable in Franco Zeffirelli's inflations of Puccini and Verdi at the Metropolitan Opera, the experience was not the delight of discovery but disappointment born of the depressingly familiar.


A Superintendent's Stormy History Repeats Itself
In the school district that stretches over much of Manhattan's East Side, plenty of people will tell you that Anthony Alvarado is one of education's holy men.
"No one can hold a candle to him," says Judith Chin, a principal whose Chinatown school is a recipient of one of Mr.
Alvarado's pet projects, an early intervention program in reading.
But there are also plenty of people who believe that Mr.
Alvarado, the superintendent of District 2, is not a person who can be trusted.
"He's a Faustian figure," said Peter Rose, a district board member.
"He should be removed from office."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about disputes involving United Ways of Tri-State misstated the year Calvin E. Green resigned as president.
It was 1989.


Drug-Dealer Evictions Are Conducted Fairly
To the Editor:
A March 4 news report from Richmond, Va., that a Federal appeals court has declared unconstitutional an on-the-spot eviction of suspected drug sellers from public housing and a March 11 article on a case involving such an eviction in the Bronx may lead readers to believe that the use of eviction proceedings against drug dealers violates due process.
Since June 1988, the Manhattan District Attorney's Office narcotics eviction program has initiated proceedings in which more than 1,000 drug dealers have been evicted from their apartments.
Those proceedings have been scrupulously fair.
When the police find evidence of narcotics trafficking in an apartment, our office notifies the landlord and encourages him to bring an eviction proceeding against the tenant-dealer.


CONCERN ON PLANS BY QUAYLE COUNCIL
Though they now appear to be in general agreement, officials of the Food and Drug Administration had mounted vigorous objections to proposals by the White House Council on Competitiveness to speed up the approval of new drugs, agency documents suggest.
The documents, obtained by Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, show that agency officials were wary of many proposals and outright opposed to others.
Some of the documents were signed by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler.


Jack Washburn Dies; Actor and Singer, 64
Jack Washburn, an actor and nightclub singer, died on Sunday at his home in New Hope, Pa.
He was 64 years old.
He died after a long illness, said his wife, Diane.


Livery Drivers in Brooklyn Hold Anti-Gypsy Cab Demonstration


UConn's Romp Sets Up Date With Buckeyes
The Connecticut team that won 15 of its first 16 games this season -- not the one that lost 9 of its last 11 -- was on the floor tonight against Nebraska and demolished the Cornhuskers, 86-65.
The result set up a notable confrontation here on Saturday between the ninth-seeded Huskies and No. 1-seeded Ohio State (24-5), which routed Mississippi Valley State, 83-56, in another Southeast Regional first-round game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Clinton Campaign Watches as Obstacles to the Democratic Nomination Fall
Little more than two weeks ago, aides to Gov.
Bill Clinton believed that his campaign was in desperate shape.
Slumped over their morning coffee at an Atlanta hotel on March 3, three of his top advisers braced themselves for bad news from Georgia and Maryland, where there were primary elections that day.
But Mr.
Clinton got the victory margin he needed in Georgia, finished within seven percentage points of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas in Maryland and so built up enough speed to steamroller the Super Tuesday primaries the next week.


E.P.A. Research Lags, Report Finds
Research conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency suffers from uneven quality, inadequate funds, poor direction and a lack of first-rate scientists and equipment, a report made public today says.
The report, discussed at a hearing of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, said the environmental agency neither conducts environmental research as well as it could nor uses science effectively in considering and writing regulations.


Three More Arrested
State police in South Kingstown, R.I., arrested three more people yesterday, including a University of Rhode Island student, while an investigation continues into allegations of gambling on campus.
Roland Recker, a 21-year-old student, was arrested Tuesday night at his dormitory and charged with bookmaking and organized criminal gambling, said Capt.
Brian Andrews.
Recker was released on $20,000 personal recognizance.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The merchandise trade deficit narrowed slightly in January to $5.77 billion, even though American exports fell for a third straight month, the Government said.  [ Page D1. ]


Shareholder Suit Aimed at Farley
Minority shareholders of West Point-Pepperell Inc. have sued the Chicago industrialist William F. Farley for allegedly "looting the company" after he acquired 95 percent of the Georgia-based textile manufacturer for $3 billion in 1989.
Mr.
Farley is chairman of Fruit of the Loom Inc. and Farley Inc., which is reorganizing under bankruptcy protection.


Air Products Names Next Chief Executive
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., the large supplier of industrial gases, specialty chemicals and environmental and energy system, announced yesterday that Harold A. Wagner, the company's president and chief operating officer, would become chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Dexter F. Baker, who turns 65 years old next month.
The announcement had been widely anticipated since June, when Mr.
Wagner was elevated to his current position.


Diner's Journal
A  Classic in the Bronx
A recent shopping expedition to Arthur Avenue in the Bronx with two fellow food sleuths, Jacques Pepin, the cooking teacher and author, and Ed Giobbi, a painter and an author of Italian cookbooks, culminated inevitably at Dominick's restaurant.
It has been several years since my last visit to this unremittingly popular 37-year-old institution.


Japan's Market Closed
The Tokyo stock market was closed today for Japan's vernal equinox holiday.
It will reopen on Monday.
On Thursday, stocks rebounded as the Nikkei index of 225 stocks rose 420.78 points, or 2.1 percent, to 20,185.09.


Ex-Rep. Michael A. Feighan, 87; Architect of '65 Immigration Law
Michael A. Feighan, a 14-term Democratic Congressman from Ohio who was chief architect of the 1965 immigration act that abolished the system of quotas by national origin, died yesterday at a hospital in Washington.
He was 87 years old and had homes in Washington and Cleveland.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


Books of The Times; Six Generations of Mediterranean Wandering
Mr. Mani  By A. B. Yehoshua Translated by Hillel Halkin. 368 pages.  Doubleday. $22.50.
A.
B.
Yehoshua, one of Israel's world-class authors, expands his horizons in an inventive new novel that crosses time and borders.
By following the fortunes of a Sephardic family during a century of seeking and wandering, he has created more than a Jewish story: "Mr. Mani" is an epic Mediterranean novel.


CHRONICLE
WENDY KOPP, the 24-year-old New Yorker who founded the Teach for America program to train and place teachers in remote rural areas, was one of 11 people honored yesterday for their contributions to their communities in 1991.
They appeared at the fourth annual Kleenex Says Bless You Awards ceremony at the Willard Inter-Continental Hotel in Washington.
"Our 1,200 corps members each day make a difference in the lives of their students, and I only hope their example will encourage others to do the same," said Ms.
Kopp, who recruits recent college graduates to work in her Peace Corps-type program.


Mr. Tsongas Departs, Gracefully
The fatal flaw in Paul Tsongas's campaign was that his message never reached much beyond well-educated, upper-income voters.
But there was something unusually principled about his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
He was consistent, honest, uncalculating.
His presence will be missed in the forthcoming Connecticut and New York primaries.
Mr.
Tsongas ended his campaign yesterday, citing a depleted war chest.
He may also have decided he could not recover from his poor showing in Illinois and Michigan.
Whatever the reason, his withdrawal becomes him.
He never pretended to be other than what he is, a public-spirited citizen with interesting ideas, an understated style and a self-deprecating sense of humor.
In the same spirit, he concluded that it would be dishonorable to masquerade as a viable candidate when all he could really be was a spoiler.


New Jobless Claims Fall In Week
The number of workers filing for first-time jobless benefits fell in the first week of March, the Goverment said today, but analysts said it was too early to predict an upturn in the job market.
The Labor Department said 433,000 people filed new claims for state jobless benefits in the week that ended March 7, down from a revised 460,000 the previous week.


The Art Market
To the Victor a Millet
Just how far will Sotheby's outdo Christie's to get a plum?
Even when times were good, the struggle between the two top auction houses, sometimes for a single picture, was fierce.
But with the spring sales in New York only two months away, obtaining great works of art appears to require a good deal of ingenuity.


Art in Review
Guaman Poma de Ayala 'The Colonial Art of an Andean Author'  The Americas Society 680 Park Avenue (at 68th Street) Through March 29
In 1908, a researcher in the Royal Library of Copenhagen came upon the extraordinary document that is the focus of this provocative and quietly moving exhibition.
It was an illustrated manuscript from the early 17th century, nearly 1,200 pages long, in the form of a letter to King Philip III of Spain.
The author, and artist of the nearly 400 drawings accompanying the text, was Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala.
He was an Andean native, a member of the Yarovilca dynasty, born around 1535.
After collaborating with the Spanish against his fellow Indians, he eventually became active on behalf of Andean causes.
Because he taught his fellow natives to read and write so that they could defend themselves in the Spanish legal system, the colonial authorities deemed him a subversive and exiled from Haumanga, the city where he lived.


Art in Review
'Something's Out There Danger in Contemporary Photography'  National Arts Club 15 Gramercy Park South Manhattan Through March 28
This exhibition, the first sponsored by this venerable institution's new photography committee, features a potpourri of work by photographers ranging from the Brazilian documentarian Sebastiao Salgado to the French fashion duo Pierre et Gilles.
Most of the work is more or less closely related to the show's theme of danger, although in many cases the threat is not immediately apparent.
Thus William Eggleston's delicate image of a young boy reading a magazine turns ominous only with the realization that the ad at which the boy gazes with such longing is for pistols.
In much the same way, Lynn Davis's delicately fluted icebergs are threatening only on reflection, while Mary Ellen Mark's photographs of rodeo cowboys performing stunts on horseback seem dangerous only to the riders.


Cunningham and Pals Are Going to Las Vegas
RANDALL CUNNINGHAM, the Philadelphia Eagles' quarterback, who is eager to come back from knee surgery, is flying four of his receivers out to Las Vegas, Nev., for a personal minicamp next week.
His friend, ERIC DICKERSON of the Colts, is expected to join the crew for a week of workouts at Cunningham's alma mater, Nevada-Las Vegas.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Seitel Inc. of Houston offered $12.5 million in convertible subordinated debentures, due 2002, through American Securities Corp., bearing an interest rate of 9 percent.
They can be converted into stock at $9.375 a share.
The company creates seismic surveys and sells data from its library.


Dismissal of Coach Explained by Board
Under court order and the threat of further legal action, the Board of Education convened a public meeting tonight to tell the most successful high school baseball coach in New Jersey why it was denying him a 34th season.
In general statements, the superintendent, his assistant and members of the board described the coach, Gordon LeMatty, as having been insensitive to the needs of his players in recent years.
They said that his won-lost record, though the best in the state, was less important than his attitude, which they said suggested that his coaching duties were more important to him than the social studies classes he was assigned to teach.


Argentine Rally Condemns Bombing
President Carlos Saul Menem joined a rally of tens of thousands of Argentines today to protest and "repudiate" the bombing on Tuesday of the Israeli Embassy here.
In a somber outpouring of support for those who were killed, an estimated 70,000 people marched 10 blocks to a site near the demolished embassy, where rescue workers were still trying to locate bodies.


Capriati Too Tired For Pace
Left with more fatigue than fight following two arduous rounds against Zina Garrison and Monica Seles, Jennifer Capriati capitulated, 6-2, 6-4, to Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain today in the semifinals of the Lipton Players International.
"I was willing to fight more," said Capriati, whose victory over Seles a day earlier ended several streaks for the world's top female player, "but you can't fight if your legs aren't there.
"Her plan was getting everything in, moving me and breaking me down. She played very smart, and I got tired. And impatient."
More interested in prolonging points and retrieving balls than trying to outgun Capriati, Sanchez Vicario goaded the 15-year-old into 32 unforced errors, thwarted her pace with a hefty dose of powdery topspin and confused her with an unpredictable array of drives and drop shots.
Lost Opportunities
This knockout combination cost Capriati the opportunity to reach her first final in 1992 as well as a career-high ranking of fifth in the world.
"She was not in position to hit, and if she's not in position, she can't hit the ball hard," said Sanchez Vicario, who will face third-ranked Gabriela Sabatini on Saturday in a final that Seles had won the last two years.
Seles had reached 21 straight finals, in fact, before Capriati eliminated her on Wednesday, ending a string of 27 match victories as well.
Tonight Sabatini turned in a 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1 comeback performance against Steffi Graf that was nearly a replica of their semifinal clash here last year, when Sabatini dropped the opening set without taking a game and then struck back, 7-6 (8-6), 6-1, in the next two.
"I never thought I was going to lose the match," said Sabatini.
"It was the most important moment when I was losing, 3-1, in the second set, but I kept attacking and coming to the net and, well, I came back."
All crisp precision as this year's rematch began, the second-ranked Graf was drenched in indecision by the time it ended with her double fault on Sabatini's second match point.
"My serve was terrible today," said Graf, who unraveled after the tie breaker and later said she was suffering from fatigue by the third set.
Once Sabatini began to ambush Graf's passing shot and charge in on nearly every return, the German was paralyzed, the Argentine energized.
Sabatini said she knows what to expect from Sanchez Vicario, whom she has beaten in 11 of 14 meetings: "She's a big fighter, and she runs everything down."
Capriati expected that, too, but didn't have the energy to make her opponent fight her favorite way.
It's Not Easy to Hit It Hard
"She likes a lot of pace, and I didn't play like that," said Sanchez Vicario of Capriati, who saved two match points on her own serve but at 40-0 dropped a backhand into the net as the Spaniard served out the match.
"I think she didn't know what to do."
That's a problem that Capriati, like most girls 10 days from their 16th birthday and enduring the mood swings that accompany the age, is busy confronting on every front.
Today, she had trouble with her tennis.
Instead of adjusting her game plan to the windy conditions, she tried to play the same swashbuckling style that served her so well against Seles, and when those high-minded shots went astray, she became frustrated and tentative, not inventive.
Tomorrow, tennis could be the last thing on her mind: "School, friends, and stuff," said Capriati.
She's not a ponytailed prodigy anymore.
Instead, she is an intermittently sulky superstar whose hair has turned a shade lighter than her disposition; she sneaked her favorite color, black, onto the court today in the form of a headband.
Although a smile comes more naturally than a frown, she is adamant about the fact that she's "not a baby" anymore and no longer feels comfortable cooing and gurgling in the spotlight.
Like all teen-agers, she spars with her parents; unlike most of them, she has to account for her growing pangs in public, which occasionally makes her irritable.
But Capriati, who already possesses the natural talent and mental tenacity of a champion, came to Lipton ready to compete, even if she was too bone-weary to show it in this semifinal.
"I was coming in here willing to play," said Capriati, who two months ago wasn't.
"I'd been working hard, my coach told me I was playing well, and I didn't want to let that go down the drain."


Nestle Is Set For Victory
After more than three months of bruising battle for control of Source Perrier S.A., it seems almost certain that Nestle, the Swiss food giant, will win, beating a rival offer from the patrician Agnelli family of Italy.
Interviews with two top officials of the Agnelli empire, which includes the Fiat S.p.A. auto company and is based in Turin, revealed that the family had little further appetite for the fight.
Unhappy at becoming embroiled in the kind of public takeover battle it has traditionally shunned, the family has concluded from two recent adverse court rulings that its cause faces overwhelming resistance.


Review/Dance; Merce Cunningham Premiere Is an Ode to Unison
"Loosestrife," which had its New York premiere with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company on Wednesday night, is a compelling work, so overflowing with an abundance of varied movement that its shapes recall mythical beasts of antiquity.
The voracious inventiveness of the choreography goes well with the strangeness of the title.
Loosestrife is a wildflower, apparently attractive to insects and apt to take over the terrain on which it grows.


Police Plan To Buy Guns From Public
In what police officials called the first salvo in an expanded campaign against the use of firearms in New York, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown announced yesterday that New Yorkers will be paid up to $75 for each gun they turn over at any of the city's 75 precincts.
"We have got to get rid of the blasted guns," Mayor Dinkins said.
"Many times we have some youngsters, some little toddler, wandering into school with a damn gun."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown Seems to Relish a Narrowed Race
Snow snarled the highways into Hartford this morning, and so Edmund G. Brown Jr., stuck in traffic, kept a group of black and Hispanic legislators waiting for 45 minutes for a breakfast meeting at the Washington Diner.
When he finally met with the group, answering their questions about how the Federal Government could help the nation's cities, he did not want to make them wait again.
So when someone said that he had an important telephone call from Washington, and that the caller was saying Paul E. Tsongas was dropping out of the race for President, Mr.
Brown did not get up to take the call.


Shifting of Fiscal Blame Is Spreading in Albany
Less than two weeks from April 1, the start of the fiscal year, state officials continue to report only incremental progress on the state budget.
But they have hustled to lay the groundwork to deflect blame if the budget is late for an eighth straight year.
In the last week, both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, have voiced optimism that the budget will be on time while simultaneously asserting that it will be the other guy's fault if it is not.


Don't Borrow to Balance the Budget, Rohatyn Says
Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the state Municipal Assistance Corporation, said yesterday that the Dinkins administration should scrub its plan to borrow $250 million during the next two years to balance its budget without layoffs, reversing his previous support for the plan.
Instead, Mr.
Rohatyn stongly urged the administration to step up pressure on municipal labor unions to obtain more work-rule changes and other cost-saving concessions that would make the borrowing unnecessary.


Replay Out of the Loop, N.F.L. Fast Forwards
Helping the World League of American Football kick off its second season on solid footing, somehow finding a solution to the National Football League's labor mess and preventing a court battle three months from now are the priorities for the N.F.L., Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said today as the league owners concluded their annual meeting.
The World League, which opens Saturday, has promised a better product this year and more return to the N.F.L. owners for their investments by providing a stronger pool of players for N.F.L. scouts.
Tagliabue said those expectations were realistic.


After Overdrafts, a Withdrawal
With his Senate campaign stalled by the House banking uproar, Robert Mrazek has told associates he's quitting the New York race.
Page B1.


U.S. Says Bank Group Is Victim in Fraud Case
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan charged yesterday that a privately held petrochemicals company had defrauded a consortium of five international banks led by Chase Manhattan of more than $100 million.
The prosecutors said the fraud was one of the largest ever involving banks operating in New York City.
The authorities said the banks were tricked into believing that the company, Arochem Inc., had more than $200 million when they lent it money, when, in fact, the company was $100 million in debt.


Rochelle Klein Plans To Join Hal Riney
After months of being wooed by several agencies, Rochelle Klein said yesterday that she would join Hal Riney &amp; Partners in New York in the new position of senior vice president and executive creative director.
Her appointment takes effect on April 6.


Critic's Choice/Film; Works of Art About Art
Philip Haas does a rare thing: he makes elegant, quietly revelatory films about art.
In the nine films to be screened in the 10-year retrospective of Mr.
Haas's work this weekend and next week at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, the 38-year-old film maker seems to possess a kind of sixth sense when it comes to capturing the experience of art -- both the making and the viewing -- on film.
His subjects vary tremendously in style, culture and geographical location.
"The Giant Woman and the Lightning Man," which is being shown today at 3:30 P.M., is one of four extraordinary films that Mr.
Haas made in conjunction with the "Magicians of the Earth" exhibition at the Pompidou Center in Paris in 1989.
It shows aboriginal artists in central Australia creating a ground painting.
"Seni's Children," another of the "Magicians" films, features Seni Camara, a Senegalese woman whose elaborate clay creature-sculptures have developed independently of local traditions (Sunday at 4:15).


Long-Term Rates Drop Below 8%
Long-term interest rates fell below 8 percent yesterday, continuing a cautious downward move that began earlier in the week.
Trading volume, however, was once again light, and participants said that despite the improvement the negative tone dominating the market for much of the last two months remained largely intact.


The Hour Has Come: Rams vs. Minutemen
The two teams were at the homes of their coaches early last Sunday evening, waiting to see where they would go in the N.C.A.A. tournament, and who would stand in the way of their dreams.
Fordham's Rams were in Westchester, at Nick Macarchuk's home, waiting to hear the details of their school's fourth N.C.A.A. tournament trip and the first in 21 years.
The Massachusetts Minutemen were near their Amherst campus, at John Calipari's house, for the news of their second N.C.A.A. bid, and their first in 30 years.


Court Ends Ban on Outside Income For Thousands of U.S. Employees
A Federal district judge today struck down a law that had prevented thousands of low- and mid-level Federal workers from earning outside income for writings and speeches unrelated to their work.
The judge, Thomas Penfield Jackson, said the section of the law prohibiting Federal Civil Service employees from collecting fees for writing occasional articles or giving speeches on topics far removed from their work violated their First Amendment rights to free speech.


Hearns and Barkley Both Fight for Redemption
The first time Thomas Hearns and Iran Barkley fought, in June 1988, their match seemed to be headed for a predictable ending.
Well into the third round, Barkley was absorbing a terrible beating, as Hearns threw buggywhip left hooks with near impunity, big noisy shots that had the crowd ooohing at the damage they produced.
Barkley's face was bloody, his brows cut and swollen.
Ringsiders sensed that the toll of punches was about to oblige a humane decision to stop the bout before Barkley became a walking gargoyle.


The Smell of Roasted Coffee Comes to an End in Hoboken


Review/Film; To Be a Jew In 1880's Hungary
In the opening scene of Judit Elek's film "Memoirs of a River," the peaceful existence of Jacob (Zoltan Mucsi), a Jewish shepherd, is shattered by the sounds of gunfire.
Moments later, he sees a wounded young girl running in terror from armed horsemen.
Fleeing into the forest, he watches as his house is burned to the ground and his sheep are set on fire.
Such images of extreme brutality erupting in lush pastoral landscapes, photographed with a mystical appreciation of their beauty, recur throughout the film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema.
These juxtapositions underscore an unsettling notion that runs to the heart of the film: not even the secluded pastoral aeries of this world are safe from evil.


On My Mind; Evans-Novak &amp; Popeye
Across the country, an important story damaging to both the United States and Israel has been printed in newspapers reaching millions of Americans.
The story is that American intelligence agencies have come across "surprising information": Israel has been negotiating with Communist China to sell it a missile called STAR.


Foreign Affairs; The Anti-Israeli Leaks
Are George Bush and James Baker scheming to undercut Israel in America?
The answer turns largely on the story behind three recent, nasty news leaks, and the Bush-Baker reactions.


Review/Art; William Harnett and the Trompe l'Oeil Still Life
Still life wasn't a subject greatly favored by American painters of the 19th century; maybe the pull of nature outside the studio door was just too strong.
But among its practitioners, William M. Harnett (1848-1892) was one of the greatest.
Harnett attained fame in his own day for his virtuosic, trompe l'oeil realism, and his illusionist's skills still have much appeal.
Yet, as "William M. Harnett," a small but superbly mounted survey of his paintings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, demonstrates, his work is equally interesting for what it has to say about the America of its time.


New Europe President For International Paper
The International Paper Company has promoted W. Michael Amick, an engineer with experience in manufacturing and human resources, to president of the company's European operations yesterday.
Mr.
Amick, who has been vice president and a group executive in charge of specialty industrial papers for the last four years, replaces C. Wesley Smith, who was named executive vice president for the company's pulp and paper division.
The change was effective yesterday.


A Salute to Bernstein
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus is to present a salute to Leonard Bernstein at 8 P.M. on Sunday at Carnegie Hall.
The concert, called "Bernstein," will have Betty Comden and Adolph Green as hosts and is to benefit the chorus's AIDS Outreach Program.
Among the guest artists to appear are Judy Kaye, Phyllis Newman, Kurt Ollmann and Kevin Gray.
Gary Miller is to conduct.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Laura Ashley Distribution
Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C., the London-based clothing and home furnishings company, has hired a unit of the Federal Express Corporation to streamline its complex distribution network.
The company said the agreement would eliminate costly inefficiencies and result in annual savings of up to 12 percent of its distribution costs, or roughly $:1.5 million ($2.6 million).
The 10-year contract is valued at $:150 million ($260 million).


Jordan's Lawyer Says He Will Be at Barcelona
After a conference call involving all concerned parties on Wednesday, the representative for Michael Jordan and the second-highest ranked official for the National Basketball Association expressed optimism yesterday that Jordan's differences with the league and USA Basketball could soon be resolved, allowing him to play in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
"Michael is definitely going to play," said his attorney, David Falk, from his office in suburban Washington, although he said no agreement had been reached.


Sounds Around Town
Horvitz and Frisell
Wayne Horvitz and the President, and the Bill Frisell Band, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Kindred spirits share this double bill of composers and performers whose music is full of wide-open spaces, post-linear leaps and sly humor.
Bill Frisell, a guitarist whose phrases seem to drift in from another dimension and disperse like smoke, leads a jazz group that doesn't rule out a little country twang.
Wayne Horvitz, a keyboardist, writes music for his group, the President, that brings together the bluesiness of Little Feat, the interlocking patterns of Steve Reich and ominous rumblings from just over the horizon.
Tonight at 9 P.M. and midnight; tickets are $12 in advance, $14 at the door.
S.O.D.
Reunion
S.O.D., the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
Even speed-metal rockers get a little nostalgic now and then.
When S.O.D. (Stormtroopers of Destruction) broke up, its members went on to form Anthrax, Nuclear Assault and Sawzall.
The band will reunite, however, to record a live album and a video.
Tomorrow at the Ritz, on a bill that also includes Agnostic Front and Morbid Angel, beginning at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $17.50 in advance, $20 tomorrow and $22.50 for reserved seats.


When Outsiders Get the Top Job
The Chrysler Corporation's decision to hand over the reins to an outsider from General Motors is a sharp departure from mainstream corporate behavior but by no means as unusual as it once was.
In the late 1960's, just 7 percent of the chief executives at large companies were there less than four years when they were given the top jobs, according to Richard F. Vancil, a Harvard Business School professor.
That figure more than tripled by the early 1980's, according to a 1987 study by Professor Vancil.


Russians and Germans Hold Orbital News Conference


Jeff Johnson Bothered by Rumor and Bad Impressions
Jeff Johnson heard rumors during the off season about the Yankees pursuing different pitchers, and it bothered him.
Johnson wondered why the front office forgot about him.
He could still pitch, couldn't he?
Were they giving up on him already?
The rumors are still floating around about pitchers the Yankees may want with Bruce Hurst of the San Diego Padres being the latest name and Chris Bosio of the Milwaukee Brewers as the pitcher most often mentioned.


For Children
'Stone Soup and Other Stories'  William Carlos Williams Center
1 Williams Plaza Rutherford, N.J. (201) 939-6969 Recommended ages: 3 to 9
Tomorrow
Last year, the Pushcart Players of Verona, N.J., toured not only their home state -- from Franklin Lakes to Point Pleasant Beach -- but also Kiev and St.
Petersburg in what was then the Soviet Union.
This season, the company, which performs mostly in schools, will present "Stone Soup" in a public engagement that is worth the half-hour drive from the Lincoln Tunnel.
Using masks and a few props, two of the company's actors, Susie Paplow and Jeffery Wingfield, deftly re-enact four folk tales with morals for children to mull over.


Editorial Notebook; Chicago's Message of Hope
It was Martin Luther King Jr. who labeled Chicago the most racist city in the United States.
Deserved or not, the label stuck.
But this week's Illinois primaries brought welcome signs that racial hostilities are easing.
Democratic voters in Chicago and its southern suburbs soundly rejected Representative Gus Savage, a black demagogue who exploited bigotry for political gain.
The winner was Melvin J. Reynolds, a black candidate who ran as a conciliator.
In the Democratic primary for U.S.
Senate, a black county official, Carol Moseley Braun, won a surprising victory over the once-popular white incumbent, Alan J. Dixon.


Review/Film Festival; Acerbity and Escapism In 'Proof,' From Australia
This year's New Directors/New Films series begins exactly as it should, with the work of film makers whose utter assurance and originality prefigure a bright future.
Jocelyn Moorhouse's "Proof," the opening feature, is a darkly clever Australian drama focusing on brilliant, wickedly manipulative characters whose attachment to one another is matched only by their mutual loathing.
Miss Moorhouse has just the right acid wit to make the most of such a situation.
Her film is centered on Martin (Hugo Weaving), a willfully unpleasant young man who happens to be blind and happens to vent much of his hostility upon Celia (Genevieve Picot), his housekeeper.
The droll Celia, whose scathing intelligence makes it clear that she is seriously underemployed, has long devoted herself to taking care of Martin, despite his abusiveness and indifference.
The film initially suggests that this uneasy truce could go on indefinitely, while it also introduces the naive, handsome young Andy (Russell Crowe), who will inadvertently throw it off balance.


Confronting Hussein: Risky for Bush
Almost no one in the world opposes depriving President Saddam Hussein of his weapons of mass destruction, but the Bush Administration's preparations for a new military showdown with Baghdad are shadowed by political risks and unpredictable results.
The military plans, which are intended to prevent the Iraqi leader from reneging on his cease-fire obligations and to loosen his grip on power along the way, are simply not driven by the same clear-cut imperative that hurried the military campaign last year to drive Baghdad's forces from Kuwait.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 592 money market mutual funds decreased by $2.83 billion, to $501.25 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 215 institutional funds decreased by $3.27 billion, to $171.40 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were up by $769 million, to $181.06 billion.
Those of the 91 broker-dealer funds fell by $328 million, to $148.79 billion, the institute said.


Adobe Lawsuit Is Dismissed
Adobe Systems Inc. said a Federal judge here had dismissed a shareholder lawsuit filed in May 1990 after the Mountain View, Calif., software company reported disappointing earnings and its stock plunged.


Tsongas Keeps His Delegates
By suspending his campaign for President yesterday, rather than withdrawing completely, Paul E. Tsongas insures that those delegates he won on the basis of his statewide vote in primaries and caucuses will be able to go to the Democratic National Convention, even though he will not be a nominee.


Short Positions at 19-Month Low on the Big Board
With many bears running for cover, the number of shares in New York Stock Exchange-listed companies sold short and not yet covered has fallen to a 19-month low, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The exchange said that on March 13, the short position was down 4.3 percent, to 691.1 million shares, a drop of 30.9 million in a month and the lowest since Aug. 15, 1990, when the figure was 669 million.


U.N. URGES IRAQIS TO REACH OIL PACT
The Security Council urged Iraq today to reach rapid agreement with the United Nations on new arrangements for selling its oil to pay for essential imports of humanitarian supplies, finance United Nations activities in that country and start compensating victims of the aggression against Kuwait.
A statement, read by Venezuela's representative, Diego Arria, said the Council welcomed Iraq's decision to resume talks on a new oil sales agreement in Vienna next week.
But it also said any new agreement must incorporate the same basic principals as its earlier offer, which Iraq rejected as a violation of its sovereignty.


Blaze Breaks Out At Westbury Concert
A smoky fire forced the evacuation of hundreds of rap music fans from the Westbury Music Fair last night, fire officials said.
None of the fans was injured as they streamed into the snow-covered parking lot, fire officials said.
One employee suffered smoke inhalation and was treated at the scene.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.50
6.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.04
4.04
5.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.21
4.22
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.27
7.32
8.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.96
8.00
8.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.90
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.79
7.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
The topic at the 92d Street Y was "The Moral and Ethical Dilemmas Facing Israel," and the moderator was JOHN CHANCELLOR, the senior commentator for NBC News.
"This is not a political evening," said Mr.
Chancellor, trying to keep the theme focused.
The task was formidable.
His panelists were YITZHAK RABIN, the Israeli Labor Party's candidate for Prime Minister in the June election; DAN MERIDOR, the Israeli Justice Minister, and DAVID KRETZMER, an Israeli lawyer specializing in civil-rights issues.


Cuomo Backs Airport Rail Links In Port Authority-F.A.A. Clash
The dispute over a Port Authority plan to build mass-transit links to the metropolitan region's airports was stepped up yesterday as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo urged the Federal Aviation Administration to support the plan and the authority turned to members of Congress from the area for help.
The F.A.A. has warned that it might block the $2 billion mass-transit plan unless the authority abandons its efforts to strengthen jet-noise restrictions at La Guardia, Kennedy International and Newark International Airports.
The F.A.A. said such restrictions, which would require airlines to phase out older aircraft quickly, would further strain the airlines at a time of financial hardship.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the fatal stabbing of a woman in the county courthouse in Milwaukee misstated the number of restraining orders sought in domestic violence cases last year in that city.
The number is 6,000, not 15,000.


Du Pont Bought Conoco
To the Editor:
In a March 8 letter, Melvin J. Silverman writes that fewer jobs resulted when "Mobil bought Conoco." For the record, Mobil did not buy Conoco.
Du Pont did.
PETER A. SPINA Vice President, Corporate Public Affairs, Mobil Corporation Fairfax, Va., March 12, 1992


Company Accused of Bilking U.S. on Waste Sites
A company that oversees the cleanup of hundreds of abandoned toxic-waste sites was accused today by Congressional investigators of billing the Government for millions of dollars for such expenses as parties, country club fees, season tickets to sporting events and use of a corporate airplane.
The company, CH2M Hill Inc. of Corvallis, Ore., was also criticized by the inspector general for the Environmental Protection Agency, John C. Martin, for executing its work so poorly that long delays and escalating costs have become the norm in the agency's Superfund project to clean up abandoned chemical-waste dumps.


In Victory, Thompson Salutes Opponent
No sooner had Georgetown registered a convincing 15-point victory over South Florida this afternoon than John Thompson, the Hoyas' coach, shook hands with members of the losing team and searched out Radenko Dobras, the Bulls' 6-foot-7-inch guard, and gave him a hug.
The Hoyas had used 3-point shooting and typically tough defense to defeat South Florida, 75-60, in a first round West Regional game, but Dobras had been superb in defeat and was largely the reason the Bulls kept it competitive.
Double-teamed most of the game and guarded by an assortment of Georgetown players, Dobras scored 16 points, handed out 4 assists and could have at least had 10 more had his teammates converted the numerous pinpoint passes he fed them.


TV Weekend; All, Absolutely All, About Old M-G-M
Lavish and shamelessly self-serving, "M-G-M: When the Lion Roars" is a just about perfect match of subject and treatment.
Running for six hours -- and that doesn't include an hour and a half of commercial breaks -- the biography of what is called without much exaggeration "the greatest motion-picture studio the world has ever known" will be broadcast on TNT at 8 P.M. over three consecutive nights, beginning this Sunday (with repeats at 1 A.M.).
Once again, the movies have been shrewdly repackaged and transformed into terrific television.
Serving as host, Patrick Stewart ("Star Trek: The Next Generation") sets the trumpeting tone in an elaborate opening-credits sequence that employs an enormous Art Deco set designed by Thomas A. Walsh to suggest the wedding cake used in the 1936 movie "The Great Ziegfeld." With a telescope trained on a dazzling firmament, Mr.
Stewart assumes the role of Master of Ceremonies, the bellowing kind that would introduce all those beautiful girls in the Ziegfeld Follies.
Listening to "Over the Rainbow," he speaks with exclamation points.
The dreams they dared to dream really did come true!
A lion's roar would freeze time!
Suspend reality!
Escape!
Extravagance!
Power struggles!
Corporate intrigues!
The spectacular rise of an empire and its lamentable fall!
The music soars lushly as Mr.
Stewart descends the wedding-cake steps.


Job Cuts Set In Bank Deal
The BankAmerica Corporation said today that it expects to eliminate 10,000 to 12,000 jobs over the next three years after its planned merger with the Security Pacific Corporation.
BankAmerica said that the actual number of employees laid off would probably be fewer than 10,000 to 12,000 because of attrition.
The company did not say where the job losses would occur.
It is expected, though, that a large number will be in Los Angeles, where Security Pacific is based, and also in San Francisco, where BankAmerica has its headquarters.


Review/Film; Historical Edward II and Gay Issues Today
Extravagant visual elegance and sexual politics have always formed a volatile mix in the work of the English film maker Derek Jarman.
And in "Edward II," his adaptation of Christopher Marlowe's musty Elizabethan drama, the 14th-century tale of the downfall of a weak gay monarch and his unpopular companion is invested with a powerful contemporary resonance.
Although the screen adaptation remains more or less faithful to Marlowe's text, Mr.
Jarman has augmented the drama with provocative visualizations of homosexual love and the persecution of gay people that infuse the play with sex, sadomasochistic violence and a hysterically pitched moral fury.
Where the Marlowe play is a dog-eat-dog political allegory without heroes, the movie is a tract against the oppression of homosexuals through the ages, filmed by a director who is himself openly gay and living with AIDS.


Suddenly, the Choices Are Clearer
With the abrupt withdrawal of Paul E. Tsongas from the contest for the Democratic nomination, the likely shape of the 1992 Presidential race has suddenly come into sharper focus.
A long, fierce and possibly close fight is in prospect between President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Election Day is more than seven months away, but a few things can be said with confidence.


To the Victor Go Far Too Many Spoils
To the Editor:
Wassily Leontief's argument in "Forget the Free Market" (Op-Ed, March 7), that the political ideology of the 1980's turned the words "public service" into an epithet, is unassailable.
Further his suggestion that the United States can learn from Japan's bureaucracy has merit, especially in political appointments.
The key to Japan's bureacratic integrity is that the Japanese prime minister has the power to appoint only 20 to 25 ministers, who fill largely ceremonial roles.
The real business of the ministries is conducted by highly professional career public servants, who don't owe their positions to a political party or politician.


Thomas Wasn't Wrong in Prison Beating Case
To the Editor:
"The Youngest, Cruelest Justice" (editorial, Feb. 27), your hasty judgment about Associate Justice Clarence Thomas, may or may not prove valid.
In either event, your words and the decision of the Supreme Court on Feb. 25 in Hudson v.
McMillian must not obscure the real problem.
It is that state prosecutors and local law enforcement agents treat prison officials as if they were exempt from the criminal law.
What the Louisiana state prison guards did to Keith Hudson, an inmate, was a crime.
While shackled and handcuffed, he was "punched in the mouth, eyes, chest and stomach" by officer McMillian and "kicked and punched . . . from behind" by another officer, who was holding him.
Shortly after that, they beat another prisoner.


Bush-Quayle Campaign Is Looking for a 'Tuesday Team II'
FOR his re-election campaign, President Bush already has a running mate.
He seems to have an opponent, especially after yesterday's withdrawal by Paul E. Tsongas brought Gov.
Bill Clinton closer to the Democratic nomination.
Still missing, though, is an element crucial to any drive to remain in the White House: an advertising team.
Robert M. Teeter, the chairman of Bush-Quayle '92, as the campaign organization is called, has been meeting with senior advertising executives from some of the largest and best-known agencies around the country.


Richter Isn't Crease Lightning Just Yet
As any goaltender knows, timing is everything.
And Mike Richter's timing, measured by the National Hockey League calendar, stinks.
Richter's injured thigh muscle is still not quite right, the reflexes are rusty and there are less than three weeks to go until the playoffs are scheduled to begin.


The Spoken Word
CONVERSATION WITH NEIL SIMON, Congregation Rodeph Sholom, 7 West 83d Street, Manhattan.
The playwright will discuss his work with Charlie Rose, a talk-show host for public television.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
SYMPOSIUM ON PUBLIC MONUMENTS, Time &amp; Life Building, 1271 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street, Manhattan.
A panel discussion on the deterioration of New York's landmarks through neglect and pollution, and on the destruction of monuments in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union as signs of changing political climates.
Participants include William McDonough and Mark Terlitsky, architects; Stanley Bleifield, the president of the National Sculpture Society; Richard McDermott Miller, the president of the National Academy of Design; Ernst Neizvestny, a sculptor; and Richard Wortman, a history professor at Columbia University.
Today from 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 889-6960.


Dow Gains 7.15 Points, To 3,261.40
Stocks closed higher yesterday in heavy trading as investors bought into the market for a number of reasons, including a strong bond market, a larger-than-expected drop in weekly jobless claims and a rebound in the Tokyo stock market.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 7.15 points to finish at 3,261.40, with buying sustained by professional traders ahead of the "triple witching" expiration of certain options yesterday and today.


Thomas Wasn't Wrong in Prison Beating Case; Legislating From Bench
To the Editor:
"Justice Thomas's Late Hit" (editorial, Feb. 25), which discusses a delayed opinion by Clarence Thomas as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, "striking down -- as unconstitutional discrimination against men -- Congress's policy of giving women a slight edge in competing for broadcast licenses," is right on target.
In overturning a longstanding Federal Communications Commission policy favoring women and minority ownership of radio and television stations, Justice Thomas is indeed engaged in legislating from the bench.
Justice Thomas is no friend of affirmative action.
He couldn't do much about minority ownership, because the Supreme Court had ruled favorably on Congressional legislation mandating the F.C.C. policy for minorities.
So he went after women by misinterpreting a Congressional Research Service study that concluded on statistical evidence that female and minority station owners both make a difference in the amount and type of women's, children's and minority programming, compared with stations owned by white males.


Sports of The Times; Spring Training At Bellevue
NOT all of baseball spring training takes place in the warmth of Florida or Arizona.
That's the beauty of the thing.
For Janet Gardella there's even a patch of it at Bellevue Hospital in the chill of Manhattan.
"I hear your son plays for the Yankees," says a student in Janet Gardella's special education class.
This is in room 42 at P.S. 106, which is located in the hospital.


Albanians Hope for Renewal After Elections


Colt's in Bankruptcy Court Filing
The Colt's Manufacturing Company, whose long and rich history of gun making includes the Colt .45 revolver credited with winning the West, said yesterday that it had filed for bankruptcy court protection.
The 156-year-old company based in Hartford said the Chapter 11 filing would not immediately affect its day-to-day operations.
A $10 million line of credit extended by the Connecticut Development Authority and Creditanstalt, an Austrian bank, will keep the company running and give the state majority ownership of the company.


United Ways Challenge Method Used to Divide Their Donations
Wealthier affiliates of the organization that distributes millions of dollars among United Way groups throughout the New York metropolitan region are increasingly dissatisfied with a system that, they believe, takes too much out of their communities and gives it to poorer urban areas.
One of the 35 affiliates of United Ways of Tri-State, the Bergen County, N.J., chapter, has threatened to pull out of the partnership, and at least six others have raised complaints about the system.


Canseco Enters Plea
JOSE CANSECO of the Oakland Athletics pleaded not guilty yesterday in Miami to charges of aggravated assault filed after a heated argument with his wife.
The police arrested Canseco, 27 years old, on an aggravated battery charge Feb. 13 after he allegedly twice rammed his Porsche into a BMW driven by his wife, ESTHER CANSECO, then got out and spit on her car window during an early-morning argument.


Chiefs Sign Krieg
DAVE KRIEG, the starting quarterback for the Seattle Seahawks for most of the past eight seasons, signed yesterday with the Kansas City Chiefs as a Plan B free agent.
Krieg, 33 years old, threw for 195 touchdown passes in 12 seasons for Seattle, but was not protected by the club.


Look Fans, One Hand: Knicks Survive Again
The Knicks continue to live on the edge without falling off.
Leading by 92-82 with two and a half minutes left against Milwaukee last night, the Knicks saw Dale Ellis erupt for the next 8 points, including a 3-point jumper that brought the Bucks to within 92-90 with 50.7 seconds remaining


Japan's Gift to Bush
Well before the Presidential primary season began, Japanese officials and industrialists made no secret that their candidate was President Bush.
But it was not until this morning, when the Government announced a new, more restrictive limit on Japanese auto exports to the United States, that those who run Japan Inc. found a way to make their first campaign contribution..
Unlike virtually every other trade concession made in recent years, this one was Japan's idea, not America's.
Moreover, timing was crucial.
In discussions in the last few weeks, Japanese involved in the decision said they wanted to act late enough to avoid accusations that Japan was meddling in the primaries, but early enough to head off election-year calls for more restrictions on Japanese products, perhaps including those produced in the United States.


When Thrown Out, Where Do They Go?
To the Editor:
"For the Homeless, Practicality" (editorial, Feb. 24) discusses "practical programs" for dealing with the New York City homeless populations.
Perhaps the suggestions are practical for those already homeless, but the initiatives you suggest come into play after people have become homeless.
What is needed are more efforts that prevent people from becoming homeless in the first place.
When an individual or family is evicted from a home by court order, the court does not consider, and is not required to consider, whether or not there are suitable options for the person or family.
The people evicted are among the most vulnerable of our citizens, single mothers, the mentally ill and the elderly poor.


G.O.P. Success in House Splits Party Leadership
Just when the House Republican leaders have forced the Democrats into retreat over the House bank scandal, they are showing more strain than glee.
Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the minority leader, today distanced himself from his second in command, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, whose slashing attacks on what he calls Democratic corruption have dominated the debate on the House bank.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"PRIVATE LIVES," Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $50. (212) 239-6200.


Yale Alumni Take Lead Again, Even If Not in Law
All was quiet around Yale Law School this week, as students and professors celebrated spring break.
But alumni of the institution once more took center stage in a wider public drama: this time, the soap opera of Democratic Presidential politics.
In the race for the 1992 Democratic nomination, Yale scored a trifecta.
The front-runner, Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas, is a 1973 graduate of the law school.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., a former Governor of California, graduated in 1964.
And former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, the third member of the Democratic triumvirate until his withdrawal yesterday, was in the class of 1967.


Ex-Rep. Michael A. Feighan, 87; Architect of '65 Immigration Law
Michael A. Feighan, a 14-term Democratic Congressman from Ohio who was chief architect of the 1965 immigration act that abolished the system of quotas by national origin, died yesterday at a hospital in Washington.
He was 87 years old and had homes in Washington and Cleveland.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


U.S. Postpones Requiring Labels On Nutrition in Meats and Poultry
Weighing in with its contribution to what has become an almost daily unveiling of deregulatory measures, the Agriculture Department announced today a one-year postponement in imposing requirements for nutrition labels for retail meat and poultry.
It also proposed that instead of determining nutritional content of each new product through laboratory analysis, producers could generally use standard values contained in computer databases.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Civic Bank of Commerce, a unit of Civic Bancorp, Oakland, Calif., expects to complete the purchase of approximately $32 million in deposits and $27 million in loans from American Bank and Trust Co., San Jose, Calif., by April 30. *
Johnson &amp; Johnson Health Management Inc., a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., bought the assets of General Health Inc., Washington, a health risk-management concern, for undisclosed terms.


Review/Opera: Atys; The Baroque, But Suffused With Eroticism
THE Sun King, it is said, saw himself as the hero of Jean-Baptiste Lully's opera "Atys" -- a young man affecting indifference to love while being consumed by its passions.
The opera was a favorite of Louis XIV's; after its premiere in 1676, he had it performed again and again.
After a three-century eclipse, that work is now becoming another musical touchstone, thanks to the extraordinary talents of William Christie, who is currently bringing the opera to life at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Putting aside, for a moment, qualifications and caveats: this is one of the most extraordinary productions of Baroque opera I have ever seen or expect to see until the same principals collaborate on Charpentier's "Medee" in 1994.
These performances are part of a three-year French Baroque project at the Brooklyn Academy of Music involving Mr.
Christie; also included will be a concert performance of "Les Indes Galantes" by Rameau in 1993 as well as workshops and master classes.
But in the meantime, "Atys" is achievement enough.


Records Show Gotti Filed No Tax Returns for Years
John Gotti failed to file tax returns for six years, according to Internal Revenue Service documents the prosecution presented in his trial yesterday.
Prosecution lawyers submitted the I.R.S. documents to support a charge that Mr.
Gotti, the reputed head of the Gambino crime family, conspired to defraud the Government.
The charge is the final count in the 13-count indictment charging him with racketeering-murder, gambling and obstruction of justice.


Andrew and Duchess: All Britain Is Talking
The political future of Britain may be hanging in the balance, the Conservative Government may sometimes be lagging in the polls and a general election is looming three weeks away, but what the country wanted to know today was only this: Are the Duke and Duchess of York breaking up?
After two days of feverish headlines like "Andrew and Fergie to Part" that bumped the election campaign off the front pages of all the tabloid newspapers, Buckingham Palace announced today that lawyers for the Duchess, the former Sarah Ferguson, had moved for a formal separation from the Duke, Prince Andrew, the middle son of Queen Elizabeth II.


Democrats Prepare Veto Friendly Tax Bill
Struggling to settle the terms for a politically attractive middle-class tax cut in time for action before President Bush's Friday deadline, House and Senate negotiators worked tonight to try to finish sweeping tax legislation they knew would not become law.
At 10 P.M., a Senate aide said that Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, designated by the other conferees to work out a bill, intended to finish tonight, no matter how long it took.
But he said they would not brief other conferees before morning and would not reveal their agreement to reporters or the public until then either.


Restaurants
American export products may be taking a bashing in some areas, but at An American Place, the patriotic food enterprise off Park Avenue, domestic quality is at an enviable level.
The restaurant reflects one man's philosophy, namely, that first-class cooking can be accomplished with exclusively native provender.
Larry Forgione, the respected chef and owner of An American Place, makes a persuasive case.
An American Place has had to contend with a location that is at the same time accessible and remote: a peculiarly Manhattan phenomenon.
At midday, the place hums with business lunchers; in the evening, the block is deserted.
Luring customers is a challenge.


INVESTIGATORS SAY U.S. SHIELDED IRAQIS FROM BANK INQUIRY
Enmeshed in a doomed courtship with Saddam Hussein, the Bush Administration in 1989 and 1990 repeatedly frustrated its own criminal investigators and regulators examining Iraq's role in a multibillion-dollar bank fraud scheme in Atlanta, interviews and internal Government documents say.
Government investigators involved in the case said they were blocked by the State Department from traveling overseas to interview key witnesses and suspects.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Review/Photography; Trying to Bridge the Gap Between Art and Politics
Paul Strand (1890-1976) was without question one of the most important photographers of the 20th century, and one of the most contradictory.
In his lifelong struggle to reconcile the competing demands of esthetic innovation and social documentation, Strand provides a particularly telling example in the continuing debates over the proper relationship between art and politics.
The retrospective of Strand's work now at the Whitney Museum of American Art outlines the major stages of his career.
After achieving early fame for a series of formally innovative and emotionally powerful images, Strand struggled in the late 1920's and early 30's to find a way to bridge the gap between art and politics in his pictures.
Eventually he abandoned photography altogether to produce leftist-oriented documentary films, a selection of which are being shown in conjunction with the retrospective.


Mrazek Is Said to Be Ready to Quit Senate Race
With his campaign stalled because of the uproar over Congressional check-writing practices, Representative Robert J. Mrazek has told associates that he intends to withdraw from the race for the Democratic nomination to the United States Senate from New York.
He plans to leave Congress when his current term expires on Jan. 3 of next year, Mr.
Mrazek's supporters said.


Workers Mourn Maxwell House's Last Drop
Twenty-one months after the conglomerate that owns Maxwell House announced that it would phase out its operation here, the last big factory on this famous waterfront is sputtering to an end.
Today, the day before their last, union workers had a farewell lunch at the plant cafeteria and finished cleaning out their lockers.
They pick up their final paychecks Friday.
Then, save for about two dozen employees who will remain to tie up loose ends by July 1, the sprawling brick complex off Frank Sinatra Drive, once the largest producer of coffee in the world, will be empty.


Quotation of the Day
"We simply did not have the resources." -- PAUL TSONGAS.  [ A14:3. ]


Midlantic Confirms Report on Review
The Midlantic Corporation in Edison, N.J., has begun a review of its corporate and retail banking accounts.
A spokeswoman confirmed a report of the search, which appeared in this week's issue of The Delaney Report newsletter, but said billings were less than a reported $10 million.


Nothing Further on Review. And That's a Promise
For six years, the National Football League's instant replay official was the Great Second Guesser, sometimes right, sometimes wrong, the guy whose decisions were supposed to correct faulty human-zebra judgment.
But too often, he enraged those who thought he would render perfection.
He assumed the devil's role from the on-field officials he was judging.


White Voices, Black Voices
Following are excerpts from an editorial in yesterday's Sowetan, a Johannesburg newspaper with a predominantly black readership.
There was a thankful sigh of relief when whites did the right thing by voting for South Africa.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day on Wednesday about a new portable computer from the NCR Corporation misidentified the product.
It is the NCR System 3170 Notebook Computer.


Review/Film Festival; In a Rich Japan, the Poor Motorist
The expressway a few miles south of Tokyo has become a parking lot.
The shiny precision-built automobiles are lined up bumper to bumper as far as the eye can see.
It is late afternoon on the first day of a four-day New Year's holiday, but it could be the night before Christmas.
Nothing is stirring, certainly not the traffic.
The only signs of life are parents making furtive three-foot forays from their cars to the curb to allow their children to relieve themselves.
Meanwhile, temperatures are rising inside the cars.
Says one irate father (Kenichi Hagiwana), "Why don't Japanese complain more?"


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Plans to Withhold Spending In Fight Over Economic Program
President Bush plans to mark the passage of his March 20 deadline for Congressional enactment of his economic-growth legislation by announcing on Friday that he will not spend $4 billion that Congress has allotted for Federal programs, White House officials said today.
Mr.
Bush's refusal to spend appropriated money, an action that is called rescission, was also employed by President Reagan.
But it proved ineffective because Federal law requires Congressional approval of such actions.
Congress has generally chosen not to rescind its own actions, and it is not likely now to approve any cuts Mr.
Bush sends it.


At the Movies
Obsession for Men
A funny thing happened to Kiefer Sutherland on his way to becoming a producer.


Paul Ylvisaker, 70, Educator and Urban Planner
Paul N. Ylvisaker, who championed cities and the urban underclass as a planner, government official, foundation executive and educator, died on Tuesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 70 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


A Congressman Sees Redistricting on the Wall
When the Monmouth County Republican chairman, who is from Frank J. Pallone Jr.'s Third Congressional District, testified before New Jersey's bipartisan redistricting commission, he made it clear that he was not much inclined to protect a Democrat.
"I'd like to see Mr. Pallone defeated," said the county chairman, Bill Dowd, who is trying to preserve the Third District more or less intact, even if the seat is held by a Democrat.
"But apparently I don't want to see him defeated as much as the Democrats do."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Win Easily  Mario Lemieux and Bob Errey scored short-handed during the same penalty, and Kevin Stevens set a National Hockey League season scoring record for United States-born players as the Penguins beat the Quebec Nordiques, 6-3, at Pittsburgh last night.
Pittsburgh moved into a third-place tie with the Devils, who lost to Edmonton, in the Patrick Division at 78 points.
The Penguins had not been above fourth since Feb. 3.
Pittsburgh has won 8 of 10; Quebec is 1-28-8 on the road. (AP) SKIING  Kronberger Wins Again  Petra Kronberger of Austria clinched her third consecutive overall World Cup title yesterday in Crans Montana, Switzerland, in the winter's next-to-last race, a super-giant slalom.
Kronberger, who won the slalom and the combined at last month's Olympics in Albertville, France, needed a 24th-place finish to take the overall title.
She squeaked by in 19th. (AP) GOLF  Couples Leads Nestle  The beat goes on for Fred Couples.
Couples, who is averaging $74,916 a start and 68.5 strokes a round this season, put together a bogey-free 67 and took the lead yesterday in the first round of the Nestle Invitational in Orlando, Fla.
His five-under-par effort continued a nine-month streak dating to the 1991 United States Open in which Couples has been the most successful player in the world.
Couples, competing in his sixth consecutive event, and the other early first-round starters had to wait out a 41-minute rain delay and fought winds gusting to 30 miles per hour. (AP) Spencer-Devlin in the Lead: Muffin Spencer-Devlin, coming off one of the worst years in her pro career in which she battled manic depression, fired a four-under-par 69 to grab a share of the lead in the L.P.G.A.
Standard Register tournament in Phoenix.
Devlin-Spencer, one of tour's most charismatic and outspoken figures, employed an array of textbook approach shots to take her share of the lead.
She is tied with with Meg Mallon and Nancy Scranton.
Spencer-Devlin played last season under the influence of carbonate lithium, a powerful anti-depressant, and won just $13,170, the lowest figure since her second year on the tour in 1980. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Tsongas's Negative Ads Prove to Be Fatal Error
Last week, five days before the Democratic Presidential primary in Illinois, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas put some catchy new commercials on the air there, attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton.
"This is Paul Tsongas," the announcer said in one.
"He's not the guy with all the endorsements from politicians, because he doesn't just make promises. He's no Bill Clinton, that's for sure."


Accounts
*
American Express Moneygram, Englewood, Colo., to D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles, for general market advertising, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
La Agencia de Orci &amp; Asociados, Los Angeles, received the account for Hispanic advertising, which was previously at Solis Group, Denver, which resigned the account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The Image Bank, New York, to Bloom FCA, New York, as first agency of record to handle its worldwide account, which was awarded without a formal review.
A campaign is expected to begin in July.
Billings were estimated at more than $1 million. *
LCI International Worldwide Telecommunications, Columbus, Ohio, to Amil Gargano &amp; Partners, New York, as agency of record for a new residential calling program.
No billings were disclosed.


A Mandate For Change; For South Africa, Pace Is Now Issue
Despite the overwhelming mandate that whites gave President F. W. de Klerk to end their monopoly on political power, South Africa has a distance to travel before blacks inherit the vote and other basic rights flowing from it.
The ringing approval of 68.7 percent of the whites who voted in Tuesday's referendum left little doubt that Mr. de Klerk has their support to negotiate power sharing with blacks.


At the Bar; Keeping tabs on legal fees means going after the people who are hired to go after people.
"If a client does not complain about a bill, it isn't high enough." This aphorism was part of the lawyerly wit and wisdom John J. McCloy, the former diplomat and New York lawyer, gave each year to the tenderfoots in his law firm.
But such an attitude was by no means limited to Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
Reluctant to dirty themselves on such unseemly matters, lawyers long set their fees arbitrarily, often erring on the side of extravagance.
Conversely, clients, either intimidated by counsel or unduly deferential to them, rarely kept close tabs.


New I.B.M. Name For Storage Unit
The International Business Machines Corporation said it had changed the name of its data-storage products business to Adstar, which stands for advanced storage and retrieval.
The unit, based in San Jose, Calif., produces disk and tape drives, optical storage devices, control devices and storage-management software.
I.B.M.'s revenue from storage devices last year was more than $8 billion.


Sergeant Says King Appeared to Be on Drugs
A police sergeant who is charged in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King, testified today that when Mr.
King stepped from his car after a chase he appeared dangerous and under the influence of the drug PCP.
The sergeant, Stacey C. Koon, is the first of four white Los Angeles police officers who are on trial to take the stand in his own defense.


House Proposal to Require Cable Units to Pay Royalty
Hoping to smooth the way for legislation that would regulate cable television rates, House lawmakers proposed a measure today that would require cable companies to pay a new royalty to television stations in exchange for carrying their programming.
The proposal is intended to retain the support of broadcasters, who provided important support for cable regulation in the Senate, but it was quickly attacked by the movie industry's top Washington lobbyist.


Democratic Convention Attracts Corporate Help
With the opening session of the Democratic National Convention four months away, New York City and the Democrats have begun lining up corporate sponsors for not necessarily partisan projects inside and outside Madison Square Garden.
The city said last month that A.T.&amp; T., American Express, New York Telephone and Time Warner had pledged $2 million in cash, equipment and supplies to the New York '92 Host Committee, a nonpartisan public and private partnership set up to manage the city's convention preparations.


60% of Americans Favor U.S. Arts Support
Sixty percent of Americans say they favor using Federal tax dollars to support the arts, according to the results of a national survey released yesterday by the Louis Harris polling organization.
This opinion from the 1,500 men and women interviewed in February was most pronounced in the East and South, followed closely by the West and Midwest, and was shared by large majorities in all demographic categories in the population, the organization said.


Pirates Cut Landrum
Two days after trading JOHN SMILEY, the Pittsburgh Pirates continued their campaign against high-salaried pitchers yesterday by cutting BILL LANDRUM, their saves leader the past three seasons.


A Film Series With an Eye For Offbeat Relationships
CHRISTOPHER MUNCH'S sweetly intimate film, "The Hours and Times," takes a footnote from the history of the Beatles -- a 1963 weekend getaway to Barcelona, Spain, by John Lennon with the group's manager, Brian Epstein -- and spins it into an imaginary portrait of a relationship.
One of the aims of the trip is to explore the boundaries of a friendship that is as complicated as it is close.
Epstein is in love with Lennon, who doesn't return his passion but is open-minded enough to consider the possibility of sexual involvement.
Finally, in an awkward encounter in a hotel bathtub, the boundaries become more set.
"The Hours and Times," which will be shown in the New Directors/New Films series on April 3 and 4, epitomizes the attitude of many of the films to be presented in this year's festival, which begins screenings this evening at the Museum of Modern Art.
At a time when the mass media's portrayal of the world tends to put everyone into cliched niches, many of the film makers are looking at relationships in ways that are far more problematic than Hollywood's cookie-cutter mentality admits.


A Bare Winter Remembers To Get It Right as It Leaves
Winter bade the New York metropolitan region a flaky farewell yesterday with a blustery snowstorm that got the plows, blowers and shovels going just when spring-minded owners figured they could leave them in the garage until next year.
It arrived just under the wire -- spring began at 3:48 A.M. today -- and left behind the familiar scenes of winter: Central Park tranquil and timeless, like a Currier and Ives print; off-for-the-day Connecticut schoolchildren pelting each other with plump snowballs, and stolid New Jerseyans determined to dig out from under as much as 10 inches.


Police Role Is Denied In Death
A New York City police sergeant, who was charged with helping murder a car-theft suspect until prosecutors withdrew the charge against him, testified yesterday that a fellow officer now on trial in the case did not choke the suspect.
The officer on trial, charged with manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide, is accused of fatally choking the man on a Queens street 13 months ago.


As It Quits Implant Business, Maker Says Product Is Safe
Keith R. McKennon, the chief executive of the Dow Corning Corporation, ended the company's 30-year trade in silicone gel implants today by acknowledging some errors on the company's part and giving credit to the Food and Drug Administration for its fairness in trying to resolve the issue.
But, Mr.
McKennon said, "it is not fair to say we've been hounded out of the business." He said the company did not believe its products were unsafe.
"I am the guy who made the decision, and I made it on the basis of business," he said.


CHRONICLE
Let human-rights advocates around the world take heart.
They will soon receive powerful new arms with which to wage their struggles against repression: hand-held video cameras, computers and fax machines.
On Monday, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, with the help of the rock musician and composer PETER GABRIEL, will start a campaign called Witness to provide human-rights groups with the equipment of mass communication.


Now You See It, Now You Don't
Rightly or wrongly, the National Football League has decided to stop using televised instant replays to determine the correctness of a field official's call.
The TV audience will still get replays.
But no longer will a supreme judge in a booth on high use them to second-guess the referees below.
"Stupidity!" says one critic of the decision.
"Wonderful!" says a fan who deplored the substitution of electronics for human judgment.


The Exclusive, Haute Training of Arazi
A videocassette is making the rounds in this small, thoroughbred-rich community an hour's drive north from Paris.
It is a cassette containing footage of the Breeders' Cup Juvenile in Churchill Downs last Nov. 2, a race in which a Lamorlaye resident named Arazi exploded past 13 other horses to win by 4 3/4 lengths and become an instant Kentucky Derby favorite.
"We've all seen it five or six times," said Yves de Chevigny, director of the training sites in Lamorlaye and nearby Chantilly.
"Arazi was the Porsche. The others were the motor scooters."


Honors
*
The awards will be presented in New York on Tuesday.


Virginians of Zulu Descent Vote G.O.P.
To the Editor:
Stephen L. Carter ("Nativism and Its Discontents," Op-Ed March 8) criticizes Patrick J. Buchanan's assertion that Zulu immigrants to Virginia would be harder to assimilate than Englishmen.
Mr.
Carter notes, "many Zulus in multilingual South Africa speak better English than most of the Europeans of whom he is so enamored."
Mr.
Buchanan should also have known that in Virginia there are descendants of Zulus who not only speak excellent English and actively participate in public life, but even become conservative Republicans.


Thomas Wasn't Wrong in Prison Beating Case; For Rehabilitation
To the Editor:
Re "The Youngest, Cruelest Justice" (editorial, Feb. 27): I was struck that on the highest court in our country those who are in prison should be seen as scum, not worthy of having their legal rights recognized.
I recently heard the Rev.
Carl Kabat, one of the Plowshares Eight, talk about his prison term for civil disobedience (his release was covered by German and Swiss reporters but none in the United States).
He is convinced prisons should be abolished because the inmates are treated worse than dogs, making the prisons "not a human place." He recommends spending the money to educate and retrain people convicted of crimes, not just to warehouse them.


Review/Film; Sure, She May Be Mean, but Is She a Murderer?
"Basic Instinct" begins with two naked bodies, a mirrored ceiling and an ice pick, which will be wielded in the heat of passion by an unidentified blond woman as she makes a nasty mess of her unsuspecting lover.
Paul Verhoeven, whose films include lurid techno-thrillers ("Robocop" and "Total Recall") and now this red-hot, dangerously modern romance, will never be accused of not knowing how to get an audience's attention.
Whatever else Mr.
Verhoeven winds up being assailed for, with a film that is as violent and misogynistic as it is sexually frank, he hasn't pulled his punches.
That opening murder scene serves as warning that "Basic Instinct" is not bound by the usual rules of decorum, not even those rules that apply to homicidal psychopaths playing cat-and-mouse games with the San Francisco police.
It's no wonder that when Detective Nick Curran (Michael Douglas) and his partner, Gus (George Dzundza), first interrogate the glamorous Catherine Tramell (Sharon Stone), who is the prime suspect in that ice-pick murder, they exchange wary glances over Catherine's absolute diffidence and superiority.
Neither the detectives nor the audience has seen anything quite like Catherine before.


Economic Scene; Forecasting Tool Gives Nod to Bush
WILL the moderate economic recovery that now seems to be getting under way be enough to keep President Bush in the White House for four more years?
The answer is yes, according to an econometric forecasting equation developed by Ray C. Fair, an economist at Yale University.
The Fair equation, estimated from data covering all Presidential elections from 1916 through 1988, predicts that Mr.
Bush will win 57.2 percent of the popular vote in November on the assumption that the American economy grows by only 1.6 percent this year, the latest consensus forecast of the 51 leading economists surveyed by Blue Chip Economic Indicators.
The consensus is for 3.1 percent inflation this year.


Market Place; Drug Stocks Slip Into the Doldrums
THE big drug stocks got off to a dreary start in 1992, losing more than 11 percent of their value in 10 weeks.
Some equity fund managers were quick to cut back their holdings, having profited from strong price rises in December.
Hoping for an economic upturn, many funds moved away from supposedly recession-proof stocks like drugs, food and beverages to cyclicals like autos, banks, chemicals and paper.





Review/Film; Dissension in the Ranks of a Household's 4 Wives
Songlian (Gong Li), the college-educated beauty who arrives at a feudal manor house at the outset of Zhang Yimou's "Raise the Red Lantern," insists on carrying her own suitcase, which is virtually the last act of independence she will be permitted during the course of the story.
Forced by her stepmother into what is essentially the life of a concubine, Songlian has agreed to become the fourth wife of a feudal patriarch, a man so regal that each of his wives presides over her own separate home.
Mr.
Zhang, while acknowledging this man's importance, deliberately ignores him.
"Raise the Red Lantern," a beautifully crafted and richly detailed feat of consciousness-raising and a serious drama with the verve of a good soap opera, is strictly about the women who manage to live under this arrangement.
Ruled by elaborate rituals, the wives spend their days waiting to be chosen for the night by their mutual husband, whose ways of signaling his choice include assigning a special foot massage to the woman he likes best.
"If you can manage to have a foot massage every day, you'll soon be running this household," wife No. 2 (Cao Cuifeng) tells the new arrival.


If Israel Sold Patriot Secrets . . .
The United States rushed Patriot missiles to Israel during the Persian Gulf war to defend against incoming Iraqi Scuds.
Now intelligence reports say Israel sold Patriot technology to China.
If so, that would violate Israel's obligation not to transfer cutting-edge U.S. technology to others -- a dismaying act by a valued ally.
The reports provide ammunition to Israel-bashers.
And they disturb experts concerned with keeping control of advanced military technologies.
Washington has long shown extraordinary tolerance toward Israeli transfers of American technology, raising doubts about U.S. commitment to stopping the spread of arms.
If the latest reports prove true, Washington needs to impose stern sanctions on Israel and the companies involved.


White Voices, Black Voices
Following are excerpts from an editorial in yesterday's Business Day, a Johannesburg financial newspaper.
South Africa is a different country today.
The referendum has changed it fundamentally, irrevocably and for the better.
White voters, choosing freely and individually, have rejected their apartheid past; more significantly, they have opted decisively for a shared future with their black compatriots.


Review/Film; Americanizing an English Farce. Hmmm. Quite So.
There are a number of hefty laughs scattered throughout "Noises Off," Peter Bogdanovich's screen version of Michael Frayn's English stage farce.
Yet there are nowhere near as many as the source material deserves and Mr.
Bogdanovich's cast might otherwise have earned.
The play, a critical smash when it opened on Broadway in 1983, is about a group of second-rate English actors touring the provinces in a third-rate English sex comedy.
The play's gimmick is that the theater audience is first introduced to the play-within-the-play, titled "Nothing On," as it falls apart during dress rehearsal.
The audience next sees the play in mid-performance from backstage as the actors' so-called real lives become the hilarious and hopeless mirror images of their frantic stage lives.


Reebok Is Criticized About Pay
Executive salaries at Reebok International Ltd. are under attack from the New York City Employees Retirement System.
The maker of athletic shoes, based in Stoughton, Mass., paid its chairman, Paul Fireman, $33.3 million in cash and stock options in 1990, the latest year available, making him one of the 10 highest-paid executives in the nation that year.


Kabul Journal; Winter, Too, Is Hell. Afghans Teeter on Abyss.
No one knows how many people have died from hunger or the bitter cold that has engulfed this crumbling city this winter.
People know, though, that the round, flat loaf of bread that is the staple food costs five times more than it did a year ago.
They know too that the precious kerosene that lights lamps and fuels stoves stopped coming from the north, from the old Soviet Union, months ago.
"Our people are dying from hunger," said Prof.
Mohammed Ashgar, a former Mayor of Kabul.
"Thousands of people are dying of hunger and cold, not just the war."


Haiti Accord Is Set Back in Parliament
Diplomats said today that their effort to win a reversal of the military coup that ousted Haiti's elected President in September had all but collapsed after Parliament failed to ratify an internationally brokered settlement.
The assessment emerged after a raucous parliamentary session on Wednesday in which conservative lawmakers seemed to deliberately torpedo the accord, which was reached after months of painstaking negotiations.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; TSONGAS ABANDONS CAMPAIGN, LEAVING CLINTON A CLEAR PATH TOWARD SHOWDOWN WITH BUSH
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts withdrew from the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today, a decision that many in his party said all but insured the selection of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Mr.
Tsongas announced his departure at a news conference in Boston, where he said his campaign did not have enough money to continue.
His move leaves only former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California to compete with Mr.
Clinton in the remaining primaries and caucuses in 21 states.


Invective Flavors Election in Marseilles
Racial tensions and high unemployment are fueling an unusually virulent fight in this port city between a flashy Socialist millionaire and the leader of France's growing anti-immigrant National Front.
The invective traded between Bernard Tapie, a self-made businessman, and Jean-Marie Le Pen, the increasingly popular purveyor of the National Front's racist proposals, seems to have taken the place of any substantive debate in the campaign leading to elections on Sunday for the country's 26 regional governments.


The Last Picture Show? Not if He Can Help It
BOB AND ESTELLE SPIEWAK shuffled ahead in the movie line, along with dozens of others outside the Movie City Theater on Cedar Lane here.
The line moved unusually fast.
In fact, the line itself was unusual in this old dark downtown.
Soon, the Spiewaks confronted Melissa Paget, the teen-age cashier.


Investigators Look North
The police here said today that they were interviewing at least six people in New York in connection with allegations that a woman was raped here last March by three New York Mets.
Authorities said none of the people were eyewitnesses to the alleged attack.
According to a complaint filed by the woman earlier this month, the attack occurred in the early hours of March 30, 1991.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out; Tsongas, in Quiet of Home, Faces Realities of Finances
For the candidate of "hard choices" and "fiscal responsibility," Wednesday was the day of reckoning.
At 9:30 in the evening, Paul E. Tsongas sat in the living room of his Lowell, Mass., house as his campaign manager and best friend, Dennis Kanin, delivered the bad news: Not only was the campaign broke, but it also needed at least $1 million to compete in the New York primary.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a petition by the New York State Consumer Protection Board to change the New York Telephone rate structure misstated the 1991 profit of the company's parent, Nynex.
It was $600.8 million.


Pop/Jazz; Soul Singer Of the 1960's Defines His Craft
If fans know anything about the soul singer James Carr, who is performing at Tramps this weekend, they culled it from a chapter in Peter Guralnick's "Sweet Soul Music" or from an occasional reissue of Mr.
Carr's work in the 1960's.
For some time in the 70's, Mr.
Carr, who has been called the world's greatest soul singer, vanished.
He vanished into a haze of suggestions.
Mr.
Guralnick's book has him at times a childlike savant, at others nearly catatonic.


Finalists Are Named In Four A's Contests
The American Association of Advertising Agencies has named the finalists in two annual awards competitions.


INSIDE
2d House Officer Resigns
The House postmaster resigned as the spotlight on abuses in the management of House institutions swung from the lawmakers' bank to their post office.
Page A17.
Loading Guns . . .
In the national debate over gun control, little is said about the ammunition industry, which produces billions of rounds a year.
Sixth article of a series on guns in America, page A20. . . . and Buying Them Back
In the first salvo of an expanded campaign against firearms in New York City, city officials announced $25 to $75 bounties for guns turned in to the police.
Page B1.
Don't Borrow, Dinkins Told
Reversing his stand, the head of the Municipal Assistance Corporation said New York City should not borrow to balance its budget.
Page B3.
A Windsor Knot Untied
Buckingham Palace said the Duchess of York, known as "Fergie," was seeking a legal separation from Prince Andrew.
Page A11.


Perot Attacks High Salaries
H.
Ross Perot attacked chief executives today for paying themselves "obscene salaries" while overlooking the needs of shareholders and employees.
"Even in a bad year, the Who's Who of corporate America grants themselves enormous bonuses," said Mr.
Perot, who contends that such practices destroy morale.
"It is obscene to have the gap between the factory floor and the corner office that we have."


Labor May Review Support for Dinkins
A top city labor leader, who played a major role in helping David N. Dinkins win the mayoral election in 1989, has expressed strong concerns over the Mayor's image in the media of late and has called for a meeting of the city's municipal unions to discuss whether to support Mr.
Dinkins for re-election in 1993.
Barry Feinstein, president of Teamsters Local 236, said that after what he perceived as two years of crisis after crisis in the Dinkins administration, including fiscal problems and staff shake-ups, he believed it was time to jointly reassess with other labor leaders the Mayor's performance and political viability.


Warmest Winter Slips (on Ice) Into History
Winter, or what there was of it, ended this morning at 3:48 A.M.
Eastern time.
The National Weather Service is counting this winter as the warmest in the 97 years records have been kept.
Nationwide the average temperature from December through February (the Weather Service's "winter," for record-keeping purposes) was about 4 degrees Fahrenheit above normal, but that hid large variations.
Eastern Montana was 11 degrees above normal; Chicago was 6 degrees above normal.
Major Northeast cities recorded temperatures 2 degrees above normal.


Some 'Worker Leasing' Programs Defraud Insurers and Employers
An innovative management technique that is supposed to save small businesses money and provide low-cost health benefits to workers is backfiring, costing employers, workers and insurers nationwide tens of millions of dollars.
The practice is known as "employee leasing." In it, a service company hires the work force of a small business and then leases the workers, with insurance coverage and other benefits, back to their original employer.


City College President Supported
By a six-vote margin, the Faculty Senate of the City College of New York rejected a resolution yesterday expressing "no confidence" in the college's president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston.
The resolution cited the December stampede at the college that left nine people dead as a justification for the no-confidence vote.
It also criticized Dr.
Harleston's response to the uproar following a July speech by Prof.
Leonard Jeffries that has been called racist and anti-Semitic.


Sweet Smell Of Nature's Bounty In All Seasons
SPRING is so maddening.
It made a brief appearance this year at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden on a balmy Sunday in February -- weeks before yesterday's snowfall.
Nobody could believe it: the kind of weather that made you keep taking your jacket off, until a little wind came up and you had to put it back on.
People were feeding the ducks on the Japanese pond and wondering where the heron was. (One year, a black-crowned night heron wintered over and got so attached to the backhoe operator that it waited for him each morning, hopped up on the bucket and breakfasted on worms from the fresh-dug earth.)


Anti-Gay Crimes Are Reported on Rise in 5 Cities
Incidents of violence against homosexuals rose 31 percent last year, according to a survey made public today by a homosexual rights group.
The group blamed political, religious and entertainment industry leaders for fostering a homophobic climate.
The survey of five cities by the group, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute, found 1,822 reported incidents in 1991, as against 1,389 the previous year.


Late Turnover Lifts Manhattan in N.I.T.
The decibel level in little Draddy Gymnasium at Manhattan College must have reached an arena high with two seconds remaining in the Jaspers' National Invitation Tournament opener last night.
It was at that point that Manhattan's Carey Edwards grabbed a Wisconsin-Green Bay turnover and dribbled in alone for a dunk shot to give the Jaspers a 67-65 victory over the Phoenix.
Manhattan students in the standing-room-only crowd of 3,055 flooded onto the court after the basket and had to be cleared for the conclusion of the game.


Apple's New Damage Claim
The Microsoft Corporation said today that Apple Computer Inc. had increased the amount it is seeking in damages in its long-running copyright infringement suit.
The new amount, $5.55 billion, up from a previous claim of $4.37 billion, is subject to further adjustment during the course of the suit, and can be awarded only if there is a finding of infringement.


Devils Prove That McVie Is No Psychic
Coach Tom McVie predicted in practice this week that his team would come out flying in its first game at home after an absence of 17 days.
But the Devils came out crawling tonight and suffered a 5-3 loss to the Edmonton Oilers that had them looking for a hole to crawl into afterward.
It was the fourth consecutive defeat at Byrne Meadowlands Arena for the Devils, who are now without a victory in their last six games and are no longer alone in third place in the Patrick Division.


Parking Rules
Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


New Jersey's New Treasurer Defends Budget to Assembly
New Jersey's new state treasurer is not officially on the job until Friday, but he was at work today defending Gov.
Jim Florio's proposed $15.7 billion budget against Republican attack.
The treasurer, Samuel Crane, whose nomination was confirmed last week by the Senate and who is to be sworn in Friday, was the first member of the administration to formally testify over a budget proposal that has become the major strain in the power-sharing between a Democratic governor and a Republican-led Legislature.


La Quinta Motor Inns L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comcast Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


American Safety Closure reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Religion Notes
Lesser Known Traditions
Two penitential seasons -- the Christian period of Lent and the Muslim period of Ramadan -- each began in the first week of March this year.
Since this coincidence was noted here two weeks ago, several readers have written to point out that adherents to other religious traditions are also practicing abstinence these days.


Post Office Joins Recycled Paper Drive
The United States Postal Service, changing with the times, is also changing the paper it uses to make 29-cent stamped envelopes.
On May 1 it will reissue 19 designs from the past year on recycled paper.
The Postal Service has been criticized over the last two years because experimental peel-off stamps, which come on little cards that can be sold through automatic teller machines, have been printed on a plastic film that does not deteriorate in landfills.
Also, the oils in the high-quality ink used on most stamps pollutes the paper of the envelopes on which the stamps are used, rendering it unfit for recycling.


Kenya Orders Ban on Political Meetings
President Daniel arap Moi banned all political meetings today, citing weeks of ethnic violence that Government opponents say has been allowed to spread in order to undermine a movement for greater democracy.
The ban, viewed by some politicians and diplomats as a possible prelude to declaring a state of emergency, comes only four months after Kenya moved to re-establish multiparty politics, which have been banned since 1969.


Snowball Causes 23 Injuries in Bus Collision in the Bronx


Hans Jelinek, 81, Dies; An Artist and Teacher
Hans Jelinek, a graphic artist and professor emeritus of art at City College, died on March 13 at the DeWitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Gertrude Stwertka Jelinek.


Grise Fiord Journal; An Unlikely Eden Amid the Frozen Polar Wastes
Canada's northernmost civilian community, on a latitude of 76 degrees north, 900 miles from the North Pole, has 134 people, a school, a medical center, a cooperative store, a church, 50 snowmobiles, 85 dogs and no locked doors.
It is a conservative village that wastes nothing, wants little and boasts of having practically no crime, drugs or unemployment.


Patents; A New Spinnaker for Racing Yachts
Lincoln F. Baird, an avid amateur sailor in Los Angeles, won a patent this week for a new spinnaker -- the large, triangular headsail on racing yachts -- that he says fills up with wind better and can propel a boat much faster than traditional sails.
The key to the new invention is a horizontal tube of lightweight fabric that runs around the the outside of the sail.
The tube inflates at the same time that the sail fills up with wind, and it remains inflated because check valves in the tube prevent the air from escaping.
The result, Mr.
Baird said, is that the tube becomes a supportive beam that keeps the sail spread out even when the wind shifts.


Wayne Dumont Jr., 77, Is Dead; Was Dean of New Jersey Senate
Wayne Dumont Jr., who served in the New Jersey State Senate for 36 years and was often called the dean of the Legislature, died on Wednesday at Warren Hospital in Phillipsburg, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Phillipsburg.
He was taken to the hospital after having trouble breathing at his home and later died of congestive heart failure, said his son, W. Hunt Dumont, a former United States Attorney for New Jersey.


Dateq Information Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kohl Is Expected to Act as Trade Envoy in Talks With Bush
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who is emerging as Europe's most powerful leader, is expected to play the role of trade envoy this weekend in private talks with President Bush at Camp David, Md.
Although trade matters will be at the top of the agenda and foreign-policy issues will be discussed, the talks on Saturday and Sunday are being described as a personal meeting.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Stanford Sets a Record


Police to Study Medical Data
Police investigators here plan to review medical records of the woman who has alleged that she was raped by three Mets last spring.
The records are expected to include information about a private physician's examination of the woman that was conducted in New York sometime after March 30, 1991, the day she said she was raped.
But the police would not say exactly when the woman was examined.


High-Stakes Poker in Albany
New York's primitive election and campaign financing rules are a national disgrace.
Will they ever change?
The answer now hinges on a high-stakes political poker game under way in Albany, and how firmly Gov.
Mario Cuomo plays his reapportionment trump card.
Governor Cuomo, sensing a rare opportunity to change the system to enhance democracy, has threatened to veto the Legislature's redistricting plans unless they are accompanied by serious reforms.
That has forced Senate Republicans, who have long resisted change, to the bargaining table.
But the insulting package they offer suggests they still think Mr.
Cuomo is bluffing.


Henley Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Is Working on Soviet Aid Package
The State Department is working on a large-scale aid package for the former Soviet Union, but the White House remains hesitant to move forward on the multibillion dollar package, Congressional and Administration officials said today.
But several of the officials said they expect President Bush, who was embarrassed last week by former President Richard M. Nixon's criticism of American policy toward the former Soviet Union, to begin pushing for the package over the next few weeks or months.
They said the White House is taking a warmer view of more aid to Russia and the other newly independent republics after shying away from foreign aid increases because of election-year accusations that it was focusing on foreign affairs to the detriment of domestic concerns.


A Turn to Peace in Afghanistan
Even as old regional wars wind down elsewhere, blood still flows in Afghanistan.
When Moscow withdrew its forces three years ago, everyone assumed that Afghan insurgents would make short work of Soviet puppets in Kabul.
But the divided guerrillas were unable to vanquish an unexpectedly resilient President Najibullah, the ruthless cop whom the Soviet Union had installed in power in 1986.
Now there's a glimmer of hope.
United Nations mediators have wrested from Mr.
Najibullah a promise to resign once an interim government is established in Kabul.
That is the indispensable precondition for a two-stage U.N. plan that provides for supervised elections.
Afghan rebels rightly scorned any settlement that would leave in power a dictator whose present talk of conciliation is mocked by his past as a torturer.


Canstar Sports Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Homeplex Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keough Goes Home
Four days after being hit in the head by a foul ball and having brain surgery, MATT KEOUGH was discharged from Scottsdale (Ariz.) Memorial Hospital yesterday and returned to his home in California.
He is not expected to be able to begin pitching for three months.
Keough, a 36-year-old pitcher trying to return to the major leagues after a five-year absence, was sitting in the visitors' dugout at Scottsdale Stadium on Monday when he was struck by a foul ball hit by JOHN PATTERSON of San Francisco.
Keough was taken across the street to the hospital, where a CAT scan showed a blood clot had developed.


British Air Has Stake in German Line
British Airways P.L.C., which has made no secret of its desire to make Berlin a major center for serving Central and Eastern Europe, said today that a new company in which it has a large interest had acquired Delta Air, a German regional airline.
The acquiring company is Deutsche BA, 49 percent of which is owned by British Airways and 51 percent by three German banks: Commerzbank, Berliner Bank and Bayerische Bank.
No price was disclosed.
The previous owners were Crossair, a Swiss carrier, and Friedrich von Bohlen und Halbach, a German industrialist.


Corrections
A short article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about a bid won by United Airlines against American Airlines to lease 16 takeoff and landing slots held by Trans World Airlines at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago misstated American's offer for the slots.
It was $65,000 a month for each slot.


Macy Can Extend Lease Decision
The Federal bankruptcy judge presiding over the bankruptcy proceedings of R. H. Macy &amp; Company gave the company more time to determine which of its 422 leases it will retain or reject.
Judge Burton R. Lifland extended Macy's right to terminate the leases until the retailer emerged from the court's protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.00
6.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.05
4.04
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.22
4.21
5.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.35
7.27
7.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.04
7.96
8.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
8.92
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.77
7.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


DePaul Tripped by Giant Killers
New Mexico State taught DePaul this afternoon that bigger is not always better.
The smaller Aggies tripped DePaul, 81-73, in a West Regional opening-round game at the Arizona State University Activity Center and once again emphasized that no matter how many big men a team employs, it needs a point guard to dish and dance on the perimeter and keep the traffic flow in check.


Richard A. Ruskay Restaurateur, 44
Richard A. Ruskay, a restaurateur on Manhattan's Upper West Side, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.
Mr.
Ruskay was a founding partner, with Jack Doenias and Carl Laanas, in the Empire Diner, the Art Deco restaurant that they refurbished in 1976.
Open 24 hours, its trendy stainless-steel, chrome and black-glass presence on 10th Avenue at 22d Street has since become a Chelsea landmark.


Legislators from Two States Attack Commuter Tax Plan
Two Republican legislators from New Jersey today won the support of two Republican colleagues from New York State in the "border war" between New York City and its suburbs over Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to raise the city's commuter tax.
The Mayor's budget director, Philip R. Michael, called the legislators' anti-tax pact a "strange alliance" and said political opposition would not make the city back down.


First Things, First: The Nets Are in 3d
After getting shot down three times in three meetings with Washington this season, the Nets finally dodged the pesky Bullets tonight, hanging on for a 99-96 victory before a crowd of 11,049 at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Not only that, but they did it without the injured Sam Bowie.
Instead, the Nets relied on 29 points apiece from Derrick Coleman and Drazen Petrovic, as well as 16 points and 10 assists from Mookie Blaylock.


Oshman's Sporting Goods reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Future Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Decision Goes to Barkley After a 12-Round Brawl
The way Iran Barkley fought Thomas Hearns tonight, he could have staged the bout in a subway token booth.
For 12 rounds, Barkley was in Hearns's face, refusing to allow the long-limbed Hearns the distance to assert his potent jab in the indoor Caesars Palace ring.


Airsensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Fed Is Investigating Dealings in U.S. Note
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York confirmed yesterday that it was conducting an investigation into a possible squeeze of seven-year Treasury notes.
Reports that the New York Fed and the Treasury Department were asking major government securities dealers about a squeeze were initially carried late Thursday by the Bloomberg News Service.


Parks Union in Contract Accord
The Dinkins administration has reached a tentative agreement with New York City's largest municipal union that will avert layoffs of 369 city parks workers through unpaid furloughs, city and union officials said last night.
District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees agreed yesterday to one-week furloughs for 1,400 workers who clean and maintain city parks.
The furloughs and other union concessions will save the city's Parks Department about $2 million, which was cut from its budget in the 1992 fiscal year that ends in June.


Forest Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patents; Levitating Materials For Testing
The founders of a small research company in Northbrook, Ill., have invented a new way to levitate small objects, using a combination of air pressure and powerful sound waves.
The system is the latest in a series of levitation devices developed over the last two decades by Charles A. Rey and Dennis R. Merkley, respectively the president and chief operating officer of Intersonics Inc.


Wall St. Grand Prix Would Just Glorify Bedlam; Who Needs This?
To the Editor:
Your favorable stance on the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York is wrong (editorial, March 8).


Patents; Coffee Percolator That's Disposable
Kraft General Foods has patented an inexpensive, disposable coffee percolator that allows a person to brew a single cup of coffee in a microwave oven and then throw the percolator away.
A lawyer for the company said, however, that it had no immediate plans to market the invention.
The new device looks like a large cup, but uses some of the same principles as an ordinary percolator.
Water is boiled, pushed up through a thin pipe and then allowed to flow back through a bed of coffee granules.
Microwave shielding around the top part of the cup prevents the oven from cooking and damaging the coffee granules.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Jamesway reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Death Toll in Israeli Embassy Bombing Rises to 32
The Death toll from the bombing of the Israeli Embassy here Tuesday rose to 32 today as investigators tried to sort out reports that a member of a German terrorist organization, the Red Army Faction, had entered Argentina only days before the bombing.
A spokesman for the Uruguayan Interior Ministry said that earlier this month, Interpol had warned the police authorities in Latin America that Andrea Martina Klump, wanted in the 1989 slaying of Alfred Herrhausen, chairman of the Deutsche Bank, might be traveling to Latin America.


Equitable Real Estate Shopping Centers L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Enzo Biochem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


94-Vehicle Crash on a Foggy California Highway Kills 1, Injures 46


Consumers Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


White House Allows Some Advice At Public Clinics About Abortion
Picking its way through the minefield of abortion politics, the Bush Administration said today that doctors in federally financed family planning clinics may give limited advice on abortions, though nurses and counselors may not.
A rule set forth four years ago banning abortion counseling in family planning clinics has never been enforced, first because of legal challenges and more recently because the Administration had not issued detailed enforcement guidelines.
The Health and Human Services Department issued those guidelines today in a letter to regional offices that seemed to make an important exception to the counseling ban.


Chinese Smugglers' Lucrative Cargo: Humans
In growing numbers, ships from mainland China are sailing toward America, their holds packed with a frightened and seasick human cargo destined mostly for labor in the restaurants and sweatshops of New York's Chinatown.
Five ships carrying a total of about 600 people have been discovered since January and as many as nine more are being monitored now as they head for Los Angeles, said Bruce J. Nicholl, an official at the Immigration and Naturalization Service in Washington.


Jacor Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oshawa Group (X) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 25


Powell Criticizes Further Military Cuts
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, today issued the sharpest criticism to date of a plan in the House of Representatives to double the size of military budget cuts the Bush Administration had proposed for next year.
Testifying before the Senate Armed Services Committee, General Powell said a move by the House to cut an additional $7 billion from the Administration's proposed $281 billion military budget for the next fiscal year could threaten American military readiness.


Having Beat the Odds, They Gather in Triumph
In the neonatal intensive-care unit of Mount Sinai Medical Center, the fringes of medical science merge with general reality.
Infinitesimal human beings, many little more than kitten size, squirm in incubators, their tiny bodies stuck with tube upon tube.
With one is a little teddy bear whose chest bears the message, "I love you." With another is a Bible opened to some comforting verse.
Triplets, unnamed and all under a pound and a half, fight blindly to keep breathing.


Nucorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conagra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23


Wrong War, Wrong Weapons, Wrong Thinking
President Bush and Congress have declared war on recession.
But they are fighting the wrong war, and, as in yesterday's tax cut jousting, both sides are using the wrong weapons.
Though the recession may be receding, the real weaknesses in the economy are structural and not amenable to quick fixes.
The real war is over economic competitiveness; the trouble with fighting this real war is that it has been a loser politically.
Competitiveness is not a tidy subject that readily captures the public's imagination.


Brascan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the French race horse Arazi referred incorrectly to the track where he will make his competitive debut as a 3-year-old.
The track, Saint-Cloud, is the only major one in France where horses run counterclockwise, as they do in the United States.


Florida Acts on Prudential Broker-Teacher
Securities regulators in Florida have moved to discipline Prudential Securities and one of the firm's former brokers who, they say, sold investments to students in adult school classes that he taught and misled them about the risks of those investments.
Among the penalties being considered are the revocation or suspension of Prudential's license to do business in the state, said Terence D. McElroy, a spokesman for the Florida Comptroller, Gerald Lewis, the state's chief securities regulator.
"What we do will depend on what we find," Mr.
McElroy said.


Alimentation Couche-Tard reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Cato Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


More Trouble for United Way
A depressing parallel to the recent ouster of United Way of America's president has emerged at the regional United Way for New York City and its suburbs.
It turns out that United Way of Tri-State dismissed its president last year with a $3.3 million lump-sum pension -- astounding bounty for a charity that banks on public trust.
The trustees of both agencies bear heavy responsibility for these embarrassments.
They approved the extravagant compensation, and supposedly monitored the management.
If they were surprised by what happened, as spokesmen assert, that's a shocking confession of laxity.


Bye-Bye Bambi
The rising deer population in the Northeast has become the bane of many suburban gardeners.
Deer feed voraciously on backyard shrubs, flowers and vegetable gardens.
The most severe damage often occurs in early spring, when deer are attracted to succulent new shoots.
A variety of repellents are sold at garden centers and hardware stores.
Read the labels carefully, as some should not be used on fruit and vegetables.
Many homemade remedies also work.
If you have a severe deer problem or dislike using chemicals, the most effective remedy is to place flexible netting over the most vulnerable plants during the early weeks of growth.
Homemade Remedies


Hills Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tax Bill Veto Is No Loss
Congress worked feverishly and successfully to pass an economic recovery plan before yesterday's deadline set by President Bush in his State of the Union address.
It need not have bothered.
The bill provided paltry relief for middle-class families, no relief from the recession and virtually nothing to spur long-term growth.
Worse yet, it reinstated a bevy of tax shelters of the type that were demolished by the glorious 1986 tax reform.
Mr.
Bush's veto of the measure, though delivered for all the wrong reasons, was therefore welcome.


Henley Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Bolder Approach' Is Urged for China
Prime Minister Li Peng called on China to "take a bolder approach to reform" today and said that its foremost task was to restructure the economy to stimulate economic growth.
Mr.
Li, delivering his annual Government work report to lawmakers, suggested that the nation's rising living standards were the crucial factor that allowed Communist rule to survive in China instead of collapsing as it has in other countries.
He indicated that the Government would make every effort to make people richer in order to repel capitalist subversion.


ASA International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gantos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Patents; A New Spinnaker for Racing Yachts
Lincoln F. Baird, an avid amateur sailor in Los Angeles, won a patent this week for a new spinnaker -- the large, triangular headsail on racing yachts -- that he says fills up with wind better and can propel a boat much faster than traditional sails.
The key to the new invention is a horizontal tube of lightweight fabric that runs around the the outside of the sail.
The tube inflates at the same time that the sail fills up with wind, and it remains inflated because check valves in the tube prevent the air from escaping.
The result, Mr.
Baird said, is that the tube becomes a supportive beam that keeps the sail spread out even when the wind shifts.


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Roy O. Allen Jr., 71; Skyscraper Architect
Roy O. Allen Jr., an architect whose work included the enormous 1 Liberty Plaza skyscraper in lower Manhattan and the Annenberg Building at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, died on Wednesday at Presbyterian Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 71 years old and lived in Miami.
He died of liver failure, his wife, Marion, said.


Data Translation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Tatar Area in Russia Votes on Sovereignty Today
While the heads of government of the Commonwealth of Independent States try to sort out their considerable problems today in Kiev, the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, is struggling to cope with a considerable threat to the unity of Russia itself here in the eastern part of European Russia, populated heavily by Turkic-speaking Tatars.
The people of Tatarstan, which is known officially as the Tatar Autonomous Republic, one of the many subdivisions of Russia, will vote Saturday in a referendum on a sovereignty proposal that has deeply upset the Russian leadership.
The referendum's question has been declared unconstitutional by the Russian court, and Mr.
Yeltsin failed in a last, overnight effort to convince the Tatarstan Government to cancel the vote.


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Petrie Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Commercial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Atlantic American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kaiser Steel Resources Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Silver-Screen Sequel?
John Gotti's trial was enlivened yesterday by a visit from Anthony Quinn, who was escorted by Gotti supporters and sat in the last row of spectators in the crowded courtroom.
"I came because I want to make a picture about this drama," Mr.
Quinn told reporters later.
His interest focused on someone "snitching" on a close friend, he added, alluding to Salvatore Gravano, the Mafia turncoat who testified against Mr.
Gotti.


INSIDE
Do's and Don'ts After 'I Do'
The overlapping careers of Hillary and Bill Clinton illustrate the ethical minefields faced by dual-career couples, especially in the incestuous world of Washington.
Page 6.
Secrecy on Heart Valve
Backed by court orders, the maker of a heart valve that is prone to sudden failure withheld data about the device's dangers from Federal health officials, lawyers said.
Page 50.


Alice Marriott, 82, Scholar Who Wrote Of American Indians
Alice Lee Marriott, an anthropolgist and author who helped popularize American Indian culture and the role of Indian women, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Oklahoma City, Okla.
She was 82 years old and lived in Oklahoma City.
She died of heart failure, said Margaret Lefranc Schoonover, a friend and colleague.


Rangers Get Going In Detroit
When a former Ranger opened the scoring for the Red Wings in the first minute of play tonight, the scoreboard clock froze at "19:40." That omen didn't seem favorable for the visiting New Yorkers, who last won a Stanley Cup in 1940.
But the Rangers recovered nicely at jam-packed Joe Louis Arena to take a 4-2 victory that improved their league-leading record, continued one positive streak and ended a negative one.


Guard Is Killed In an Ambush In Brooklyn
A 68-year-old armored-car guard was shot to death and his partner was wounded yesterday morning by robbers who came up behind them outside a check-cashing store in an industrial section of Brooklyn, the police said.
The killers escaped with $186,000.
The police said they were investigating whether the robbery was connected to two similar crimes in Queens recently, one outside a check-cashing store, the other in front of a clothing warehouse.
In all three cases, masked men with shotguns attacked guards from behind.


Classical Music in Review
American Festival of Microtonal Music St. Paul's Chapel at Columbia University


Comtech Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The House; COUNSEL TO REVIEW HOUSE OVERDRAFTS
Intervening in the House bank scandal, Attorney General William P. Barr today appointed a retired Federal appeals court judge as a special counsel to review the check-writing practices of lawmakers and the operations of the bank.
Mr.
Barr named Malcolm R. Wilkey, a Republican, who sat on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia from 1970 to 1985, to head the preliminary inquiry intended to determine whether there was sufficient evidence to warrant a criminal investigation of the bank's activities.
Full Prosecutorial Powers
"My direction to Judge Wilkey is to conduct a fair, thorough and expeditious review of this matter and to report to me as promptly as possible on whether there is any individual wrongdoing which requires further action," Mr.
Barr said in a statement.


Washington Governor Signs Measure on Obscene Music
Challenging the recording industry, Gov.
Booth Gardner of Washington today signed a measure that would outlaw selling to minors music deemed obscene.
Discounting the pleas of leading artistic groups and thousands of letters from young people, the Governor said he signed the measure because he wanted to "send a warning shot across the bow" of the recording industry.


A Writer Adrift in a Movie-Mad World
The rueful Turkish film "A Heart of Glass" could be called a comedy of mild manners if it was a shade less hangdog, and if it had been made with more flair.
As it is, Fehmi Yasar's story of a hapless screenwriter in Istanbul, and of the unlikely adventures that lead him to rural Anatolia, is more notable for its occasional droll flourishes than for its ability to sustain interest.
"A Heart of Glass" has been directed quite confidently, as if the material had more charm than it actually does.
But Mr.
Yasar vacillates too unpredictably between a dryly observant tone and one that intimates real tragedy is in the offing.
In the end, this mixed message, plus a number of quasi-comic allusions to film history, winds up being more than this slight tale can easily sustain.
Like his protagonist, Mr.
Yasar may have seen too many movies.


Iraq Agrees to Destroy Missiles To Meet U.N. Cease-Fire Terms
Faced with veiled American and British threats of military force, Iraq has backed down in its latest confrontation with the Security Council and agreed to destroy its ballistic missile equipment as required by the cease-fire resolution that ended the Persian Gulf war, a Council official announced today.
Rolf Ekeus, head of the special commission set up by the Council to oversee the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction after the war, said Baghdad also agreed Thursday night to provide full details next month of its programs for building nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.


Cabot Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Robbers Slay Vendor, 78, A Neighborhood Institution
For nearly four decades, Frank Falleti operated a catering van in the gritty industrial part of East New York, announcing breakfast and lunch to scores of factory workers with a honk of his horn and offering credit to those who came up a little short.
As he prepared to serve another lunch yesterday, Mr.
Falleti was shot to death by one of two robbers after he resisted their demands for the morning's receipts, the police said.


Classical Music in Review
'Tales of Malamud' New York University Theater 35 West Fourth Street Through tonight


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut; To Cheers, Brown Jabs Campaign 'Gong Show'
Edmund G. Brown Jr. came to City Hall here today, declaring at a noontime rally that being Governor of California was "the major leagues," that the United States should build "B-2 bullet trains instead of B-2 bombers," and that the campaign for President is "a Gong Show" run by the wealthy.
He was cheered long and loudly.


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


MILITARY IS SEEN STALLING ON OZONE
A new policy aimed at eliminating the use of ozone-depleting chemicals by the military is being blocked at the top levels of the Pentagon, military officers said today.
Environmental officials in the Defense Department attributed the delay in issuing the policy to the usual slow bureaucratic process in the military.


JHM Mortgage Securities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atlantis Res reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


It's Baaack! World League Set to Begin Second Season
In New York, they'd like you to think of it as a sort of National Football League in the spring.
Anyplace else, it's the World League.
And it's back, with its shortened name, starting today.
"We're opening in an entirely different environment. We have some sort of track record now," said the league's chief operating officer, Joe Bailey.


Patents; Nuclear Generator for Exploring Mars
The Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation, a unit of the French company Matra S.A., this week patented a nuclear-fueled turbocompressor to generate heat and electricity on the planet Mars.
The Bush Administration has long supported a manned mission to Mars, but with costs estimated in the hundreds of billions of dollars, the project has been stalled.
But if humans ever walk on Mars, Fairchild's invention is designed to let them do more when they get there.


Failure Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Circuit Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Frequency Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Your Taxes; Many Forgo Cut In Withholding
When President Bush unilaterally increased the take-home pay of millions of workers in January, not by cutting taxes but by changing the formula by which payroll taxes are withheld, he confidently declared: "Something tells me that a number of taxpayers will take me up on this one."
Something told him wrong.
A lot of people, it appears, are unhappy at being told to borrow today's lunch money from next year's tax refund.


Information for Tourists In Variety of Languages
To the Editor:
Jerome L. Wilson suggests that New York City should have in Grand Central Terminal "foreign language windows with 'live' foreign speakers inside, able to give directions to the city's highlights in the visitor's native tongue" (letter, Feb. 13).


Galactic Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Celutel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


A Soda Seagram Didn't Swallow
Seagram has become the latest marketing giant to be taught a painful and expensive lesson by the soft-drink business.
Faced with steadily declining consumption of its Scotch and gin in the United States, the Seagram Company Ltd. in 1989 bought Soho Beverages, then the hottest brand in the fast-growing natural soda business.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Inverness Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Some 2,000 players went into action this afternoon at the start of the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
The immediate focus of attention is the four-session Open Pair Championship, but most of the stars are looking forward to Sunday, when six days of Vanderbilt Knockout Team play will begin.
The Vanderbilt winners a year ago were Steve Robinson, Peter Boyd, Ed Manfield and Kit Woolsey.
They gained heavily in the final on the diagramed deal, which might well have produced a swing against them.


New Ambulance Companies Are a Welcome Sight in Brooklyn


Cineplex Odeon reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Indictment In Marketing Tax Shelters
A New Jersey man has been accused of engineering a large tax shelter scheme that was marketed to wealthy, well-known investors.
Officials with the United States Attorney's office said Victor Wexler of Livingston, N.J., had used rigged securities transactions to produce $740 million in fraudulent interest expenses.
Those expenses were in turn used by investors to take more than $160 million in tax deductions, the indictment said.


Continental Savings of America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Calprop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Issues; TAX BILL IS PASSED BY THE DEMOCRATS AND BUSH VETOS IT
Clearly foreshadowing the general election campaign to come, President Bush and Congressional Democrats slugged it out today over taxes, spending and the affections of the middle class, their favorite election-year economic issues.
Aside from an exchange of sharp attacks intended to portray Mr.
Bush as a lackey of the rich and the Democratic Congress as more interested in "pork" than progress, the Democrats passed a tax bill that Mr.
Bush promptly vetoed, and he proposed spending cuts that he expected them to resist.


New Jersey Panel Redraws 14 Congressional Districts Into 13
In a strict party-line vote decided by its neutral chairman, a bipartisan commission carved Representative Frank J. Pallone Jr.'s Third Congressional District into four pieces today and threw Mr.
Pallone into a potential race with another Democratic incumbent, Bernard J. Dwyer.
Democrats on the commission had pushed a plan that also targeted Mr.
Pallone, but their map would have done less damage to his home base and would have thrown him into a probable race with a Republican incumbent, Christopher H. Smith.


Baseball Coach Loses Bid For Another School Season
Union High School's varsity baseball coach lost his final court bid today to be reinstated for a 34th season and a chance to extend the string of victories that has made him the most successful baseball coach in the state.
Judge Miriam N. Span of Superior Court here, acting a day after the Township's school board convened a special meeting at her direction to tell the coach, Gordon LeMatty, why it had not reappointed him, said she was satisfied that the board had complied with her order, "however superficially," and denied Mr.
LeMatty's request to be reinstated pending further arguments, either in court or through an administrative grievance hearing.


Classical Music in Review
London Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


F&amp;M Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Huge Fund Turns Up Proxy Heat
California's influential public pension fund turned up the heat on 10 companies today -- including giants like I.B.M., Time Warner and Polaroid -- by threatening to vote against the re-election of their directors if they do not change policies that it contends give short shrift to shareholders.
The fund, the California Public Employees Retirement System, said the companies paid their top managers excessively, stacked their boards with their own executives or failed to consider shareholders' interests in setting corporate strategy.
Those shortcomings, the fund said, contributed to subpar financial performance by the companies and poor returns to shareholders.


Debit vs. Credit Cards: Pay Now, or Later
A year ago, Susan Frankowski, a Reading, Pa., lawyer, applied for and received a Visa debit card from the Meridian Bank of Reading, where she has a checking account.
"I don't write half as many checks as I used to," she said.
"And it saves time in balancing my statement." Previously, she said, she used credit cards to pay for many purchases.


AW Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ukrainian Uses Summit to Berate Russians and the Commonwealth
Animosity between Ukraine and Russia broke into the open at a summit meeting of the Commonwealth of Independent States today.
The Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, publicly lambasted Russia and the commonwealth, saying they had failed to resolve "a single political or military problem."
As Ukrainian demonstrators outside branded the commonwealth as a successor to the "evil empire," Mr.
Kravchuk asserted that the three-month-old association of former Soviet republics had failed to follow up on any of its decisions, and had proved helpless to stop ethnic conflicts in the Caucasus and in Moldova.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; Clinton, Facing Hurdles, Opens New York Drive
Gov.
Bill Clinton, gliding toward the Democratic nomination, today begins his campaign in New York, where he needs not only to defeat Edmund G. Brown Jr. decisively on April 7 but to lay the groundwork for victory next November in a pivotal state that no Democratic nominee can afford to lose.
The quest for New York's 244 delegates could become a sideshow to what will be the main event for Mr.
Clinton: to repair his relationship with some local Democrats, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and to win over black, Jewish and Hispanic voters and organized labor in a state where he is little known.
Teachers' Endorsement Set
"It's important not only for the primary," said Harold M. Ickes, the New York campaign manager for Mr.
Clinton, who is to scheduled to announce the endorsement of the New York State United Teachers union at its convention in Manhattan today and formally accept support from black and liberal members of Congress.


Essex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Prices of Treasury Securities Drop
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday, and long-term interest rates moved back above 8 percent.
Sellers emerged early in the session, in response to rumors that an account was unloading $500 million worth of bonds.
Subsequent sales of corporate bonds by retail accounts forced the securities firms that bought the corporate debt to sell additional Treasury securities as a hedge against those purchases.


News Summary
International 2-5  IRAQ BACKS DOWN, U.N. SAYS
Faced with veiled American and British threats to use military force if it did not cooperate, Iraq has backed down in its latest confrontation with the United Nations and agreed to destroy its ballistic missile equipment, officials said.  1


Dycom Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Film; The 'Cute Kids' of a Couple of Crooks
There would appear to be a great movie in the story of the three Levy children or, at least, that's what Remy Gravelle (Eric Mitchell) thinks when, like the reporter in "Citizen Kane," he begins his hunt for the Levy equivalent to Kane's Rosebud.
At the start of Amos Poe's blithely comic "Triple Bogey on a Par 5 Hole," which opens today at the Walter Reade Theater, this much is known: the Levy children live on a yacht that Robert Maxwell might have coveted and spend their days cruising up and down the Hudson and East Rivers.


Roll Call in House on Vote on a Tax Package Sponsored by the Democrats
Following is the roll-call vote of 211 to 189 by which the House approved a Democratic-sponsored tax bill today that would cut taxes for the middle class and raise them for the wealthy.
A "yes" vote is a vote to approve the bill.
Voting for the bill were 209 Democrats, 1 Republican and 1 independent.
Voting against it were 40 Democrats and 149 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.
There are no vacancies in the 435-member House.


Automatix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Forest City Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


S.E.C. in Action Against Brokerage
The Securities and Exchange Commission went into Federal court yesterday in an effort to halt what it says are abusive practices by Stratton Oakmont, a fast-growing brokerage operation in Lake Success, L.I.
The agency's court complaint charges that the firm is actually an illegal boiler room that has defrauded investors in 13 states in the last three years.
In papers filed with the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, the S.E.C. sought a permanent injunction that would bar the firm from future violations of securities laws.
It complained that the firm and its officers had engaged in price manipulation, made unauthorized trades in customer accounts, lied about previous professional experience, made exaggerated claims about stocks it sold and used high-pressure techniques to badger investors into buying or prevent them from selling stocks the firm was promoting.
A Lawyer's Response
The firm intends to fight the S.E.C. action, Ira Sorkin, a lawyer for Stratton Oakmont, said.
"These allegations are more than a year old," he said.
"The firm is in compliance and has more than sufficient capital, and we believe these allegations are not supported by the facts." He noted that the firm's assets had not been frozen and that it remained in operation.
A hearing date has not yet been set for formal arguments on the injunction request.


Efforts to Resolve Nassau's Government Impasse Spin Into a Vortex of Confusion
Despite a fast-moving flurry of union votes, court decisions, and official pronouncements today, Nassau County government remained stalled in a budgetary and political gridlock as thick as any traffic tie-up on the Long Island Expressway.
First, after the wrenching loss of thousands of members through layoffs, the county's largest public-employee union announced that union members had voted overwhelmingly to defer all overtime payments for three years -- in exchange for a halt to future layoffs.


Human Rights Picture in Tunisia Is Grim
To the Editor:
The human rights picture that Ismail Khelil, the Tunisian Ambassador, paints in "Tunisia Acts Justly on Fundamentalists"(letter, Feb. 22) is rosy, in stark contrast to real human rights conditions in Tunisia.


Arrhythmia Research Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Florida Employers Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Louis Gerstman, 61, a Specialist In Speech Disorders and Processes
Dr.
Louis J. Gerstman, a neuropsychologist who was a co-inventor of the talking computer portrayed as HAL in the movie "2001: A Space Odyssey," died on Tuesday at his home in Malvern, Pa.
He was 61 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Information Solutions reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


LIFE TERM UPHELD FOR ISRAEL'S AGENT
A divided Federal appeals court here upheld a life sentence today for Jonathan Jay Pollard, the former Navy analyst convicted of spying for Israel, rejecting his claim that the Government had breached a plea agreement that would have given him a lesser sentence.
Judges Laurence H. Silberman and Ruth B. Ginsburg joined in a majority opinion that held that Federal prosecutors did not sabotage the plea agreement.
Judge Stephen F. Williams dissented, saying that he thought the Government's behavior in the case was "a miscarriage of justice" and that Mr.
Pollard deserved to be resentenced before a different judge.


March 30 Is Strike Date For Players In the N.H.L.
Without a collective-bargaining agreement since Sept. 15 and unhappy with the current pace of negotiations, the National Hockey League Players Association announced today that its members would strike the league on March 30, the start of the final week of the regular season.
Shortly afterward, the league announced that negotiations would resume next Tuesday.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Advanced Interventional Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BRIEFS
*
Belvedere Corp., said Christiana General Insurance Corp., a unit of Storebrand A/S, had made a proposal to enter into a merger agreement whereby Christiana would acquire Belvedere. *
May Department Stores Co., St.
Louis, increased its annual common stock dividend to $1.66 a share from $1.62.


Nassau Clerk Is Faulted for Backlogs
The mounting backlog in the Nassau County Clerk's office, which has caused a legal nightmare, stems in part from County Clerk Harold W. McConnell's reluctance to computerize operations, despite repeated appropriations to pay for the work.
But lawyers and local officials say politics has also played a major role.
They say, for example, that Mr.
McConnell has resisted laying off Republican allies who hold top-paying jobs, and that complaints about problems in the office generally went through the Republican Party, which until recently ruled unchallenged in Nassau County.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GOTTI V. GLASSER


Capucino's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Worthy Out for Season
Seven-time All-Star JAMES WORTHY will be sidelined for the rest of the season, the Los Angeles Lakers announced yesterday after the 6-foot-9-inch forward underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee.
"The surgery has been completed, there was general wear and tear there, a little debris was cleaned up," said JOHN BLACK, the Lakers' public relations director.
"He'll begin rehab soon and just try and get ready for next year."


U S West Will Adopt Interim Technology
U S West, in a departure from other large cellular-telephone operators experiencing quality and capacity problems, said yesterday that it planned to forgo converting its networks to completely digital technology in favor of a modified analog process using Motorola Inc. equipment.
U S West plans to adopt an interim technology, available this fall, that is half-digital, in anticipation of a fully digital process that may be available in as little as a year or so.
The new technology would be installed in Seattle, Minneapolis and Denver, with other major markets scheduled for next year.


For Bereft Father, a Dark Cloud Clears
Every single day for the last two years, Jose Dominguez says, the killing of his son has hung on his mind like a dark cloud.
And every day for more than a year, he has lived with the consequences of a single moment, when he pulled out a gun and shot his son's killer in the back on the steps of the Bronx County Courthouse.
Mr.
Dominguez has never denied that he went to the courthouse and waited for his son's killer.
But he has explained time and again that he was motivated by fear that the man would bring further harm to his family and by a feeling that the authorities were not acting aggressively enough in prosecuting the case.


Quote of the Day
"We now have some reason to take Iraq's assurances of good will more seriously." ROLF EKEUS, a United Nations official  [ 1:2. ]


Miller (Herman) Inc. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


A Salute to Bernstein
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus is to present a salute to Leonard Bernstein at 8 P.M. on Sunday at Carnegie Hall.
The concert, called "Bernstein," will have Betty Comden and Adolph Green as hosts and is to benefit the chorus's AIDS Outreach Program.
Among the guest artists to appear are Judy Kaye, Phyllis Newman, Kurt Ollmann and Kevin Gray.
Gary Miller is to conduct.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


UMass Flies Past Rams; Orange Not Ripe for an Upset
Fordham University's first trip to the national collegiate basketball tournament in 21 years came to an abrupt halt tonight with an 85-58 loss to the third-seeded Massachusetts Minutemen, whose outstanding defense and flying dunks thrilled a sellout crowd of 13,514 at The Centrum.
And Princeton's fourth appearance in four seasons ended with a fourth defeat.
The 51-43 Tiger loss to sixth-seed Syracuse exceeded the combined margin of defeat in Princeton's three previous tournament appearances.


Israelis Close Off Gaza Strip After Palestinian Slays Two
The Israeli Army today sealed off the occupied Gaza Strip indefinitely, barring thousands of Palestinians from traveling to work in Israel.
The move followed a stabbing rampage this week by a Gaza man who killed 2 people and wounded 19 others in the town of Jaffa, adjacent to Tel Aviv.


Getty Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Grist Mill Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Art's Way Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 22


Industrial Training Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


National Data reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Canadian Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Dance; Liveliness Of Film, But Onstage
What viewers do not see is as important as what they do in "Channels/Inserts," a work from 1981 that was given a lively revival by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company on Thursday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street).
Conceived as choreography for film, "Channels/Inserts" was adapted by Mr.
Cunningham for the stage.
The theater audience does not see the doors, hallways and nooks and crannies that framed or concealed the dancers in the movie version, directed by Charles Atlas.
Nor can the shardlike images derived from crosscutting be reproduced onstage: the idea that one was witnessing activity in two places at the same time was always prevalent through the extreme juxtaposition of film images.


Cooper Development reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Agreement Will Open Skies To Reconnaissance Flights
A long-sought agreement to open the skies over the former Soviet Union, Europe and North America to reconnaissance aircraft flights was reached in Vienna today.
Too late for monitoring cold-war troop and missile movements, the Open Skies Treaty will be initialed on Saturday and signed on Tuesday by the 24 nations participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.


Caucasus Shooting Resumes After Vance and Iran Efforts
Within minutes of the departure of the last Iranian peace mediators from Nagorno-Karabakh tonight, shooting started anew between Azerbaijani and Armenian militiamen along the ill-defined no-man's land between Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, killing at least one Azerbaijani.
The six Iranians -- members of a delegation sent from Teheran to the Azerbaijani capital, Baku, and the Armenian capital, Yerevan -- had stayed behind in the Nagorno-Karabakh capital, Stepanakert, several hours after the departure of the United Nations special envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, to insure compliance on the first day of a planned seven-day cease-fire.
One Reported Killed
In addition to creating conditions needed for Mr.
Vance's fact-finding trip to the troubled territory, the cease-fire was also timed to correspond to the old Persian New Year, "Nouvruz."


Cataract Surgery
To the Editor:
Your Patents column of March 7 provides blatant untruths about cataracts and sensationalizes unproved hopes for prevention of this disease.


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Supreme Court Agrees to Hear Census Dispute
Granting an urgent request by the Federal Government, the Supreme Court agreed today to review a lower court's ruling that the Census Bureau improperly included Federal employees living abroad in calculating how to allocate Congressional seats after the 1990 census.
At stake in the long-simmering dispute is the size of the Congressional delegations of two states, Massachusetts and Washington.
The Census Bureau's count that included the 922,810 overseas American military and civilian personnel cost Massachusetts one of its 11 Congressional seats and gave a new ninth seat to Washington.


To Protect More of the Montana Wilderness; What Constituency?
To the Editor:
Oh you holier-than-thou politicians -- in this case, United States senators -- who condemn those who have caused African grasslands to become deserts and those who have filled wetlands for building or poisoned them with chemicals.
You decry the slash-and-burn destruction of tropical forests and jungles.
Yet in your own backyard, as Robert Weir describes (Op-Ed, March 4), you collude quietly with the Forest Service to destroy our country's largest remaining old forest.


Colortech Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Canadian Newscope reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


American Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Computer Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pic 'n' Save reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Dow Up 14.99, to 3,276.39; Broad Market Off
Stocks were mixed in heavy trading yesterday, as blue chips turned higher on buying related to the expirations of options and futures, while the broad market declined.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,276.39, up 14.99 points for the day and 40.48 for the week.
Stocks' gains were affected by the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond again breaking above 8 percent, as investors saw the high yield as an attractive alternative to equities.


Micron Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 5


Colombian to Be Questioned on Editor's Killing
The police and Federal agents investigating the slaying of a crusading Hispanic journalist arrested a 21-year-old Colombian yesterday as a suspect in a 1989 murder.
The man has ties to one of the leading South American drug cartels, law-enforcement officials said.
The police said the suspect, Freddie Mauricio Garcia Gallo, who was arrested on a busy intersection in Corona, Queens, at midday yesterday, was wanted in Miami in the machine-gun murder of a cocaine distributor in July 1989.


Elinor Montgomery, A Volunteer, Dies at 54
Elinor White Montgomery, until recently the board chairwoman of the New York City School Volunteer Program, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old.
She died of complications of cancer, her family said.


A Worthless $185 Million Theft
A Manila envelope containing $185 million worth of corporate securities was plucked from under the arm of a Goldman Sachs courier in lower Manhattan yesterday afternoon, the police said.
But the securities won't do the thief any good, a spokesman for the investment banking house said.
The courier, a 64-year-old woman who works for a temporary agency and whom police did not identify, was carrying the securities from the Goldman Sachs office at 85 Broad Street to the office of the Security Pacific bank at 2 Rector Street, about five blocks away through narrow, crooked streets, Sgt.
Andrew McInnis said.
A Goldman Sachs executive who spoke on the condition of anonymity said it is common practice for couriers to transport securities.


Bangladesh Takes Complaint on Burmese Expulsions to the U.N.


A Deal Is Reached On Sale of Patriots
JAMES BUSCH ORTHWEIN, the brewery family magnate who wants to re-establish a National Football League team in St.
Louis, might or might not get his wish, but by the time the National Football League picks two new expansion franchises in October, Orthwein, at least, will have had some practice as an N.F.L. owner, and the N.F.L., moreover, will owe him a very big favor.
That's because Orthwein has come to terms on a deal to buy VICTOR KIAM's majority interest in the debt-laden New England Patriots, relieving the N.F.L. of the prospect of litigation and assuring the team's continued presence in New England.


ACAP Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Aramed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Filene's Basement reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


2 Innings, 5 Runs: Gooden Is Dented But Undaunted
Dwight Gooden was wild.
Dwight Gooden was hit.
Dwight Gooden was able to throw fastballs no harder than 87 miles per hour with regularity.
Dwight Gooden was taken deep by Craig Biggio.
Dwight Gooden was yanked after only two and one-third innings against the Astros in his first official start of the spring.
And Dwight Gooden was smiling when it was all over.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bush and Congressional Democrats slugged it out over taxes, spending and the affections of the middle class, their favorite election-year economic issues.
Democrats passed a tax bill that the President promptly vetoed, and he proposed spending cuts that he expected them to resist.  [ Page 1. ]


Budget Talks Place Mayor In a Squeeze
Mayor David N. Dinkins found himself squeezed yesterday in his continuing attempt to balance the budget and the priorities of the city's labor unions.
Earlier in the week, state fiscal monitors pressed him to seek savings through labor concessions instead of borrowing money to make future budgets work.
But yesterday, a major municipal labor leader warned that the Mayor would suffer politically if he bowed to such pressures.


Couples With 2 Jobs Ask When Interests Conflict
Now that the overlapping careers of Hillary and Bill Clinton have moved to center stage, all across Washington and elsewhere dual-career couples are reviewing their lists of do's and don'ts.
And those looking to prove that the nation's capital is an insular and interconnnected place need only look down the growing list of such marriages.
Lawmakers marry lobbyists, people who oversee government health programs marry doctors, journalists marry Congressional aides, sometimes Republicans even marry Democrats.


A Monument to the End of Winter


Courier Falls to Chang And Loses No. 1 Spot
Jim Courier threw down his racquet as if the handle were burning him, and then, using his fingertips, he picked it up by the frame and dangled it, like a piece of refuse, at arm's length.
He spit in the general direction he wished one of his many forehand miscues had taken -- across the net rather than into the stands.
He reviled himself and midway through a point in the third game of the second set called himself a moron who was committing tennis suicide instead of forcing his opponent to depose him.


Manufacturer of Faulty Heart Valve Barred Data on Dangers, F.D.A. Says
Documents that reveal the dangers of a heart valve that is prone to sudden, deadly failure were kept from the public and the Food and Drug Administration, according to the agency and lawyers whose clients are suing the company.
The documents were found by lawyers for the clients, but the company insisted that they be kept secret as a condition of allowing the lawyers to pursue their cases, and it obtained court-enforced orders to guarantee that secrecy.


Theft of Box-Office Receipts Is Reported at 'Catskills' Theater
The Manhattan District Attorney's Office said yesterday that it was investigating allegations of financial impropriety in the box office of the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, home of the comedy "Catskills on Broadway."
Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for the District Attorney's office, said that the owner of the theater, "the Nederlander Organization, did bring a complaint to us and it is under investigation."


Belleville Journal; Rash of Arson Darkens the Image of a Quiet Amish Community
Standing on the porch gazing at his grain silo, Samuel Yoder seems the postcard image of an Amish farmer in his coarse brown work clothes, scraggly beard and wide-brimmed hat.
But the pristine picture is sullied by the charred foundation stones lying next to the silo, all that is left of Mr.
Yoder's barn.
The agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation who came by this week, the first one Mr.
Yoder has ever met, does not fit the scene either.


Colts Sign Matich
Offensive lineman TREVOR MATICH, left unprotected by the New York Jets, signed with the Indianapolis Colts yesterday as a Plan B free agent.
Matich, a seven-year veteran, has played center, guard, tackle and tight end for the Jets since joining the team as a Plan B free agent on March 19, 1990. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the trial of a New York City police officer in the death of a suspect characterized a witness incorrectly.
The witness, a police sergeant who testified that the defendant had not choked the suspect, was appearing for the defense, not the prosecution.


Tulane Comes From Nowhere to Oust St. John's
It wasn't supposed to end like this for St.
John's splendid seniors, Malik Sealy, Chucky Sproling, Robert Werdann and Jason Buchanan.
In their third consecutive appearance in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, it seemed unimaginable that the Redmen would be eliminated after one game by a team that had never been to the tournament.
But the inconceivable became believable today as the Tulane Green Wave (22-8), seeded 10th, stunned seventh-seeded St.
John's, 61-57, in the first round of the Southeast Regional at the Omni.


Wall St. Grand Prix Would Just Glorify Bedlam
To the Editor:
"Big Wheels on Wall Street" (editorial, March 8), condoning an annual automobile race in the heart of New York City, surprises me.


Informal Latin Economy Saves Day
On every downtown city block here, men and women sit hawking their wares.
From Bic lighters to Snickers candy bars to Brut shaving cream to Japanese television sets.
This helter-skelter commerce is only the most visible part of a vast informal economy that includes home building in Brazil, large parts of the bus system in Lima, Peru, and textile manufacturing in Bolivia.


Appeals Panel Supports Broker on Margins
A Federal appeals court in Chicago, in a case stemming from the 1987 stock market crash, has ruled that a broker has the right to increase a customer's required down payment on an options investment sharply, with virtually no notice.
The decision by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit was dated Thursday but not disseminated until yesterday.
It upheld a summary judgment dismissing a suit filed by an investment company representing more than 20 customers, Capital Options Investments, which contended that its broker, Linnco Futures Inc., had acted improperly.


American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Americana Hotels &amp; Realty reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Judge Admonishes Gotti Over Behavior at Trial
John Gotti clashed with the judge in his racketeering-murder trial yesterday, exchanging sharp words in court, as the prosecution came close to completing its case.
Glaring at Mr.
Gotti, who had been muttering and gesturing at the prosecutors, Judge I. Leo Glasser suddenly interrupted the questioning of a witness and briefly excused the jury.


Volunteer Ambulance Corps Fill the Gaps
The Tri-Community Volunteer Ambulance Corps officially came into being at 5:36 last Saturday evening when its only ambulance responded to its first emergency -- a car accident on Clarendon Road in Brooklyn.
And, as the crew merrily pointed out, they beat the Emergency Medical Service to the scene by a good 20 minutes.
"That's why we're here," the corps' ebullient driver, Darryl Ellis, said as he climbed back into the ambulance to wait until another emergency call sputtered over the police radio.


Penwest Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Surrender? The Huskies Have Just Begun to Bark
Connecticut, having dispatched Nebraska with little trouble in the first round of the N.C.A.A. tournament, pondered a bigger problem today: Ohio State.
The Buckeyes, the No. 3 team in the nation, are the Huskies' assignment in a second-round game on Saturday.
"I see it as a challenge, a big opportunity for Connecticut basketball," Huskies Coach Jim Calhoun said optimistically.


Alpine Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Review/Pop; Evoking A Youthful Sinatra
If he wanted to, Harry Connick Jr. could ride his Frank Sinatra imitation toward a lucrative career of singing old pop standards for nostalgic fans.
He refuses to do so, a choice that bolstered his concert on Thursday night, the opening of a sold-out, 15-show engagement through April 7 at the Paramount.
The Sinatra imitation is only passable; it helps that Mr.
Connick is skinny and looks good in a tuxedo.
Like the young Mr.
Sinatra, Mr.
Connick is a baritone, and he has picked up the Sinatra style of widening the vibrato as a sustained note goes on. (He also has some of Mr. Sinatra's arrogance, boasting between songs that after he told off some audience members in Atlantic City, they lost $100,000 gambling.) But he can't match the young Mr.
Sinatra's effortlessness, his precise pitch, or, most important, the sense of storytelling in a song.
Regardless of what he's singing, Mr.
Connick usually sounds emotionally nonchalant and musically studious.
Yet on Thursday, the crowd burst into applause whenever Mr.
Connick started a song like "All of Me" or "It Had to Be You."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Says Golfing at All-White Club Was Mistake
After months of presenting himself as a Southern candidate with a good civil rights record, Gov.
Bill Clinton has suddenly found himself under criticism for a classic gesture of racial separation: playing golf at an all-white country club.
Mr.
Clinton was chided by a leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Little Rock and by Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia for playing golf on Wednesday at the Country Club of Little Rock, an upper-crust bastion in the Arkansas state capital.
The rebuke by Dale Charles, president of the Little Rock chapter of the civil rights group was first reported on Thursday by The Washington Times.


Standardized College Exam Is Customized by Computers
Beginning next October, students taking a major college admissions test will be able to leave behind their No. 2 pencils and use a computer instead, a preliminary step that could someday lead to a vastly different world of standardized testing with a personalized touch.
Test officials ushered in that new world yesterday by voting to computerize the Graduate Record Examination and give students the option of taking the test in a radical new way.


To Protect More of the Montana Wilderness
To the Editor:
"Forest for Sale: It's a Steal" by Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead (Op-Ed, March 4) is harshly critical of my Montana wilderness bill.
The article accuses me of sponsoring a bill that would create an environmental holocaust in the state I love.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Yankees' Shake-Up Affects Michael's Role
Saying that their organization has been in disarray and losing money since owner George Steinbrenner was banished from baseball in July 1990, the Yankees today restructured their front office and named limited partner Barry Halper vice president of baseball operations.
The move appears to decrease General Manager Gene Michael's power because he must now report to Halper, who in turn reports to the nominated managing general partner, Joseph Molloy.


Asamera Minerals reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shabby Lives in Brooklyn, With Camera Looking On
Nick Gomez makes an impressive debut as the writer and director of his first feature, "Laws of Gravity," a vividly acted and extremely well photographed tale of three days and nights on the Brooklyn streets.
The film will be shown at the Museum of Modern Art today at 9:30 P.M. and tomorrow at 3 P.M. in the New Directors/New Films Series.
At the center of "Laws of Gravity" is the friendship of the comparatively settled Jimmy (Peter Greene), who is married and makes ends meet by petty thievery, and his sidekick, Jon (Adam Trese), a good-looking younger man with no great amount of brains and a dangerously short temper.


Moldova Claims Former Soviet Military Assets


Israelis Close Off Gaza Strip After Palestinian Slays Two
The Israeli Army today sealed off the occupied Gaza Strip indefinitely, barring thousands of Palestinians from traveling to work in Israel.
The move followed a stabbing rampage this week by a Gaza man who killed 2 people and wounded 19 others in the town of Jaffa, adjacent to Tel Aviv.


Alliance Global Environment Fund Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


A Course So Familiar Jennings Could Teach It
Spring.
Franklin Park.
A cross-country race.
Could there be a friendlier backdrop for Lynn Jennings's latest visit to Boston?
"My backyard," she called it today, answering questions about the world cross-country championships to be staged here on Saturday with nearly 500 athletes from 54 countries.


Sports of The Times; A Question Of Priorities And Patience
Throughout the week, Dale Brown, Louisiana State's head basketball coach, has reiterated his recommendation that Shaquille O'Neal, his 7-foot-2-inch all-America center, skip his senior year in college in favor of the National Basketball Association.
Brown originally made his suggestion in the wake of a game with Tennessee during the Southeastern Conference tournament in which O'Neal and Carlus Groves had got into a fight after Groves committed an intentional foul.


Global Income Plus Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Classical Music in Review
Stanford Olsen Alice Tully Hall


Surgery for Quintana
The cure may not have been worse than the disease, but for Red Sox first baseman CARLOS QUINTANA, who broke his arm in a car accident in Venezuela last month and will miss at least half the season, it was bad enough to require a second operation.
The surgery, performed in Worcester, Mass., repaired damage stemming from the first operation.
When doctors in Venezuela repaired his broken upper left arm by performing a bone graft with bone taken from his right pelvis, the pelvic area became infected.


Let There Be Light (but not Heat, Cold or Ultraviolet Rays)
Spring is a good time to add glass to a home in the form of a sun room or greenhouse, skylights, a patio door or supplementary windows.
This popular improvement can enhance a home's comfort and appearance and sometimes lower energy bills.
But be wary; using the wrong glass can make rooms less comfortable by draining heat or admitting excessive amounts (both also raise energy bills) and can cause upholstery, wallpaper, hanging art, carpets and other interior items to fade because of exposure to ultraviolet rays.


Canamax Res reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Harold Potter Is Dead; Film Archivist Was 60
Harold Potter, a film archivist and director of operations of 20th Century Fox's Movietone News division, died on Tuesday at his home in North Woodmere, L.I.
He was 60 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Joyce.


Observer; Farewell, Mrs. Keppel
I can't decide which line to take toward England's scandalous royals.
The newsman in me clamors for shrieks of "Shame!" and "Civilization is finished!" And why not?
Exclamation marks sell newspapers.
The interior historian, however, counsels a tone of amused contempt:


Computrac Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Review/Theater; Women Who Fight On When There Is No Hope
In "Vinegar Tom," Caryl Churchill set out to write a play about witches that did not have any witches in it, a play, she said, "not about evil, hysteria and possession by the devil, but about poverty, humiliation and prejudice." The result, though not as richly textured as Miss Churchill's most mature work, is fueled by the fierceness of its conviction.
As staged by Marjorie Ballentine at Theater Labrador/New Georges, it is provocative theater as well as a conscience-baring feminist document.
The play was written in 1976, the same time that the author was working on "Light Shining in Buckinghamshire," her enlightening exploration of the English civil war of the 17th century.
The two plays share a period and a sense of history trampling the individual spirit.


New Chairman Elected At Brooklyn Academy
Bruce C. Ratner, a real estate executive, has been elected chairman of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The announcement was made this week by the office of Harvey Lichtenstein, president and executive producer of the academy.
Mr.
Ratner, who has been a trustee of the academy since 1989, is president and chief executive officer of the Forest City Ratner Companies, a commercial and residential real estate concern in New York City.
He replaces Judge Franklin R. Weissberg, of the New York State Court of Claims, who will remain vice chairman of the board.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Beauticontrol Cosmetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


New Jersey District Is Carved Into Four
In a party-line vote in New Jersey that was decided by a neutral commission chairman, the Third Congressional District was carved into four pieces, throwing the Congressman from that district, Representative Frank J. Pallone, into a potential race with another Democratic incumbent.


Kevlin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


In Korea, Time Runs Short for Inspections
To the Editor:
"Hold the Fire on Pyongyang's Nukes" (editorial, Feb. 24), which maintains that North Korea will soon open its nuclear sites to international inspection, states that the Government in Pyongyang has "submitted its list of facilities to be opened for inspection." But it has not.


For Bereft Father, a Dark Cloud Clears
Every single day for the last two years, Jose Dominguez says, the killing of his son has hung on his mind like a dark cloud.
And every day for more than a year, he has lived with the consequences of a single moment, when he pulled out a gun and shot his son's killer in the back on the steps of the Bronx County Courthouse.
Mr.
Dominguez has never denied that he went to the courthouse and waited for his son's killer.
But he has explained time and again that he was motivated by fear that the man would bring further harm to his family and by a feeling that the authorities were not acting aggressively enough in prosecuting the case.


Confidence Indexes Show Brighter Consumer Outlook
Consumer confidence, which had remained gloomy even as consumer buying had begun to rise, appears to be moving up again after a long slide.
The University of Michigan index of consumer sentiment, which edged up a bit in February, spurted more than 8 percent in the first half of March to 74.6 from 68.8.


Care Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Munsingwear Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 4


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
Upon reading that Ireland had her first feminist awakening when Pan Am refused to provide dental insurance for her husband, I could not help but wonder whether she'll have another awakening when she realizes that only a handful of employers in the entire country currently would provide insurance for her domestic partner.
Perhaps NOW will push
this
idea until it is embraced by the mainstream. MICHAEL C. P. RYAN
New York, N.Y.


Where Was the Crime in House Bank Affair?; Akin to a Club
To the Editor:
The facility established for the House of Representatives was anything but a bank -- it was not chartered as such, did not hold itself out to the public as a financial institution, nor was it created as a profit-oriented enterprise.
Instead, it was a cooperative convenience, a pool, established by and for a most restricted group of members, something akin to a club.


Making the Grass So Green in Spring
NITROGEN is one of the nutritional elements that helps to make spring so green.
It makes the grass grow, it helps seeds sprout, and it causes plants to thrive.
The element occurs in high quantities in plants, since it is part of every living cell.
And here is the most important part: nitrogen is also the element most easily lost, because it leaches easily in heavy rains and in eroding soils.
Addition of fertilizers to home lawns in spring, particularly those high in nitrogen, has become a suburban ritual.
The fertilizer is put on in super quantities, quite often much more than is necessary, and the excess runs off.


The Young Face of Inner City Unemployment
Salvador Martinez ran a hand through his short-cropped hair, smoothed his freshly ironed T-shirt and walked through the warehouse door of the Vargas Furniture Manufacturing Company, hoping to find work as a laborer.
An 18-year-old high school dropout from one of the poorest neighborhoods of Los Angeles, he has never held a steady job, and the more he looks for one the more he thinks he never will.


BASEBALL: Coaches Howard and Foote Offer Advice With a Capital Hey!; For Torborg, a Lieutenant
He is Manager Jeff Torborg's right-hand man, and in Barry Foote's right hand you can find an air horn one moment and a computer printout the next.
Foote can be caustic and then clever.
He can endanger eardrums or stroke egos.
So, one way or another, Foote is going to be heard, and his impact is going to be felt.
Torborg wants it that way, and so the Mets can't have it any other way.


Poet Creates Holocaust Liturgy
AFTER wrestling for a year to develop a proper approach to a book to memorialize the Holocaust, Rabbi Adam Fisher of Stony Brook, an award-winning poet, finally began to write.
"Early on," Rabbi Fisher said, "I had nightmares when I was reading through thousands of pages of testimony. Preparing the book was a humbling experience. On one hand, it was important for someone who is not a survivor to do this. On the other hand, it is highly presumptuous. I realized that the goal of proper acknowledgement had to be realized, and that to fail this was not simply to do a poor job, but to offend the dead and the living."


A Weak Europe Could Prevent U.S. Recovery
RisinG exports have been one of the few economic success stories for America in the past several years, a sign of "growing U.S. competitiveness in world markets," as Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin put it last week.
But now the exports are shrinking, and that fact may endanger the economic recovery.
In January, the Commerce Department reported last week, exports fell for the third straight month, largely because of a fall in shipments of capital equipment used by businesses abroad.
The problem does not seem to be American competitiveness, although the stronger dollar is not helping.
Foreign economies simply are buying less as they experience their own weakness.


No One Gets Bye In Game of Life
To the Sports Editor:
In response to William C. Rhoden's column "Creating a New Standard," (The New York Times, March 1):
Both athletes, the systems that thrive off them and the media that cover them need to understand that "character" in athletic competition is so narrowly focused and has such artificial objectives that it cannot hope to extend into real life.


Elizabeth Smith Marries on S.I.
Elizabeth Marie Smith, a daughter of David Smith of West Brighton, S.I., and Patricia Einbond of Colonia, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Edward Pryor Jr., a son of Mr.
Pryor and Dr.
Mary Pryor of Dayton, Ohio.
Justice Charles A. Kuffner Jr. of State Supreme Court on Staten Island performed the ceremony at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in West Brighton.
Ms.
Smith, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant corporation counsel with the New York City Law Department.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Stanford University.
Her parents are real-estate brokers, working on Staten Island and in Colonia.


Still No Pill for Japan
It's not that the Japanese are especially prudish.
Condoms, which are available from vending machines, are widely used by both married and single men to prevent pregnancy, and abortion is practiced with little of the moral agonizing that has divided the United States.
But for a variety of reasons birth control pills are illegal.
Over the years Japanese officials have contended that the pills are unsafe for women and would encourage promiscuity.
And, in a country where maintaining racial purity is such an obsession, the Government has argued that even without the pills Japan's birth rate is too low.


New Jersey Congressman Announces Retirement
One day after a Republican redistricting plan threw him into a potential race with another incumbent Democrat, 71-year-old Bernard J. Dwyer announced today that he would not run again for the seat in the United States House of Representatives that he has held for seven terms.
Mr.
Dwyer's surprise announcement appeared to give Representative Frank J. Pallone Jr., whose Third District was combined with Mr.
Dwyer's Sixth in a redistricting plan adopted by a bipartisan commission Friday, a clear shot at renomination to keep his seat without an intraparty fight.


Where Was the Crime in House Bank Affair?; Too Many Privileges
To the Editor:
The so-called bank scandal involving overdrafts by members of the House of Representatives would not be significant if it did not taunt us with the reminder of the much wider problem of elected officials who horde privileges for themselves that they deny the average citizen, whose interest they claim to represent.


Corrections
A list of sample menus on March 1 in The Sophisticated Traveler, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about American food, misstated the location of one restaurant, L'Etoile.
It is in Madison, Wis., not Milwaukee; the address is 25 North Pinckney Street.


Political Memo; New Kind of Potomac Fever Is Caused by Spartan Living
A guillotine has not yet appeared on the Potomac, but the mood here is very tense.
For years, the capital has had a caste system that allowed its top officials immunities and emoluments and deference and perquisites.


Fish Under Wraps
THE FISH OF WINTER AND early spring are often treated like fragile fellows, swaddled in purees, rubbed down with pungent herbs, tenderly simmered, slowly baked.
This sort of pampering defies the nature of cold-weather fish.
Winter's offshore squalls and a drop of up to 30 degrees in the ocean temperature means that the frisky -- and therefore catchable -- fish of the season are more Buster Browns than shrinking violets.
Yet the fat cod and scrod that dominate the Boston Fish Auction, the salmon and pike that pile heavily on the piers in Seattle, seem to ask for more than a romp on the grill or a quick saute.
They want a hero's welcome.
Ultrasonic fishing equipment, air freight and aquafarming have blurred the seasons of fish, but the traditional warriors of winter are still accorded the respect of ancient mariners who made it through a gale.
Especially in seaside towns, cooking the cold-weather catch has more to do with gratitude than with the actual flavor and texture of the fish.


Noted With Pleasure
Language Confounded
In 1941 the critic Cyril Connolly, appalled by the abuse of language in England by politicians and inept writers, offered this startling metaphor to dramatize the problem.
This is from "Friends of Promise: Cyril Connolly and the World of Horizon" by Michael Shelden (Harper Perennial, paper).


Where Was the Crime in House Bank Affair?; A in Cash Management
To the Editor:
I praise the members of Congress who overdrew their accounts in the House Bank -- the more frequent the overdrafts and the higher the amounts, the higher the praise!
They get an A in cash management from me, being able to get interest-free loans when banks are so reluctant to lend money.
They are the people I would trust to run the fiscal affairs of our Government.


China to Reward Army With 13% Increase in Military Budget
The Government announced today that it would give the army a 13.8 percent budget increase this year, apparently a reward for helping to keep the Government in power.
The rise in the military budget is bigger than any other increase in a major spending category and comes on top of a substantial boost in army spending in each of the last few years.
The new military budget is more than 50 percent bigger than the one for 1989.


RIGHTIST CHARGED IN TOKYO SHOOTING
The Japanese police began an investigation today into a small, militantly right-wing group after one of its members was charged with trying to assassinate Shin Kanemaru, a leader of Japan's governing party and arguably the country's most powerful politician.
The suspect, Hiroshi Watanabe, who is 24 years old, reportedly told officers that he took three shots Friday at Mr.
Kanemaru, all of which missed, on behalf of Yukoku Seiwa Kai, an extreme nationalist group.
No one was wounded.


Cynthia Pratt Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Pratt Jr. of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Southwick Pratt to C. Hammon Cottrell, a son of the Rev.
Christine Geer Cole of Hydes, Md., and J. Trowbridge Cottrell of Madison, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pratt, 32, is an interior landscape designer with Rainbow Plantscapes in Baltimore.
She and her fiance graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Avon Products in New York.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANANCY AND MR.
DRY-BONE.
Written and illustrated by Fiona French.
Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Using traditional characters from Caribbean and African folk tales, a gifted British artist tells a new courtship story.
The mostly black and white figures are silhouetted against dazzling sunset colors.
Anancy makes Miss Louise laugh, so he gets to marry her.


Miss Mersereau, Banker, Affianced
May wedding plans for Pamela Beth Mersereau and John Taylor Dickinson have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Paul E. Mersereau of Avon, Conn., and Carol H. Mersereau of New Britain, Conn.
Mr.
Dickinson is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy M. Dickinson of Westport, Conn.
Miss Mersereau, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president at BancBoston Capital in Boston.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Drew &amp; Mersereau in Avon.
Her mother is a real-estate broker with Century 21 in West Hartford, Conn.


Data Bank/March 22, 1992


Haitian Rule of Terror Spreads Ever Wider
To the Editor:
In "Hold the Cheers on Haiti" (editorial, Feb. 28), you highlight the Haitian army's veto power in discussions between President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and representatives of the Haitian Parliament.
You then note the Bush Administration "seemed more concerned with halting the flow of Haitian refugees than defending democracy against 7,000 thugs in uniform." While you are right about the Bush Administration, you vastly understate the size of the Haitian army.


Investors Seek Scraps Of Real Estate Empire
ON July 12, 1991, Jonathan Googel and Benjamin Sisti sat before a hostile audience in an auditorium at the University of Hartford, taking questions from creditors of their bankrupt company, Colonial Realty.
The meeting was led by Hal M. Hirsch, a trustee appointed by a Federal judge to take over Colonial's affairs.
Creditors charged that the company was either an outright fraud or one of the worst-managed businesses ever patched together.
Accountants said they could not separate Colonial's finances from those of Mr.
Googel, Mr.
Sisti and the scores of investment partnerships they had created.


Long Wharf Stages 'An Enemy of the People'
"AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE" is never untimely.
When self-interest overrules conscience and the perpetuity of double dealing is a basic assumption of life, the play's pertinence is, pitifully, a given.
It was in 1882 that Ibsen wrote this prototypical work of righteous indignation, fanatical idealism and single-minded allegiance to truth.
As the playwright most likely to follow in Ibsen's path of moral certitude, Arthur Miller wrote a spruced-up adaptation, with some alterations, in 1950, three years before "The Crucible."


Killing Time


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 172,000
18 Wesleyan Road  4 -bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Head of the Harbor 425,000
Rhododendron Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 240-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room, basement, 2.7 acres; taxes $7,400.
Oyster Bay Cove 1.05 million
143A Cove Road  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 35-year-old brick ranch; three fireplaces, water views, 12 acres; taxes $31,000.
Rocky Point 167,000
3 Longview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, deeded beach rights; taxes $4,300.
Sound Beach 113,500
30 Lookout Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath 17-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, den, fireplace; taxes $3,700.
Wading River 169,000
35 Sound Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 80-year-old Victorian; library, screened porch, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $2,400.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 147,500
15 Lydia Lane
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; new roof, new driveway; taxes $3,400.
White Plains, N.Y. 475,000
18 Cobblefield Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial;fireplace, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, den, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $7,800.
Avon, Conn. 236,000
26 Forge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; ceiling fans, skylights, sunroom, 1 acre; taxes $3,435.


Judd Hirsch Finds the Echoes in 'Conversations'
It's not in the playbill or in the cast or even in the script, but there is a dybbuk present in Herb Gardner's new play, "Conversations With My Father." The dybbuk, an otherworldly Jewish spirit that takes up residence in the bodies of the living, keeps creeping into the main character, Eddie Ross, when you least expect it.
Eddie is the get-along, go-along guy, the guy who changes his name from Goldberg to Ross in the late 1930's to "make it in the goyisher world," the guy who refuses to believe the Holocaust is under way, the guy who tries to outsmart God right to the edge of the grave.


Sinan's Mosques
To the Editor: Olivier Bernier's article, "Mosques of Istanbul's Great Builder" (Travel, Feb. 9), is interesting and shows appreciation of Sinan's genius, but there are errors and confusion in his account.
Part of this is because more than one mosque in the same city may have the same name, both given by the same benefactor, and named for him, or in the case of a sultan, for a previous ruler.
Selimiye across the Bosporus in Uskudar is not Sinan's "earliest Istanbul mosque." It was built by Sultan Selim III in 1803 to 1804.
It is one of the largest and finest of the Baroque mosques, and stands close to the great barracks of the same name, where Florence Nightingale nursed during the Crimean War.


Inside Story: Barkley Crowded Hearns
Iran Barkley came into the post-fight news conference Friday night resembling a figure from "The Spirit of '76."
He was stooped over and his left arm was in a sling because of the broken hand he said he'd suffered in his 12-round brawl with Thomas Hearns.
And there was swelling beneath both of his eyes.


Degas and Mrs. Manet
Among the more intriguing works by Edgar Degas is a mutilated portrait of Suzanne Manet, the wife of Edouard, done in the 1860's and now in a Japanese museum.
In his new book, "Olympia: Paris in the Age of Manet," to be published next month by HarperCollins, Otto Friedrich tells the story of the contretemps between the two artists over the work.
To Edgar Degas, it seemed perfectly natural to paint a joint portrait of his friends, the Manets, with her playing the piano and him lolling dreamily (or bored?) on a sofa.
So he painted it, and was pleased with it, and proudly presented it to Manet, who gave him a still life of some plums in return.
The next time Degas saw his picture, it had been mutilated, slashed right through the face of Suzanne Manet at the piano.
She had been sitting in profile, and the cut went straight through her temple.
Everything to the right of that had been destroyed.
Degas was naturally furious, and if Manet offered any explanation, it has not been preserved.
It seems an almost psychotic act of rage on Manet's part.
Degas stormed out of the Manet apartment with the ruined painting under his arm, and it was some time later before the art dealer Ambroise Vollard saw it and asked about it.


Montgomery Journal; Leaping Into the Fray Over Gay Group at Auburn
Montgomery residents say this lovely river port has always been genteel except when the Alabama Legislature was in session.
The legislators, many of them small-town lawyers, used to spit tobacco, engage in noisy debates and throw their peanut shells onto the floors.
But even the legislators are models of decorum now.
The spittoons and peanut shells have disappeared, and many of the lawmakers, some of whom have nicknames like Noopie, Skippy, Crum and Jabo, have traded in their plaid sport coats for tailored gray suits.


Christine Vento To Wed in June
Christine Anne Vento, a medical student at Cornell University, and Dirk Willem Soutendijk, a sales associate at Eli Lilly &amp; Company in Stamford, Conn., are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Vento, 27 years old, graduated from Lehigh University and is the daughter of Catherine and James J. Vento of New Dorp, S.I.
Her father owns a Sir Speedy printing store in Toms River, N.J.
Her mother is an assistant principal at the Susan E. Wagner High School in Willowbrook, S.I., and an author of textbooks on computers.


Athletes Playing To Empty Seats?1
The comments made by the Staples High School athletic director, Bob Byiteck, in the article "Young Athletes Play to Empty Seats" (March 1) startled me.
He may feel that high school basketball is doing poorly with fans, but I do hope he means in his world.
In our part of the planet (30 miles north of Westport), in Danbury, we are ardent high school fans.
Even though our stellar team of the past four years has graduated (they gave us one All-American, two All-State and a host of all-area and all-league players), we supported our team by filling our home- and away-game sites as well.
Fans would stand in line for tickets on game day (before school)!
This year's team has also commanded respect.
At a recent playoff game in Fairfield, our fans almost outnumbered but definitely out-cheered and downright displayed more enthusiasm than their home fans.


After His Fall From Grace, Aundray Bruce Starts Over
The fall from grace for Aundray Bruce began just when grace had been obtained.
In 1988, when the Atlanta Falcons made Bruce the first pick in the National Football League draft, he gained the money, the status and the opportunity for success that all rookies long for -- and that he especially had longed for, because his intensity for the game had always been questioned, because he had worked long and hard to overcome a speech impediment, because he grew up one of 14 children in the projects in Montgomery, Ala., and because his father had died when he was only a year old.
Yes, in 1988, Aundray Bruce was on top of the hill after an arduous journey.
But it seems as if he jumped on a sleigh after that draft and has been skidding downhill ever since.


Kelly Saletan Has Wedding
Kelly Ruth Saletan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Saletan of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married last evening to Richard Scott Grunther, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Grunther of New York.
Rabbi Philip H. Berkowitz officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Grunther, 25 years old, is the public-relations manager for the children's book division of Random House in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.
Her father owns Brother's Poultry, a distributorship in Brooklyn.


Key Figures in House Bank Affair Were Partners in a Bahamian Land Deal
In 1988, eight Democratic members of Congress formed a company to buy a tiny island in the Bahamas -- an old pirates' lair with pink beaches and palm trees -- with the idea of turning it into a resort.
One of them was Matthew F. McHugh, the upstate New York Representative who is now leading the ethics committee investigation of the House bank affair.
Two of the others were Robert J. Mrazek of Long Island and Edward F. Feighan of Ohio, who figure prominently in that affair and who are now appealing to Mr.
McHugh's panel for exoneration on the ground that they did not "routinely and repeatedly" overdraw their accounts by significant amounts.


Andrea Karsch, Lawyer, Is Wed
Andrea Elisa Karsch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Karsch of Flushing, Queens, was married last night in New Hyde Park, L.I., to Michael Neal Druckman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Druckman of Princeton Junction, N.J.
Rabbi Mordecai Efron performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel.
Mrs.
Druckman, 26 years old, is a lawyer in the Department of Commerce in Washington.
She graduated from the State University of New York in Albany and received a J.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a science teacher at Intermediate School 25 in Bayside, Queens.
Her mother, Marcia Karsch, is a teacher at Public School 76 in Long Island City, Queens.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's all very well to say, and even believe, that friends should be accepted for what they are -- men and women with both virtues and faults -- but sometimes it's difficult.
Most of us have at least one friend, or at the very least a close acquaintance, who tries our patience in one way or another.
Why put up with a friend who not infrequently irritates or embarrasses?
Probably because although friendship has a number of pluses you can point to -- enjoyment of each other's company, a mutuality of some interests, a shared feeling of respect, regard and caring -- it is, in the main, an intangible that cannot be accounted for or explained.
And probably because, for every irritation and embarrassment caused by a friend, there's one that you cause the friend in return, and both are outweighed by scores of placid, unruffled and mutually pleasant occasions.
Still. . . .


Should a Lawmaker Judge His Partners?
In 1988 eight Congressmen, three of whom are figures in the House bank affair, bought a Bahamian island.
Their venture sheds light on lawmakers' behind-the-scenes financial dealings and reflects the lack of clear-cut guidelines on how to avoid potential conflicts of interest in Congressional ethics cases.
Article, page 18.


Mutual Funds; A Potpourri of Reader Questions
Are there mutual funds that rely on the stock-picking approach called "technical analysis"?
What should investors look for in fund managers?
How can the number of stocks owned by a fund affect its performance?
Here are answers to these and other recent questions from readers.
Question: Are there any mutual funds that base their selections on momentum or trend analysis, as some commodity funds do?


Wendy S. Loeb, Manager, Wed
Wendy Sharon Loeb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Loeb of West Hartford, Conn., was married last evening to David Garson Heller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Garson F. Heller of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Harold Silver officiated at Congregation Beth Israel in West Hartford.
Mrs.
Heller, 25 years old, is a sales manager at Perrier in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is president of Allan S. Goodman Inc., a wholesale liquor distributor in East Hartford.


Correction
An article on March 8 about techno music misstated the nationality of the musician Moby.
He is American, not English.


Wall or Ceiling Projects Not for Inexperienced
INEXPERIENCE can be a harsh teacher, as when a seemingly straightforward project like remodeling a wall or ceiling by attaching paneling or new wallboard goes awry because of uneven surfaces underneath.
Unless the surfaces for new wall and ceiling materials are flat and smooth, and either plumb in the case of walls or level in the case of most ceilings, panels will not fit squarely, nor will they mask the bumps and hollows they are intended to conceal.


Airport Alert In Buenos Aires
Passengers traveling from the United States to Buenos Aires are being warned by the Transportation Department that the Ezeiza International Airport there "does not maintain effective security measures."
The warning, issued March 13, follows a series of inspections by American security officials.
In November the department warned Argentina that security at the airport did not meet the standards set by the International Civil Aviation Organization.
A follow-up visit by experts from the Federal Aviation Administration found some improvement, but not enough to meet all the standards.


Albany Considers Allowing Video Lottery Games
With illegal operators already reaping profits from electronic gambling machines, New York State budget negotiators are considering co-opting that industry by setting up "video lottery" games in taverns and restaurants throughout the state.
And part of the money, if one of the sponsors of the legislation has his way, will go to Gamblers Anonymous.


On the Street; The Long and the Slim of It
Fashion today is about multiple choice.
Some women are already wearing long, slim skirts that shape the hips sensually as an alternative to miniskirts, trousers and leggings.
Designers are diffidently introducing a few long hems in their collections.
The lengths range from the top of the calf to the bottom of the calf with hem slits to ease walking.


Chess
In chess there is no need to throw yourself against a stone wall.
If an obstacle cannot be breached directly, there's always a way around it.
That's what the grandmaster Joel Benjamin of Manhattan has been doing lately.
He would like to play the main lines of the Ruy Lopez were it not for the current ascendancy of the Marshall Counterattack.
The last time he bucked that, in the first game of his match with Gata Kamsky for the United States championship last August, he suffered a beating.


Studio Days


'Boom' Serves And Slow Courts
To the Sports Editor:
Robin Finn writes that wide-body racquets have speeded up the serve and made the game faster ("Does Power Tennis Make Poor Tennis?" in The Times, March 8).
Then why aren't players storming the net behind every serve since a faster "boom" serve should favor the server and volleyer?
I suggest that in spite of the wide-bodied racquet and speed of serves, the balls now are less live, and the hard courts are slower; the ball sits up and it is more difficult to put a ball away.
The big serve-and-volley game, however, still works on the faster grass surface.
That's when power servers and volleyers like Edberg, Becker and Stich have the advantage.


Lettie Gay Carson, Rail Advocate, 91
Lettie Gay Carson, who fought to save railroad service both in New York and Pennsylvania, died on Wednesday at her home in Newtown, Pa.
She was 91 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, her daughter, Sally Carson, said.


Review/Dance; Bridgman and Packer Search for Serenity
All it takes to make a good dance program is imagination.
Art Bridgman and Myrna Packer demonstrated that when they performed last Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church under the auspices of the Danspace Project.
There were no fancy theatrical trappings at all.
But because Mr.
Bridgman and Ms.
Packer are skilled performers and inventive choreographers, their evening was rich in content.
Simply by keeping his back to the audience for much of the time in "Bones," a new solo to recorded bird calls, Mr.
Bridgman suggested that he had embarked upon a deeply personal mission into the unknown.


A Cross Section of Styles by 23 Contemporary Black Artists
THE Reader's Digest is not overly modest: no company housed in a 1930's Georgian mansion that is only slightly smaller than Blenheim could be called that.
Still, it does not batter the public with its image.
Other publications come and go, changing policies and formats, but this 70-year-old magazine keeps prospering, like The National Geographic, and last year expanded its domain to include Russia.
Not the least of The Digest's assets is the art collection, which Lila Acheson Wallace and her husband, DeWitt, started in the 1940's for the edification of their employees and which now numbers 7,000 works.
Degas, Monet, Manet, Van Gogh and Bonnard are among the names represented.
And we are not talking about studio scrapings: the Monets include a "Water Lilies," and "Anemones and Mirror," circa 1920, is one of the loveliest still lifes that Matisse ever painted.


Animal Magnetism
The grrr and growl of animal markings, particularly leopard and cheetah, come and go in fashion.
Spot them returning this spring and charging out in full force next fall.


The Usual Suspect Cited In Mexico Bugging Case
The capture of three men trying to spy on a meeting of opposition politicians has raised questions about President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's promises of fair play in Mexican politics.
The men were caught on March 7 in what appeared to be a clumsy effort to bug meetings of the conservative National Action Party in Morelia, the capital of the central state of Michoacan.


Review/Film Festival; An Escape To Another Closed Door
"Swimming With Tears" begins with an act of quiet rebellion, as Fey, a Filipino mail-order bride runs away from her Japanese husband and life on his lonely farm.
Escaping to Tokyo without a word of farewell or explanation, she finds work at a Chinese restaurant with a boisterous, largely American clientele.
Thus transplanted, she tries her best to feel welcome in Japanese society, but the film clearly regards this as an impossible task.
"Swimming With Tears" addresses itself bluntly to Japanese xenophobia by capturing the unhappiness and prejudice encountered by this gentle, accommodating foreign worker.
Fey, very much the innocent as played by Ruby Moreno, begins the story having already experienced second-class citizenship on the farm.
"My only function is hard labor and sex for reproduction," she writes to her mother in the Philippines, though it was the mother who urged her to emigrate in the first place. ("Do you want to be an egg vendor like me?" Fey recalls her mother asking.) Part of the reason Fey has been sent to Japan is to find her father, a Japanese executive whom she has never met or heard from.
Fey's mother, though ignored by this man, has never lost hope of attracting his attention.


The Civic VX: a Honda for the Long Haul
IN the scheme of things, it isn't all that long ago that I was paying 21 cents for a gallon of gas, with S &amp; H Green Stamps as part of the bargain.
On the other hand, those days in the middle 1950's seem like a time of long-lost innocence.
It was eons ago that I was pulling up to the pump and asking for a buck's worth of gas.
I got it without a sneer, too, and it would take me out and about for what passed as an evening's fun.


Lopiano Just Smiles Before the Brushback
AN old softball pitcher famous for shaking off her catcher's signals stormed into town last week with a new job and a supercharged mission.
Donna Lopiano, for 17 years the director of intercollegiate athletics for women at the University of Texas, has become executive director of the Women's Sports Foundation at a critical moment in the history of Title IX, the law that revolutionized the world of funds and games.
The timing is exquisite.
By the National Collegiate Athletic Association's own statistics, its annual basketball tournament is a perpetrators' lineup of big-time colleges that have been blatantly violating Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which bars sex discrimination at institutions that receive Federal aid.


Ann Kaufman To Wed in May
Ann Kaufman, an architect, and Anthony Coates Webster, an assistant professor and the technology director at the Columbia University Graduate School of Architecture, both of New York, are engaged to be married in May.
Ms.
Kaufman, an associate at Li-Saltzman Architects, is the director of advanced studies in the architecture program at Princeton University.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Wesleyan University and has a master's degree in architecture from Columbia.
She is the daughter of Edith and Rudolf E. Kaufman of St.
Louis.
Her father is a retired vice president of Stix, Baer &amp; Fuller, a St.
Louis department store.
Her mother is a retired English teacher at Washington University in St.
Louis.


Colorblind


Networking; A Little Light on a Black Art
"The art of diagnosing a network is a black art," said Joe Walters, supervisor of LAN services for the Unocal Corporation, the oil company based in Southern California.
From his office in Anaheim, Mr.
Walters oversees a worldwide network of more than 5,000 nodes that range in complexity from a supercomputer down to PC's and uses several network operating systems.
He is always on the lookout for tools that might turn his black art into something resembling a science.
Recently he has been testing a new product from Network General of San Mateo, Calif., called Expert Sniffer, one of a group of network management systems known as protocol analyzers.
Expert Sniffer consists of a computer and related software that monitors traffic patterns of data moving over the network, searching for signs of developing problems.
It is what Mr.
Walters calls a pro-active protocol analyzer.


Style Makers; Larry Bitterman
When Larry Bitterman decided to introduce a line of western wear, he was bent on reviving the real McCoy.
Bandanas had to be as big as they were when cowboys used them as slings, bandages, face protectors and masks.
Frontier pants couldn't have belt loops, since belts strapped into holsters in the 1800's.
Denim riding dresses had to have two hidden pockets for stashing chicken feed or pin money.
Mr.
Bitterman's two-year-old mail-order firm, the Old Frontier Clothing Company, offers traditional items like bib-front shirts, frock coats, vests and spurs.
Men's shirts and pants are $40 to $60; hats, $175 to $200, and boots, $230 to $400.
There's also a men's navy blue wool cavalrycoat with brass buttons, gold-braid cuffs and matching detachable cape for $200.


Prague: Then and When, but Never Now
I RETURNED to Prague last year in spring, its signature season: Prague Spring, when the window on the West briefly cracked open, and then slammed shut.
That spring of 1968 came to signify all the broken hopes that gave the city its cold-war allure.
For its grimness in those years did give Prague a kind of black-leather-jacket glamour.
My first visit to Prague, in May 1975, coincided with the week the American troops left Saigon.
I had sought out the city in books during my generation's youthful immersion in national shame, the long anguish of the war in Vietnam.
Prague -- and Czech history -- had a "roots" fascination for me, but the city was also a charm I could finger to convince myself I belonged not only to the big country that devastated the little country, but to the little country of my ancestry, holding itself in moral aloofness from a crushing giant.


A Mexican Master Surveys the Past
At the age of 90, Manuel Alvarez Bravo provides a living link to the glories of the artistic renaissance that flowered in Mexico in the 1920's and 30's.
Long his country's most renowned photographer, Mr.
Alvarez Bravo knew and photographed most of the leading figures of that cultural blossoming, including Diego Rivera, Frida Kahlo, David Alfaro Siquieros and Jose Clemente Orozco.
In addition, he portrayed many of the foreigners drawn to Mexico during that time, including Leon Trotsky, Andre Breton and Sergei Eisenstein.
Other illustrious names crop up elsewhere on his resume: in 1927, at the urging of Tina Modotti, he sent a portfolio of his pictures to Edward Weston; the two remained friends until the American photographer's death in 1958.
Later Mr.
Alvarez Bravo also worked as a cameraman on film projects in Mexico by Eisenstein and Paul Strand.


Style Makers; Helene Safire, Jewelry Designer
It's no longer a surprise to Helene Safire when the jewelry she wears to a party doesn't come home with her.
It is bought right off her neck and ears.
Ms.
Safire, who was born in England, has studios in Maryland and Virginia where she designs and creates jewelry in sterling silver, gold-plated sterling and anodized aluminum.


Bill Would Privatize N.J. Transit Bus Routes
Beginning what could be a major Republican effort to shift public services to private companies, a bill that would turn half of N. J. Transit's bus routes over to private operators over the next two years has been introduced in the State Assembly.
Alex DeCroce, the chairman of the Assembly Transportation Committee and the bill's chief sponsor, said while the operation of certain bus lines would be turned over to private operators, the state would retain broad control.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
If Ireland and her husband choose to stay married while living independently, they are certainly not the first (or last) to do so.
It saddens me that some of the NOW members would criticize Ireland's personal life, especially since expanding the range of options available to women is what the women's movement is all about.
JULIE SPIEGELBERGER
New York, N.Y.


POSTINGS: Project for the Zabars; A Building's 4th Incarnation
Having led three lives already in 95 years, a handsome two-story building on Broadway, between 82d and 83d Streets, is being readied for a fourth.
The structure includes storefronts on Broadway and a section on 82d Street that was originally the Fourth Church of Christ, Scientist.
This portion was remodeled in 1912 as the Schuyler Theater, which was later turned into a supermarket, next to which was a Schrafft's.
Upstairs for many years was the New York School of Ballet.


Terrie Burrell Has Wedding
Terrie Ann Burrell, a Ph.D. candidate in cellular and molecular biology, and Dr.
Christopher Sutton Kent, a neurosurgery resident, both at the State University Health Science Center at Syracuse, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
David Souder officiated at the Lyncourt Wesleyan Church in Syracuse.
Ms.
Burrell, 24 years old, graduated from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Burell of East Aurora, N.Y.
They own Trailerland, a motor-home sales company in East Aurora.
Dr.
Kent, 28, is a cum laude graduate of Colgate University and the University of Rochester School of Medicine.
He is the son of Suzanne M. Kent and Lester W. Kent, both of Port Washington, L.I.
His mother is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
His father retired as president of the Kent Connection Ltd., a distributor of air and water filtration systems in Port Washington.


Corrections
A picture caption on Feb. 9 with an article about Istanbul's mosques misidentified one.
It was the Fatih Mosque, not the Shehzade Mosque by the architect Mimar Sinan.
In addition, the accompanying map of Istanbul misidentified one mosque and rendered the name of another incorrectly.
The mosque on the northern side of the Golden Horn is Sokollu Mehmet Pasha, not Sokollu Mehmet.
The mosque to its east is Kilic Ali Pasha.
The date of the Suleymaniye Mosque was also misstated.
It is 1550 to 1557, not 1667.
This correction was delayed improperly by an editing oversight.


Ms. Zuckerman Weds M. A. Broude
Susan Lynne Zuckerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Zuckerman of Woodmere, L.I., was married last night to Mark Allen Broude, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Broude of New York.
Laurence Bazer, a rabbinical student at the Jewish Theological Seminary, performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel.
Mrs.
Broude, 27 years old, is an associate in the corporate communications department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the president of M. Zuckerman &amp; Company, a general sales concern in New York.
Her mother, Janet Zuckerman, is the director of development and planning of the Rockaway Development and Revitalization Corporation, a community group in Far Rockaway, Queens.


Elderly Man and Home Care Aide Are Slain in Bronx Apartment
In a Bronx building where neighbors know each other by name and try to look out for one another, the bodies of an elderly man and his home care attendant were found Friday night in the man's apartment, with both of their throats cut.
The police said Jose Veve, who was in his 80's, and Ida Llambels, 56, were found dead in Mr.
Veve's fifth floor apartment at 1194 Brook Avenue in Morrisania.
The bodies were discovered by Mrs.
Llambels' husband, Carlos, about 11 P.M.
Friday, almost nine hours after she usually leaves to return home.


Demons: Dangerous When Annoyed
THE PAINTED ALPHABET
By Diana Darling. 209 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANANCY AND MR.
DRY-BONE.
Written and illustrated by Fiona French.
Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Using traditional characters from Caribbean and African folk tales, a gifted British artist tells a new courtship story.
The mostly black and white figures are silhouetted against dazzling sunset colors.
Anancy makes Miss Louise laugh, so he gets to marry her.


Ms. Westward to Wed D. B. Johnson
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Westward of Newton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Lynn Westward, to David Benedict Johnson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Anthony Johnson of Buffalo.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Westward, 26 years old, is a trader with the Berg Capital Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is a partner of Stern Brothers, New York stock brokers.


Making a Difference; Fox Television's New Mr. News
As a vice president for acquisitions at the News Corporation during the mid-1980's, Stephen Chao helped Rupert Murdoch put together his deals to acquire Twentieth Century-Fox and the seven television stations that became the core of the Fox television network.
He then went on to develop entertainment programming for Fox, including "Cops" and "America's Most Wanted."
Last week, Mr.
Murdoch tapped the 36-year-old Mr.
Chao for another important job in Fox's effort to build a true competitor to ABC, CBS and NBC.
Mr.
Chao was named president of Fox News, a newly created division of Fox Inc. that will oversee the news broadcasts of the stations owned by Fox and the development of a network-quality national news operation.


Israel Confronts the Idea of Life Without Washington
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir told a couple of American journalists half a dozen years ago that he wanted to be remembered after leaving office as the Israeli leader who "kept things quiet."
When it comes to Israel's most important relationship, that with the United States, events obviously haven't worked out quite the way he hoped.
Today, relations between the two countries are an unquiet mess.


Jennings, in Her Own Backyard, Finds Winning as Easy as 1-2-3
The experience of winning a third consecutive world cross-country championship over a course she regards as home so moved Lynn Jennings today that she almost felt compelled to stop during the race to take it all in.
As it was, she deviated from normal behavior only after crossing the finish line in 21 minutes 16 seconds, 2 seconds ahead of her final challenger, Catherina McKiernan of Ireland: She hugged her husband, Dave Hill, and cried.


Ms. Freedman Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Freedman of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced 1993 wedding plans for their daughter, Deborah Lynn Freedman, and Steven Todd Shapiro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Shapiro of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Freedman, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and is completing law studies at the University of Pennsylvania, as is her fiance, who is 24 and graduated from Penn.
Her father is the director of geriatrics at the New York University Medical Center.
Her mother, Cora Freedman, is a family therapist and the director of counseling at Family Consultation Service of Eastchester, N.Y.


Sunday Menu; Scallops: Out of the Brine, Into the Broiler
Risotto, like pasta, goes with so many things.
This dish calls for sea scallops.
Cut them in halves or quarters before broiling them.


The Latest Technology Fuels the Oldest of Drives
As increasing numbers of Americans, searching for intimacy in the age of AIDS, turn to computer keyboards to aid their fantasies, computerized sex play is becoming a growing issue for the companies that sell on-line information services.
The possibility of increased law-enforcement surveillance and new restrictions could hamper the electronic networking that the computer industry sees as one of its most promising vehicles for new economic growth.
Last fall, a 42-year-old man in Fremont, Calif., using a nationwide computer conferencing system, posed as a 13-year-old homosexual boy.
He said he was electronically approached by someone identifying himself as a 50-year-old New Yorker who tried to arrange a meeting.
In Massachusetts in January, a man was indicted for raping a 12-year-old boy whom he befriended through a computer bulletin board.


CALL OF THE WILD
The leopard is changing his spots and taking on many new forms and functions this season.
Following fashion's lead, design objects from potholders to lamp shades are peppered with leopard.
Too much is never enough.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Grace Under Pressure? It's Working for Clinton
Once the votes are in, political consultants and journalists know exactly what it took to win a campaign.
They can often explain it all using one or two television images: a brilliantly uplifting or nasty commercial, a blunder in a debate, a humiliating shot on the evening news, a sound bite like "Where's the beef?".
But this year's Democratic campaign looks inconveniently complicated even in hindsight.
If there was one dominant image on television, it was the calm smiling face of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, but you couldn't really call that a defining moment because it lasted more than two months, through moment after moment that would have defined other politicians as ex-candidates.


Neil Simon's Pinball Rules for Playwriting
"How long did it take you to write the play?" the young college student queried.
I was stumped.
I didn't know.
I had no recollection.
Does it start from the moment you put pen to paper? (I don't type. I write in long, narrow-ruled notebooks that I seem to find only in England, and even there they appear to be fast disappearing. I like to see as much as I can in one glance at a sheet of paper to get a sense of the rhythm and tempo of the words.)


Unqueenly
Lawyers for Leona Helmsley have apparently lost in their exhaustive efforts to keep the self-promoted queen of a hotel and real-estate empire from four years in unhospitable accommodations.
In the latest round, a Federal judge, Thomas P. Griesa, ruled last week that the 71-year-old Mrs.
Helmsley, who was convicted of tax fraud, must check in at a Federal minimum-security prison on April 15, the deadline for millions of Americans to pay their income tax.
Her imprisonment will kill her husband, Harry, contends Mrs.
Helmsley, who once bragged that "only the little people pay taxes," according to the testimony of her former maid.
"He has nobody in the world that loves and cares for him," Mrs.
Helmsley said outside the courthouse, stifling sobs.
"All he has is me." Incarceration would kill her, too, she said.
Mrs.
Helmsley, who appeared to collapse after the hearing, checked in to a hospital where her physician said she is suffering from heart palpitations and hypertension.


Once-Privileged Writers Now Share Russian Pain
Back in the old days, when the Soviet Government was still propping up an official cultural establishment, Lev Novogrudsky used to spend three months a year in various retreats belonging to the Union of Soviet Writers.
In these places, called Houses of Creativity, in the foothills of the Caucasus, on the Baltic beaches, or along the Crimean coast, he wrote plays for children, far from the annoying realities of Soviet life, living out a writer's dream courtesy of Litfund, the union's literary aid society.


Methadone Clinic Tied Up in Politics
As chairman of the ad hoc group Riverhead Citizens Opposed to a Methadone Clinic, I'd like to share some footnotes, and an update, on "Riverhead Fights Methadone Clinic"  [ Feb. 23 ] .
Particularly because I happen to be a social worker whose special area of interest is drug-abuse prevention and treatment, I'd like to emphasize that the opposition in Riverhead is to methadone specifically, and not other kinds of treatment.
We consider methadone treatment to be just one more of the many mistakes made in western Suffolk County that we don't want to see repeated on the East End.
The result of more than three months of fighting the methadone-clinic proposal is that methadone treatment has become a secondary issue in the controversy.
The core issue for Riverhead citizens has become the callous disregard of public opinion by the government.


Making a Difference; Dan Kranzler's Big Breakthrough
When the Bell Atlantic Corporation announced last week that it would introduce an innovative "one person, one number" service this summer, the man behind the innovation was Daniel R. Kranzler, a former child-and-family counselor in Northern California who got his start in telecommunications selling electronic pagers.
"One person, one number" would allow a customer, through a single telephone number, to receive calls at the office, at home, on a cellular telephone, a facsimile machine or a pager.
The customer can also get messages left on voice mail.


Stepping Aside?
To the consternation of many in the West, the withdrawal of the last Soviet troops from Afghanistan three years ago wasn't followed by a rebel victory there or the prompt replacement of Najibullah, the leader the Kremlin had propped up.
Instead, the fighting, which began 13 years ago, just dragged on.
Now, however, the combination of international pressure and exhaustion from war, along with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the drying up of financial assistance from its successor states, seem to be having an effect.
United Nations officials have been saying that their efforts to help Afghans negotiate an end to the war depend on a commitment from Mr.
Najibullah to step down.
Last week, he finally agreed to do so -- once an interim government is formed with the consent of diverse elements of Afghan society under the United Nations' plan.
Mr.
Najibullah had pledged to support the plan, but the announcement was his first public commitment to step aside to give the plan a chance to work.


Talking: Co-op Sublets; Delays Mean Lost Tenants
WHEN the market for New York City cooperatives began to weaken, many boards began allowing tenant-owners to sublet their apartments.
But some shareholders are finding that boards are frustrating their efforts to rent by insisting on lengthy, costly and cumbersome approval processes for tenants.
Laurie Smith, executive vice president at Spencer Realty, a Manhattan agency that deals primarily in rentals, estimates that a third of the potential market for co-op rentals is being lost because of processing delays.
"Whenever we have a client needing something immediately we can't even show them a co-op sublet," she said.


Getting to Work: Other Views
The article "Getting to Work Will Never Be the Same" (Feb. 23) correctly focuses on changes in New Jerseyans' commuting habits, which will be driven by the 1990 Clean Air Act.
Many of the programs being discussed are long overdue, like tax incentives to employers who subsidize commuting employees who use public transportation or use new technology to work from home at least one day a week.
Such pilot programs are already under way in California.
The missing ingredient, however, is the need for a regional approach to the commuting-pollution problem.
Thus, more than half a million New Jerseyans commute daily into New York City and tens of thousands go to Philadelphia.
As the article noted, employees who commute to jobs out of the state will be affected by Clean Air Act regulations adopted in the neighboring states.


Crime
Peter Dickinson has such breadth of imagination and such depth of empathy that he could probably write a suspenseful tale about a field of rocks waiting to be plowed under. (Or has he done that one already?) In PLAY DEAD (Mysterious Press/Warner, $17.95), the British author contents himself with staring into the soul of 50-year-old Poppy Tasker, a cultured and sensitive woman chafed by the narrow limits of her life.
"I can feel myself shrinking," says Poppy, who stifles her discontent with classical music and gin, and by looking after her lively toddler-grandson while her daughter-in-law runs for public office.
At the playground, Poppy eavesdrops on the lives of the young mothers and other, more nubile nannies, even as she cringes from "the sort of look the young give you sometimes on meeting, those adventurers for whom the decades seem to spread away before them like rich provinces waiting to be sacked." When a stranger comes skulking around the playground, Poppy and the other nannies draw themselves into a druidic circle and ward him off with a collective look of almost pagan ferocity.
But when the intruder is found murdered on the park grounds, his body stripped and grotesquely garlanded with flowers, the women's spell is broken and they all become suspects in the murder.


New Zealand's Kiwi Tactics
To the Editor:
Regarding "Let's Have Fair Play for Foreign Kiwis" by James Bovard (Forum, Feb. 9), the California kiwifruit industry would like to correct some distortions of fact about our industry and the action we have taken.
Almost every last one of our growers was of the view that if action under United States antidumping laws was not taken, we would soon not have an industry left to defend.
The objective of our action was not punitive.
We filed our petition solely to insure that fair prices would be restored and maintained.


Dr. Ilene Goldstein Is to Wed in May
May wedding plans for Dr.
Ilene Joy Goldstein and Dr.
Stephen Jay Swartz have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Goldstein of Oceanside, L.I.
Dr.
Swartz is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Swartz of Rumson, N.J.
Dr.
Goldstein is a pediatrician completing a fellowship in allergy and immunology at Schneider Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hofstra University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from the State University of New York Downstate College of Medicine at Brooklyn.
Her father is a lawyer with a private practice in Hempstead, L.I.
Her mother, Tina Goldstein, is a paralegal in his office.


Taking History's 'Plaster Figures' And Making Them Real
WHEN Robert K. Massie was working as a reporter for Newsweek magazine in the mid-1960's, he would dash off to the New York City Public Library during lunch hours to read about hemophilia, the disease afflicting his 10-year-old son, Bobby.
He discovered that the son of the last Russian Czar, Nicholas, was also a hemophiliac.
But most historians mention the child's illness only in passing, prompting Mr.
Massie to write a book on the subject.
"People write about what's inside them," Mr.
Massie said during a recent interview in his home here.
"Nicholas and Alexandra" was my attempt to write about Bobby's illness in terms of another child.
Nobody would show much interest in me writing about Bobby, but they were interested in the Czar's son."


Privates on Parade


Wall or Ceiling Projects Not for Inexperienced
INEXPERIENCE can be a harsh teacher, as when a seemingly straightforward project like remodeling a wall or ceiling by attaching paneling or new wallboard goes awry because of uneven surfaces underneath.
Unless the surfaces for new wall and ceiling materials are flat and smooth, and either plumb in the case of walls or level in the case of most ceilings, panels will not fit squarely, nor will they mask the bumps and hollows they are intended to conceal.


Culture Tours To 3 Continents
The Jewish Museum in New York is sponsoring a tour to SPAIN and MOROCCO from May 14 to 28 that will be led by three professors.
Madrid, Granada, Casablanca and Fez are among the cities on the itinerary.
The cost is $4,999 a person plus a $500 contribution to the museum that is deductible to the extent allowed by law.
Air fares, hotels, some meals, tour manager and local guides as well as the three lecturers are included.
More information: (212) 399-3390.
The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston offers a 21-day tour to INDONESIA and the SPICE ISLANDSto be led by Dr.
Jan Fontein, Matsutaro Shoriki Curator in the museum's department of Asian art.
The tour leaves June 30 and costs $5,450 a person, including round-trip air fare from Boston, domestic flights, hotels, most meals and sightseeing, plus a $350 deductible donation to the museum.
More information: (617) 267-9300, extension 551.


Patricia Ann Sickafoose Is Married
Patricia Ann Sickafoose, a daughter of Keith and Anne Marie Sickafoose of Franklin Park, N.J., was married last evening to Mark Alan Edelstein, a son of Mannie and Gail Edelstein of La Jolla, Calif.
Rabbi Frederic Dworkin officiated at the Scanticon Conference Center and Hotel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Edelstein, 25 years old, graduated from Rutgers University and is a medical sales representative for Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals in New York.
Her father owns the Ondutec Corporation, a machine manufacturer in Princeton.


Songs From Early America and Russia
PROGRAMS around the state this week range from songs and dances celebrating the heritage of American Indians to Rachmaninoff's Choral Vespers sung in Church Slavonic Russian.
The American Indian Dance Theater will perform at the Shubert Theater in New Haven, with the company's performers using indigenous instruments to accompany chants and dance ceremonies representing several tribal cultures, some of them dating back 600 years and more.
Shows are scheduled on Tuesday, at 10 A.M. and noon as part of the Shubert Student Series, and at 8 P.M. as a regular evening performance (624-1825).


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BLACK MOUNTAIN COLLEGE
A little known but widely influential experiment in the arts is the subject of an exhibition at the Station Gallery in Katonah through May 9.
Titled "Black Mountain College/Scratching the Surface," it contains works by faculty members and students, executed when the college was in existence, from 1933 to 1957.


Africa Explorer Asks Volunteers
Jim Owens, an outdoorsman from Washington, D.C., who led a re-enactment two years ago of Henry Morton Stanley's 1871 expedition to find Dr.
David Livingstone, now plans to retrace Stanley's longer 1874-77 expedition through the Congo.
Applications to take part are being invited.
The 6,000-mile expedition will begin in May 1993 and traverse four countries, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Zaire, crossing the breadth of Africa -- on foot and by river barge -- from east to west.
Mr.
Owens expects to complete the trek -- which took Stanley 999 days -- in 8 to 10 months.
Experience in anthropology, zoology, geology, botany or videophotography would be helpful, Mr.
Owens says.
Each team member is expected to be knowledgeable about the history and political concerns of the region and to be physically prepared for the rigors of the journey.
Swimming is a prerequisite skill.
Members of the primary team, which will do the entire trek, must pay their own air fare to and from the expedition and contribute $1,000 toward supplies.


Kate Seligson Is Wed
Kate Seligson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Seligson of Locust Valley, L.I., was married last night to John Scharlin Friedman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Friedman of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Bonnie Steinberg officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The bride, 27 years old, teaches nursery school at Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Mr.
Friedman, 30, a graduate of Syracuse University, is president of J.F.
Chemical Sales, an industrial chemicals trading company in New York.


Albania, Voting Today, Is Expected to Throw Out Old Guard
This last redoubt of a semblance of Communist rule in Eastern Europe will vote on Sunday to elect its first Parliament of the post-Communist era.
In Albania's initial free multiparty elections, last March, the Communist Party of Labor was entrusted with the right to govern the country.
Since 1944, it had done so only by exercising what was generally regarded as Europe's most despotic rule.


A $78 Million Year: Steve Ross Defends His Paycheck
Steve Ross looks like a humbled man.
Slumped in a leather chair, the chairman and co-chief executive officer of Time Warner, the world's largest media and entertainment company, winces as he reaches for a glass of water.
His smile is wan, his jowls sag, his once athletic frame appears bloated.
"It's been a rough couple of years," he says in a voice that sometimes descends to a Brandoesque murmur.
"I've been hurt tremendously."
The physical pain Ross feels is concentrated, excruciatingly, in his back.
Every movement is cumbersome; rising to his feet an intricate maneuver.
Although his office, with its paintings by Mark Rothko and Arshile Gorky, suggests a life of sumptuous ease, Ross's appearance amounts to eloquent testimony that money is not everything.


Regional Group Seeks New Penalties Against Haiti
Stung by setbacks in negotiating the return to Haiti of its elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the Organization of American States is preparing for more punitive steps against the Haitian military Government and violators of the economic embargo who have helped it stay in power, Administration officials say.
Officials said on Friday that a blockade of Haiti was among the measures likely to be discussed.
They argued that enough petroleum and vital goods have been arriving in Port-au-Prince to give the military, which overthrew President Aristide on Sept. 30, a sense that the region is not serious about forcing the ousted leader's return.


INSIDE
Angry French Voting Today
Frustrated by rising unemployment and abruptly uncertain of their place in the world, the French appear ready to register a big protest vote.
Page 3.
Rep.
Dwyer Drops Out
One of two Democratic Congressmen thrown into the same New Jersey district said he would retire.
Page 26.
Brazil Ousts Ecology Aides
Ten weeks before Brazil is to play host to a mammoth "Earth Summit," its President dismissed his top two environmental officials.
Page 15.


All the Trimmings for a Sunday Spring Dinner
ALTHOUGH this winter was one of the warmest on record, it is now officially spring.
And with a change in the seasons, people's moods about menus also change.
Spring lamb, herbs, asparagus and light fruit desserts will now whet appetites sated with stews and casseroles.
The following menu is a fancy one, a lineup for a Sunday dinner.
It would actually qualify for Easter Sunday, still about a month away.


Sinan's Mosques
To the Editor: The Rustem Pasha Mosque that Mr.
Bernier so enthusiastically describes is, indeed, one of the most interesting, but is currently under repair with those incredible Iznik tile walls covered by heavy protective canvas.
Unlike Mr.
Bernier, I would not depend on the taxi drivers to know the locations of all the mosques.
Many of these drivers have recently come to Istanbul from Anatolia and if you can point out your desired destination on a tourist map you're likely to have better luck.


UP AND COMING: Marisa Tomei; She's Straight Out of Brooklyn
Marisa Tomei bows her head for grace before eating a sandwich, and with a smile acknowledges that her last 12 months have been particularly blessed.
A co-star of the new comedy "My Cousin Vinny," she awaits the release of two more films this year -- Richard Attenborough's "Charlie" and Alan Rudolph's "Equinox" -- and begins shooting "Baboon Heart," Tony Bill's tragi-comic romance, this month.
That she has such dissimilar roles in these films -- the silent-film star Mabel Normand, an angelic street urchin and a depressed young woman, respectively -- pleases Ms.
Tomei, whose performance as an appealingly crass Brooklynite in "My Cousin Vinny" might otherwise have stereotyped her.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BIOGRAPHERS' DAY
Defining the definitive biography, biographers choosing the subject or vice versa, and the ways in which biography influences other disciplines will be discussed by a dozen experts in the field during a daylong symposium at Yale on Saturday.


County Faces Challenges In Upgrading Charles Point
COUNTY officials are preparing to comply with strict new Federal air-pollution standards that will sharply increase the cost of burning Westchester's garbage at the Charles Point plant here.
The exact type of scrubbers and filters required will not be known until later this year.
But county officials and the private owner of the plant, which is on county land, are about to begin negotiations to determine the financial effect on the majority of county taxpayers, who pay to use the plant through their refuse-district taxes.


Southbury Training School
Robert Hamilton's interview with Cathy Juni, "Speaking Out for Disabled People" (Feb. 2), was informative and constructive in many ways, but it presented a very unfair and inaccurate picture of Southbury Training School.
Your readers deserve to know what Southbury Training School is really like.
Our current population, 24 years after Ms.
Juni left the school, is very different from what she remembers.
Over 77 percent are severely or profoundly retarded, with little or no language, functioning below a 5-year-old level.
In addition, 25 percent are both mentally ill and mentally retarded, and 33 percent are "at risk," needing either special drugs or a behavior modification program to help them control behavior problems.
They are extremely handicapped, and almost none of them would know what to do with the "freedom" Ms.
Juni wants for them.


New York State Pair Wins a Bridge Event
Two bridge players from New York State captured a major title as the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals got under way here this weekend.
The North American Open Pairs was won Thursday night by Jim Krekorian of Manhattan and Rick Zucker of North Tarrytown.


Sheri B. Seigel, A Broker, Weds
Sheri Beth Seigel, a real-estate broker for R. J. Wolff Associates, and John Marks Reiss, a partner in the law firm of White &amp; Case, both in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Harmonie Club.
Mrs.
Reiss graduated from New York University and is a daughter of Rosellen Seigel of New York and the late Stanley Seigel, who was an investment banker.


Sea Change


The Specter of 40 More Chernobyls
While the world prepares for the Earth summit meeting -- the U.N.
Conference on Environment and Development -- in Rio de Janeiro in June, up to 40 potential Chernobyls are waiting to happen in the former Soviet Union and Central Europe.
By the time this nuclear nightmare catches the world's attention, it maybe too late to prevent a catastrophe that could do irreparable human, economic and environmental damage.
Without an international rescue operation, the risks can only accelerate.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE TIGER'S DAUGHTER, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Fawcett Crest, $5.99.) In this distinguished author's first novel, a young Indian woman, educated and married in America, returns for a summer to the changed land of her birth.
"Miss Mukherjee's heroine is a perfect instrument for recording the mutations of her time," Martin Levin said here in 1972.
IN THE SPIRIT OF CRAZY HORSE, by Peter Matthiessen. (Penguin, $14.) Out of print for eight years because of litigation, this book argues the innocence of Leonard Peltier, a leader of the American Indian Movement who was convicted of the murder of two F.B.I. agents in a 1975 shootout in South Dakota.
Mr.
Matthiessen's contention that Mr.
Peltier was framed led to an ultimately unsuccessful libel action against parties including the author and the original publisher, Viking, by an F.B.I. agent and William Janklow, the former Governor of South Dakota.
Mr.
Matthiessen has written a revised epilogue for this new edition, in which he recounts a meeting with a man claiming to be the real killer.
In 1983 our reviewer, Alan M. Dershowitz, called "In the Spirit of Crazy Horse" "one of those rare books that permanently change one's consciousness about important, yet neglected, facets of our history." Penguin is also reissuing Mr.
Matthiessen's INDIAN COUNTRY ($11), a 1984 book detailing the author's many journeys to native American territories.


Anne Hamburger Weds Rafe Jenney
Anne Rosalind Hamburger, the producer of En Garde Arts, an Off-Broadway theater company, and Ralph Atterbury Jenney, a senior programmer at Securities Industry Automation Corporation, both in New York, were married last night in New York.
Don Robert Johnson, a leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, officiated on the stage of the Victory Theater.
Ms.
Hamburger, 38 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts and has a master's degree from the Yale University School of Drama.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
She is a daughter of Charles and Jane Hamburger of Pikesville, Md.
Her father, owner of a men's clothing store, has retired.


POSTINGS: Nuts and Bolts Seminar; Sharing City Construction
The gush of commercial and residential development projects the city saw in the 80's has slowed to a trickle.
As a result, since 1989, when the construction industry employed a high of 123,200 workers, 31,700 jobs have been lost.
In an effort to help revive the industry, the city is speeding up some public projects.
On Thurday the New York Building Congress and the city 's Department of General Services will hold a one-day seminar that could be called a blueprint for bidding.


New York Tourism Supported
Tourism will continue to be a growth industry for New York City through the end of the decade, a yearlong study commissioned by the New York City Convention and Visitors Bureau says.
But it adds that growth could be stifled by high taxes as well as by public and private indifference.
The 62-page study, titled "New York Tourism 2000" and released yesterday, was prepared by Hunt &amp; Hunt, an international tourism industry consulting organization, under guidelines developed by 21 New York tourism and community leaders.


David Byrne Finds a Groove Closer to Home
It took two tries.
But with "Uh-Oh" (Luaka Bop/Warner Brothers 9 26799, CD and cassette), David Byrne has finally figured out how to make the wacky Pan-American dance album he's been after since the mid-1980's.
When he released "Rei Momo" in 1989, Byrne was an awkward student of Latin rhythms, a gringo trying to rhumba in somebody else's tight shoes; his vocals and lyrics jutted out of neatly labeled cumbia, cha-cha-cha, mapeye or merengue rhythms.
Now, on "Uh-Oh," Byrne doesn't worry about what rhythms he's using -- he and his collaborators just concoct groove after groove.
With its lyrics, "Uh-Oh" carries on Byrne's amused and appalled reactions to the late 20th century and its hollow promises of instant, endless gratification.
"The future isn't quite what you imagined/ Everything you valued has been sold," he sings in "Cowboy Mambo." The future brings options that previous generations never had -- in the album's opening song, a transsexual joyfully announces to his/her daughter, "Now I'm Your Mom" -- but those options, and the enjoyment of them, can't be separated from corruption and decay.


Where Was the Crime in House Bank Affair?
To the Editor:
Re "Congressional Officials Disclose 21 Names in House Bank Affair" (front page, March 15): Once again a nonissue threatens to drive talented and capable leaders from public service, and the news media are assisting because they do not know the difference between a bounced check and an overdraft.


Why Forster's Novels Have Star Quality
"She is going to marry someone she met in an ho
tel!"
says Mrs.
Herriton, with an air of restrained alarm at the news that her widowed daughter-in-law is about to drag the family's good English name through the Italian mud.
In "Where Angels Fear to Tread," this Edwardian lady sits at the dining table with her two grown children -- the slightly priggish Philip and the exceedingly priggish Harriet -- who are equally shocked.
Lilia, it seems, is planning to marry the penniless son of an Italian village dentist, a man who is actually a dozen or so years younger than herself.
She might as well have run naked through the House of Lords.
Mrs.
Herriton's contemptuous tone says everything about the rigid rules of her social class, whose very existence is challenged by such passion and willfulness as Lilia's.
And this compressed scene suggests why E. M. Forster's novels are so successful and alluring on screen.


Wall Street; Debunking the Junk 'Bomb' Theory
Behind all the uproar that surrounded the investigation and prosecution of Drexel Burnham Lambert and Michael Milken, the dominant factors in the junk bond market of the 80's, lurked a serious scholarly question.
How do junk bonds behave in the real world?
For most researchers, this question gets translated as: At what rate do junk bonds default?
The inspired argumentation of the medieval scholastics pales beside the debates that academicians have waged on that topic in recent years.
And the shouting matches are about to resume.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Religious Studies Are Upgraded To a New Major
More than 125 years after Cornell University was founded on purely secular terms, this first nonsectarian member of the Ivy League now offers a major in religious studies.
Barry Adams, a professor of English here who directs the religious studies program, said the major would enable "students to get a relatively broad perspective on the role of religion in life around the world."


A June Wedding For Miss Maxey
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Maxey of Berwyn, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Kathleen Costello Maxey and Michael Patrick Mullins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Mullins of Montgomery, Tex.
Miss Maxey, 24 years old, is an account executive with Taylor Smith, an advertising concern in Houston.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the vice chairman and the chief operating officer of Ayer Inc., the New York advertising agency.
Her mother, Anne Maxey, is a real-estate broker with Prudential Preferred Properties in St.
David's, Pa.


Burmese Rebels Await A Foe's Lucky Number
Waiting in the jungle for the start of yet another wave of battle, the rebels under siege here know that the notoriously superstitious Burmese military Government intends to crush them by March 27.
The date is propitious for the generals not only because the 27th is Armed Forces Day in Myanmar, the nation once called Burma, but also because 27 is a multiple of nine -- nine is supposed to be a magic number -- and because March is the third month of the year, and three is the square root of nine.


What to Do With 'Soviet'?
WE HAVE A WORD that is no longer attached to a thing.
In philologese, that could be put this way: the sign is detached from the fractionated referent.
Such linguistic severance requires immediate out- placement efforts on behalf of the replacement, or in plain words: if
Soviet
doesn't work anymore, what do we call the several groupings of the newly separated former Soviet republics?
Soviet
was first a Russian noun, meaning "local council"; the word was thrust on the world scene with the Leninist slogan "Power to the Soviets!" Later, it became an adjective, as in "the new Soviet man," and was treated by many as a modifier of
union
in "Soviet Union," though it could still be considered a noun meaning "union of soviets."


Social Events
AIDS Project
March 23 -- The Manhattan Plaza AIDS Project, located at the midtown apartment buildings that house thousands of members of the arts, is holding its second annual fund-raising event.
The organization provides counseling and support for people with AIDS and their families.
Christopher Reeve will be the host of a cabaret show that starts at 8 P.M. at the Ellington Room at Manhattan Plaza, 482 West 43d Street, followed by a dessert reception.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 971-0660, or at the door.
Brooklyn Concert and Party
March 24 -- David Byrne, who won an Academy Award for his score of the movie "The Last Emperor," will perform his acoustic music at a concert at 7:30 P.M. at St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity Church, 157 Montague Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Dinner and dancing in a loft on Washington Street between the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges follow.
The evening benefits the Arts at St.
Ann's, a performance series, and the American Heritage Center, a research and training center for the conservation of stone, wood and stained glass.
Tickets, $150, for performance and party, $40 for the performance alone, from (718) 834-8794.
Summer Camp for Girls
March 25 -- Over the last 57 summers, 60,000 girls from low-income families in the New York metropolitan area have gone to a summer camp in upstate New York maintained by the Girls Vacation Fund.
A benefit for the fund will be held from 7:30 to 11:30 P.M. at Tavern on the Green with an open bar, hors d'oeuvres, raffles and dancing.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 532-7050, or $65 at the door.
Urban League at the Plaza
March 25 -- The National Urban League will hold its annual black-tie benefit at the Plaza Hotel starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Dinner and dancing follow.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 310-9044.
Feminist Press Dinner
March 26 -- The Feminist Press at the City University of New York, a nonprofit publisher of books by and about women, will hold a literary evening at B. Smith's Restaurant, Eighth Avenue at 47th Street, from 6 to 9 P.M.
Gloria Steinem, Grace Paley, Mary Alice and Clare Coss will be among those celebrating Women's History Month.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 360-5790.
Benefit for Best Buddies
March 26 -- The 7:30 P.M. showing of the movie "Beethoven" at the Worldwide Theater, 340 West 50th Street, followed by cocktails and dinner at Planet Hollywood, will benefit Best Buddies, which matches college students with mentally retarded persons.
Tickets, $100 for movie and dinner, $30 for movie alone, from (212) 366-1497.
Helping the Homeless
March 26 -- The Grand Central Partnership, an organization of midtown businesses that has helped 200 homeless people find housing and jobs since September 1989, will hold a reception at Cucina and Company in the Pan Am Building at Park Avenue at 42d Street.
The 7 P.M. benefit will aid the organization's social-services programs.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 818-1220, or $45 at the door.
Downtown Party to Fight Diseases
March 26 -- The young professionals group of the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America, which raises funds for research and treatment of the digestive diseases, is holding a party at the Hudson Grill, 350 Hudson Street at King Street.
From 7 to 10 P.M. there will be food, drinks, dancing, raffles and pool.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 679-1570, or $55 at the door.
Chinatown Banquet
March 27 -- The Chinatown-based dance company Chen and Dancers will hold a benefit 10-course banquet at the Oriental Pearl Restaurant, 103 Mott Street below Canal Street.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 349-0126.
Gay Men's Spectacular
March 27 -- A 10th-anniversary benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis will be held at the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus performance at Madison Square Garden and at parties before and after the show.
At 6:30 P.M. there will be a meet-the-clowns party at the Garden.
After the 7:30 performance there will be a party at the Manhattan Center, 34th Street and Eighth Avenue, with food booths, prizes and games.
Tickets, $1,000 for both parties and the performance, $250 and $500 for the circus and the party afterward, from (212) 337-1913.
Tickets for the performance, $20 to $100, from (212) 465-6741.
Channel 13 Party
March 28 -- A dinner and dance after which the designer table settings will be auctioned will be held at Channel 13, 356 West 58th Street.
The evening, starting with cocktails at 8 P.M., will benefit Channel 13 and the American Federation for AIDS Research.
Tickets, $200 or $375 a couple, from (212) 297-0652.
Broadway Salute
March 30 -- Cocktails at 7 P.M., dinner at 8 P.M. and a cabaret show with Cy Coleman, Chita Rivera, Gwen Verdon, Maureen McGovern and others will benefit the American Liver Foundation's Mary Lea Johnson Richards Fund for liver research and education.
The benefit at the Grand Hyatt will honor Mrs.
Richards, who, with her husband, Marty, produced the Broadway hits "On the Twentieth Century" and "Sweeney Todd." She died in 1990 after a liver transplant.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (201) 256-2550.


Feeding Time at the Capitol Hill Piranha Tank
The first reports of the scandal at the House bank fed the prejudices of Americans who like to think of members of Congress as arrogant abusers of power.
But as the disclosures pile one on top of the other, the gap between caricature and reality is becoming uncomfortably thin.
The question, though, is who are most worthy of ridicule: the handful of members who used their official checkbooks to write themselves what were in effect interest-free loans of tens of thousands of dollars or the cutthroat politicians trying to crowd onto the lifeboat while making sure that as many of their enemies as possible drown.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
The awakening of my political life came on July 4, 1989, when the Webster decision was handed down by the Supreme Court.
I felt an anger so new, so intense, it literally pushed me out of my house onto the street.
And who was there?
NOW.
They had the signs, the bullhorns, the demonstration permit.
Most of all, they had words for my anger and hundreds of voices to augment it.
When NOW ceases to be, as Gross variously describes it, "contrarian," "antagonistic," "hard-edged," "angry" and "militant," it also ceases to be useful to me.
Moderate organizations are for moderate feelings.
KRISTIN KOVACIC
Pittsburgh


Abroad at Home; The Iceman Cometh
When Jerry Brown was elected Governor of California in 1974, his campaign finance director was Richard Maullin.
A few years later Mr.
Maullin said:
"Jerry doesn't have the same attachments as other people do. He doesn't care about friends or possessions or sports. He's totally into power."


Corrections
An article on page 46 of The Times Magazine today about Geraldine Ferraro misstates the month Robert Abrams expressed support for the Persian Gulf war.
Mr.
Abrams, who is running against Ms.
Ferraro for the Senate nomination in the New York Democratic primary, said at a news conference in February 1991 that he was "in support of the President and our troops."


New York's Prisoners With AIDS Ask for Dignity During Last Days
As afternoon's fading light sweeps shadows across his bed, Hector Santiago, also known as state inmate 90A3742, runs a bony finger across photographs of his two daughters, captured in the various poses of childhood: birthday parties, trips to the park, a graduation.
Then he waits for death.
He has not seen the girls, ages 3 and 13, since entering prison in 1990 on a drug-possession conviction, and like any proud father, he longs to be with them.
But Mr.
Santiago, who is from East Harlem, has two years before parole, and an intractable opponent -- AIDS -- seems to be catching him in the race to freedom.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
I am a 36-year-old middle-class college-educated housewife who lives on the suburban Connecticut shoreline.
I have been married for 12 years to my childhood sweetheart and have two perfect children.
I pack lunches, clip coupons, sort laundry, chauffeur my children to school, games, libraries and the movies, substitute for aerobics instructors and call my husband on his car phone at least twice a day.
I am, although I hate to admit it, extremely average.
And yes -- Patricia Ireland speaks for me.
I have had two unplanned pregnancies and two abortions.
I desperately want my daughter to have that option.
Ireland's personal choices -- her clothes, hair and makeup (or lack thereof) and her sexual preference -- hold no interest for me.
How grateful I am that mine hold a great deal of interest for her.
VIRGINIA S. PUGSLEY
Guilford, Conn.


Closing the Door to Abortion
Last fall a 23-year-old West Virginia woman named Mary Jiveden had a date.
The man's sexual advances were unwelcome -- "it was kind of like date rape," she says.
Several months later, during a routine medical checkup, a doctor told her she was pregnant.
What happened next, as reported by The Times's Tamar Lewin, seems incredible in a country where women have had the right to end a pregnancy since Roe v.
Wade in 1973.


Corrections
Some copies of The Times Book Review today include several pages from next Sunday's issue in place of the correct pages; the error affects the table of contents, continuations from the front page, and several reviews.
Readers wishing copies of the correct pages may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.  10036.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15 IN BIG SHIFT, JAPAN PULLS MONEY IN


BASEBALL: Coaches Howard and Foote Offer Advice With a Capital Hey!; For the Yanks, A Hitting Tutor Who's a Jolly Good Bellow
The voice bellows from everywhere: from the coaches' room in the clubhouse every morning, from the back field beyond the left-field fence at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, from the covered batting cages near the grandstand.
It's always there.
Frank Howard, the Yankees' ubiquitous hitting coach, is the first to arrive and the last to leave each day at spring training.
He will hit fungoes until it is too dark to see the ball.
He will offer advice and counsel to every last hitter in camp, from Andy Stankiewicz to Kevin Maas.
He will never stop moving, consoling, teaching.


Audrey Wolfson Has Wedding
Audrey Jane Wolfson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Wolfson of Stamford, Conn., was married last night in New York to Robert Andrew Forman, the son of Jack Forman of Fair Lawn, N.J., and the late Selma Forman.
Rabbi David Woznica performed the ceremony at the Water Club.
Mrs.
Forman, 36 years old, is a freelance production consultant for stage and film in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Empire of America Relocation Services in Norwalk, Conn.
Her mother, Nancy Wolfson, is a real-estate broker with Prudential Connecticut Realty in Stamford.


Minnesota Death Trip
OVER THE EARTH I COME
The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862.
By Duane Schultz.
Illustrated. 307 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/ St.
Martin's Press. $21.95.


Abuse of Power And Star Power
To the Sports Editor:
For the past six months, American journalism has been replete with accounts of the sexual attitudes and/or behavior of male public figures.
The spotlight on men such as Clarence Thomas, Bill Clinton, William Kennedy Smith and Mike Tyson has informed public debate on issues ranging from sexual impropriety to harassment to rape.
The "alleged victims" in these cases have achieved the dubious distinction of a secondary, albeit short-lived, notoriety as a result of their public protest.
In each case, however, the woman's protest was publicized in a manner dictated by the status of the man involved; accusations against political figures received front-page attention in The Times, whereas the Tyson case was relegated to the Sports pages until the final verdict.


Political Ads May Wound, But Not Win Races
By most accounts, it was during the 1988 Presidential campaign that media consulting really triumphed over message.
Together George Bush and Michael S. Dukakis spent a record $50 million on television advertising and it is widely believed that the Republicans' notoriously inflammatory Willie Horton ad helped seal the doom of the Democratic ticket.
This year, not surprisingly, the Presidential candidates have already spent millions on commercials and seem on their way to matching the 1988 total.
Commentators have dusted off their warnings about the power of advertising.


GOVERNMENT THAT MEANS BUSINESS
The now-familiar exemplars cited as "evidence" that citizens can have it all -- more control, better service and lower taxes -- were imitated elsewhere over the past decade but frequently failed.
Many American cities, communities and families lack the resources of time, organization, information and desirable business location, not to mention willing banks and businesses, to take on the tasks sloughed off by entrepreneurial government.
There is a reason some services were publicly provided in the first place: the market failed to provide adequately for all.
Decentralization and privatization will insure that some communities will be deprived of the equal treatment to which, as equal citizens, they are entitled.
When governments act like businesses, they guarantee market-generated unequal results.
HILARY SILVER N
ew York, N.Y.


Getting to Work: Other Views
"Getting to Work Will Never Be the Same" does not note a critical additional option open to many employers, and even to some of their employees.
Leave.
Environmental pollution most assuredly is a critical issue.
But those planning to solve the problem must take into account this opt-out option.


Making a Difference; Another Tour of Duty
In a not-so-instant replay, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange earlier this month elected John J. Wallace, the president of Park Avenue Securities, to a two-year term as chairman of the exchange's board of governors.
Mr.
Wallace, whose firm is one of the specialists on the equity trading floor, has served as a governor since 1974, and last held the post of chairman from 1988 to 1990.
Those were years of considerable growth for the Philex, the nation's oldest stock exchange which, in recent years, has developed as a dominant marketplace for foreign currency options.
But in the listing and trading of common stocks, the exchange turned in a more mixed performance during Mr.
Wallace's last term.


Mirror Image: Bruins and Cardinals
When Louisville (19-10) and U.C.L.A (26-4) meet Sunday afternoon in a second-round game of the national collegiate basketball tournament's West Regional, do not expect an identity crisis on either side of the ball.
Both teams use an up-tempo style.
Both run half-court offenses with plenty of motion.
Both are versatile in their defenses and both love to run tricky, set plays out of bounds, especially in the waning seconds of a half.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Kings Top Flames Corey Millen scored twice to cap a four-goal first period yesterday as the Los Angeles Kings scored three times in a 4:44 span to beat Calgary 5-2 in Inglewood, Calif.
The loss left Calgary four points behind the idle Winnipeg Jets in the race for the fourth and final Smythe Division playoff slot, with seven games remaining for both teams.
The Flames missed the playoffs only twice in their first 19 seasons and have qualified in every season since 1974-75, winning their only Stanley Cup in 1989.
Mike Vernon became the Flames' first goalie with 30 losses since the franchise moved from Atlanta to Calgary in 1980, surrendering three goals on the Kings' first five shots of the game.
He was pulled in favor of Jeff Reese after only 5 minutes 55 seconds of play. (AP) GOLF Couples Soars in Gusts


In Peru's Shining Path, U.S. Sees Road to Ruin
In Congress, the State Department, the Organization of American States and private research and human rights organizations, the sense is growing that the astonishing momentum being shown by the Shining Path rebellion in Peru is the toughest post-cold war policy test on the horizon for the Western Hemisphere.
"Put out of your mind the F.M.L.N., the Sandinistas, the M-19 of Colombia and other South American insurgencies," Bernard W. Aronson, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, told a recent Congressional hearing.
"Sendero Luminoso is in a category by itself."
"Make no mistake," he warned.
"The result could be genocide" if Sendero Luminoso -- the Shining Path -- were to take power in Peru.
Quoting Shining Path's leader, Abimael Guzman, the Assistant Secretary said the movement believes in the violent replacement of one class by another -- to remake Peruvian society just as the Khmer Rouge set out to reduce Cambodia to the Year Zero.
"The revolution will triumph, according to Guzman, after the Peruvian people 'cross over the river of blood,' " Mr.
Aronson said.


Anything UConn Do, Buckeyes Do Better
Ahead by 12 points not once but three times -- but beaten by 23 at the end.
That was the story of Connecticut's wilting effort against Ohio State today in a second-round game in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Southeast Regional.
The Buckeyes overcame those 12 points late in the first half and went ahead, 31-30, on a driving basket by their all-American, Jim Jackson, 28 seconds before the intermission.
In the second half, Ohio State continued to roll and there seemed to be a lid on the basket when Connecticut took its shots.
When it was over, Ohio State had a 78-55 victory.


Cecile Ruth Sands, 91; Was on School Board
Cecile Ruth Sands, who served for six years as the only woman on New York City's Board of Education and also worked for charitable causes, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old.
She died of a heart attack, her family said.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Regents Setting New Boundaries On Free Speech
The state Board of Regents is revising a speech code for the University of Wisconsin that could lead to the expulsion of students found guilty of verbal harassment.
The issue is one of nice speech versus free speech: On one side stands the Board of Regents, seeking to protect students from one another; on the other stands the state chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, which contends that no one should govern what another may say.


Q and A
Digging in Hawaii
Q.
I recently saw a television program about archeological excavation sites in Hawaii dating to the original Polynesian settlers.
Is it possible to spend my next vacation volunteering to help in such a project? -- Line L. Rader, Palm City, Fla.


POSTINGS: Nudging the Market; Sonyma Drops Its Rates
With 30-year fixed rate mortgages offered by New York banks edging upwards -- the average rate was 9.15 percent last week and is expected to go to 9.25 percent this week -- low- and moderate-income homebuyers may be tempted by the latest offering from the State of New York Mortgage Agency (Sonyma).
The agency dropped its rate last week to the lowest level in eight years -- 7.25 percent for the first five years and 8.20 percent for the remaining 25 years.
"Things were slow," said John N. Spano, a vice president at Sonyma, explaining that the agency's loans had dropped from $412 million in 1990 to $350 million in 1991.


Where Washington and Lee Lived
"IT was kind of a forgotten area," said our guide, explaining why the stately Colonial mansion in the Northern Neck of Virginia came through the Civil War unscathed.
The region -- an 80-mile tongue of land bounded on the north by the Potomac River, on the south by the Rappahannock and on the east by Chesapeake Bay -- had little strategic importance.
It had no industry or railroads or major ports.
Except for some pigs, chickens and other provisions grabbed by raiding parties for the Army of the Potomac, there was nothing to attract the interest of Union soldiers on their way to do battle for Fredericksburg or Richmond.
More than 100 years later the rolling countryside of the Northern Neck, about a two-hour drive from Washington, remains largely undisturbed.
Still without a rail line or an Interstate, the area has had minimal development.
Along Route 3, the main thoroughfare traversing the peninsula from west to east, there are no sprawling malls, few fast food restaurants and few billboards.
At the eastern end, towns such as Irvington attract some sailing enthusiasts, intent on catching the wind on the Chesapeake.


First Steps
Of all the vast tides of migration that have swept through history and through every continent in the world, probably none was more concentrated than the wave that washed 12 million immigrants onto American shores in little more than three decades.
Their first steps in the new land were taken on a pinpoint of an island in New York harbor, in the shadow of the Statue of Liberty.
ELLIS ISLAND: An Illustrated History of the Immigrant Experience (Macmillan, $49.95) is a vivid description of the island and its peak years as an admitting station, between 1892 and 1924.
The authors -- Ivan Chermayeff, the vice president of the American Institute of Graphic Art; Fred Wasserman, a former official of the Ellis Island Immigration Museum; and Mary J. Shapiro, the author of "Gateway to Liberty" -- have put between covers the equivalent of an actual visit to the Ellis Island Immigration Museum.
The book describes, often in their own words, the immigrants and the officials and social workers who played a part in the great influx.
Lavishly produced with reproductions of historical documents and more than 400 pictures, many in color, "Ellis Island" dramatically re-creates the story of the immigrants from journey's start to journey's end.
The reader learns of injustices, abuses, hardships, triumphs and defeats -- and, mostly, about the human treasures from abroad whose dream was the Golden Land.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 22, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
8
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
3
5
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
4
5
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
5
46
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
1
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
7
3
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) A serial killer in the Twin Cities.
8
4
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the death of a widow.
9
3
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
10
9
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
11
4
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Continuing the story of life in the fantasy land of Shannara.
12
18
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
13
5
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown (Fanfare/Bantam, $4.99.) A woman and a man find true love while fighting to save her family's business.
14
2
FATHER MELANCHOLY'S DAUGHTER, by Gail Godwin (Avon, $5.99.) The plight of a clergyman's daughter after her mother deserts her father and her own relationships go awry.
15
9
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
2
44
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
5
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
4
8
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
5
36
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
6
437
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
2
PREDATOR, by Jack Olsen. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The story of a serial rapist in Washington State.
8
2
DARKNESS VISIBLE, by Willia Styron. (Vintage, $8) A memoir of severe depression.
9 *
13
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
10 *
1
NANCY REAGAN, by Kitty Kelley. (Pocket, $5.99.) An unauthorized biography of the former First Lady.
11 *
121
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
12 *
8
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) The case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
13 *
1
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of a California entrepreneur.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
32
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
1
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
81
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
62
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
30
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Michigan Freshmen Pass A Test
Before Michigan's first-round game against Temple in the Southeast Regional here Friday, Steve Fisher, the Wolverines' coach, was worried that his five freshmen starters, tagged during the season as the Fab Five, would have trouble with the rarefied air of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament.
It turned out that Fisher's fears were completely unfounded, at least for a night.
But at times, against a more experienced Temple team, with wily Coach John Chaney at the controls, Michigan's freshmen did look like -- well, freshmen.
They were inconsistent and frustrated.


Cathy Altman, Therapist, Wed
Cathy Sue Altman, the chief physical therapist at Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan, and Dr.
Russell Howard Silver, a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman officiated at the Harvard Club.
Mrs.
Silver, 29 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and has a degree in physical therapy from New York University.
She is a daughter of Janet A. Goldscheider and a stepdaughter of Robert Goldscheider of New York, who own International Licensing Network, a consulting concern in technology management.


Perspectives: Bertelsmann on Broadway; A Buyer Takes a Stake in Times Square
FOR the last several years, Times Square has needed a juicy real-estate deal, one in which some major company commits itself to using a sizable share of the new office space that was speculatively created in the late 1980's.
It took a bankruptcy declaration to get it, but the deal has finally come in the decision of Bertelsmann A.G., the privately held German media company, to buy 1540 Broadway, the newly built but empty office tower between 45th and 46th Streets.


Ms. Tonkel Is to Wed R. C. Nolan Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Rock Tonkel of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lyn Tonkel, to Robert Calvert Nolan Jr., a son of Robert C. Nolan and Betty Linda Jones Nolan, both of El Dorado, Ark.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tonkel, 24 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University and is studying for an associate's degree in interior design at El Centro College, Dallas.
Her father is the president and chief executive of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York.
Mr.
Nolan, 26, is an independent oil and gas landman and an independent investor in oil and gas wells in Tuscaloosa, Ala.
He graduated from Southern Methodist University.
His father is the president of the Munoco Company, an oil and gas exploration concern in El Dorado.


Trade Is on the Agenda in Bush's Talks with German Chancellor


A High-Scoring Team Gets Shut Out
For more than two decades, Camden High School has been a powerhouse basketball team under the direction of Clarence Turner.
But as the best teams in New Jersey made their way through the state tournament the last several weeks, Turner's team was idle.
Its absence has prompted a debate about incidents of violence at high school athletic events, how they should be dealt with and how much responsibility the school and its teams bear for them.
The Camden team was barred from the tournament, which began on March 2, because of a chair-throwing melee that occurred at this time last year.
The incident took place after Camden defeated Trenton Central, 87-85, in a double-overtime state semifinal game at Monmouth College.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANANCY AND MR.
DRY-BONE.
Written and illustrated by Fiona French.
Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Using traditional characters from Caribbean and African folk tales, a gifted British artist tells a new courtship story.
The mostly black and white figures are silhouetted against dazzling sunset colors.
Anancy makes Miss Louise laugh, so he gets to marry her.


Malls Shifting Focus To Bargain Shoppers
THE moribund Long Island economy is leading bargain-conscious shoppers to dictate a new focus at malls and strip centers.
Developers are seeking anchor stores whose names are associated with high volume and low prices.
Retail industry executives point to several examples.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
I would like to state emphatically that Patricia Ireland, the president of the National Organization for Women, does not speak for me ("Does She Speak for Today's Women?" by Jane Gross, March 1).
I have been happily married for more than 25 years, do not commit adultery, do not have "a lesbian friend," do not believe in abortion or practice civil disobedience.
I believe Ireland is guilty of adultery and immorality.
Having a person of questionable moral character leading a large organization is not reassuring.
The fact that half of the population of the United States is female and that only 250,000 are members of NOW is hardly an affirmation of its leadership.


As Mediator, Iran Begins Quest for Influence
Iranian mediation in the fighting between Armenia and Azerbaijan marks Teheran's formal engagement in a subtle contest for influence from the Caucasus to China.
Iranian analysts say the competition is likely to force the Iranian Government to soften its Islamic militancy in pursuit of a historical status of "centrality" in the region.
Armenian and Azerbaijani officials announced in Teheran on March 15 that they had agreed to a draft peace treaty that would lead to the lifting of an economic blockade on Armenia and an exchange of prisoners taken in the fighting between the two former Soviet republics over Nagorno-Karabakh, an enclave that lies within Azerbaijan but is populated mostly by Armenians.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


Bowie Needs 'Cool Down' As Nets Prepare for Miami
Beat a winning team.
Beat a losing team.
Win without Derrick Coleman.
Win without Sam Bowie.
Win at home.
Win on the road.
Every night, there is a new challenge for the Nets to overcome, and sometimes more than one.
Tonight, New Jersey will grapple with the Heat in Miami without Bowie, the starting center.
Bowie is off in Portland, Ore., to see a doctor about his sore right leg.


'I Am No Pete Rose,' Says Michael Jordan
The way MICHAEL JORDAN is telling it in the wake of reports that he ran up more than $100,000 in gambling debts, the worst that can be said about him is that his putting could use a little work.
Jordan, the Chicago Bulls' star, said he has gambled on his golf game, but never on basketball.


At Work; Making Family Leave a Local Issue
Larry Hawkins has no objection to being considered an avatar of social reform.
For more than a decade, as a Dade County, Fla., commissioner and before that, as a state legislator, he has championed child-care issues.
On Monday, a Hawkins-sponsored measure requiring Dade County businesses to establish family leave policies went into effect, making Dade, which includes Miami, the first county-level government in the nation to have such a law.
The measure resembles the family leave bill passed by Congress two years ago and then vetoed by President Bush, who has said he will also veto a new version of the bill now being negotiated on the Hill.
Supporters of family leave nationally say the Dade County measure is significant because of Dade's size -- in population it is larger than 13 states -- and because its reputation for taking leadership on other issues that have bubbled up from the grass roots may inspire other regional governments.
"This is very significant coverage for a sector of people that didn't have it before," said Judith Lichtman, head of the Women's Legal Defense Fund.


Volunteers Offer Worldwide Advice
THREE days a week, Charlie Bevis of Westport drives 30 miles round trip to the world headquarters of the International Executive Service Corps in Stamford, where he puts in a full day of work on various global communications projects.
On two occasions, Mr.
Bevis also has spent time on extended assignments for the corps in Belize and Costa Rica, helping improve and expand television operations.
The Central American assignments, like his work at the corps' headquarters, entails a great deal of creativity and responsibility.
Yet, since joining the service corps four years ago, Mr.
Bevis has received no pay.
Nor have any of the 41 other executive volunteers at the group's headquarters in the South End of Stamford, including 17 who, like Mr.
Bevis, have worked on projects abroad.


Ms. Madsen Weds C. H. Kellers Jr.
Marjorie Mary Madsen and Charles Henry Kellers Jr. were married yesterday in Blue Ridge Summit, Pa.
The Rev.
Robert Edmundson officiated at Hawley Memorial Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 32 years old, graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and has an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Until recently, she was a consultant at Pearl Meyer &amp; Partners, a New York executive compensation consulting company.
She is a daughter of Sally and Col.
Arlyn Madsen, U.S.A., retired, of Blue Ridge Summit.


Rock Climbers Band Together To Protect a Chunk of Nature
TO help preserve rock-climbing areas in the state and maintain public access to them, 100 people have joined a new group called the Ragged Mountain Foundation.
The organization, which includes hikers, rock and ice climbers, bird watchers and other nature enthusiasts, takes its name from Ragged Mountain, which straddles the Southington-Berlin line at 761 feet above sea level and is the best known of Connecticut's rock-climbing destinations.
With cliffs offering more than 90 challenging routes, up to 100 feet long, the mountain has been popular with climbers since the 1930's.
Some of the cliffs are on private property, some on land owned by the New Britain Water Department.
Access has always depended on the good will of the landowners.


Is it Duke Against Seton Hall Or a St. Anthony's Reunion?
The next meeting of college basketball's Friars Club will convene Thursday at the Spectrum in Philadelphia.
That's when top-seeded Duke and fourth-seeded Seton Hall meet in the semifinals of the East Regional.
Three starters in the game, and two reserves, played at St.
Anthony's High School in Jersey City, N.J., where the Friars have become a perennial national power under Coach Bob Hurley.


For Those Who Believe You Can Tell a Book by Its Cover
American book collectors focus more attention on the contents than the covers of the volumes they own, rarely exhibiting the jackets.
For this reason, the craft of bookbinding is largely unknown to the public in this country.
"It's the Anglo-American way," said T. Peter Kraus, the New York dealer-owner of Ursus Books, 981 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street.
"Here and in Britain, the tradition is to collect literature, and the bindings on these books are more utilitarian than decorative."


Ms. Weisser Weds Seth C. Goldstein
Deborah Katherine Weisser and Seth Copen Goldstein, both Ph.D. candidates in computer science at the University of California at Berkeley, were married last evening in San Francisco.
Rabbi Rona Shapiro officiated at the Sir Francis Drake Hotel.
Ms.
Weisser Goldstein, 27 years old, graduated from Stanford University.
She is a daughter of Victor Weisser of Oakland, Calif., and Barbara Weisser of Guerneville, Calif.
Her mother is a technical documents consultant in Guerneville.
Her father is the president of the California Council for Environmental and Economic Balance, a public-policy analysis group in San Francisco.


They Shoot, They Score


Hire 'Em, Cowboys
When his Wyoming team suffered six losses in seven games at midseason, there were cries for BENNY DEES'S head.
Fortunately for the 55-year-old Dees, the Cowboys recovered and finished the season at 16-13, good enough to bring his five-season record to 91-62 and save Dees's job.
Not that Wyoming's athletic director, PAUL ROACH, who extended Dees's contract for two years on Friday, won't be looking for an improvement next season.


POSTINGS: Lower East Side Parish; Home for a Homeless Church
For almost two decades, the 149-year-old Trinity Lower East Side Lutheran Parish has been a church without a home.
In 1975, its building at 139 Avenue B, at Ninth Street, in Manhattan (but not the brownstone parish house next door) was demolished because of structural problems.
Services since have since been at held in a small rented room at 630 East Sixth Street.
This fall, though, the parish will begin construction of a new church on the site of the old one.
The three-story, $900,000 structure will have a 100-seat chapel and a community center adjoining the parish house.


Who's the Boss?


Shedding White Ties and Tails for 'Crazy for You'
In "I Got Rhythm," the rousing finale of the first act of the hit Gershwin musical "Crazy for You," the stage is flooded with zany percussionists from the mining town of Deadrock, Nev., improvising a comic cacophony with whatever tools are handy.
Featured in this percussive free-for-all is the popular cabaret trio Manhattan Rhythm Kings.
Brian Nalepka (portraying the character Moose), plays a saw, Hal Shane (as Mingo) a toilet plunger, and Tripp Hanson (Sam), a tire pump.
The casting of the trio, which specializes in 1930's song-and-dance routines, is a small but inspired coup that adds a touch of period authenticity to the show, now at the Shubert Theater.


Amy Ciabattoni, Dietitian, Weds
Amy Therese Ciabattoni, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Ciabattoni of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to John Charles Keating Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keating of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Tarrytown House.
Mrs.
Keating, 27 years old, is a registered dietitian and a nutritionist at Kraft General Foods in White Plains.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in nutrition from Emory University.
Her father is the manager of applications systems at NBC-TV in New York.
Her mother, Therese Ciabattoni, is an academic counselor at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.


When Art Emanates From Outside the Academic Tradition
WHEN Sal Scalora was a graduate student at the Art Institute of Chicago, he met William Dawson, an artist with a nonacademic approach.
Mr.
Scalora recalled: "He'd say to his wife: 'Honey, boil up some bones. I'm going to do some art.' "
Mr.
Dawson was a self-taught artist who began making sculptures of wood and cleaned bones after he retired from other work (mostly in a produce warehouse).
Mr.
Scalora was impressed by the sculptures and by Mr.
Dawson himself: "My friends and I would visit him, and I got more out of him than out of some of my professors. He spoke very honestly. He had dreams. I really admired him."


Previn Coaches Players in His First Love, Chamber Music
SINCE settling his family in the county three years ago, Andre Previn has done the neighborly thing by lending his name to local efforts, a common if relatively fruitless gesture of the famous.
But Mr.
Previn, a world-hopping conductor, composer and pianist whose reputation preceded him here by decades, has also gone further than that, seeking ways to enjoy himself in home territory while delighting others with his presence.


'Elektra' Complex at the Met
A friend who likes to get value for his operatic dollar has a problem with Richard Strauss's "Elektra." Why, he wonders, should he settle for a mere 100 minutes of opera, when for the same price he could see, say, the many hours of Wagner's "Parsifal"?


Michelle Segall Wed
Dr.
Michelle Segall, a radiology resident at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, and Dr.
David Ginsberg, a psychiatry resident at the New York University Medical Center, both in New York, were married in New York last evening.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue.


News Says Large Pay Went to Ex-Publisher
The former publisher of The Daily News, James Hoge, received more than $1.9 million in compensation last year, the financially troubled newspaper reported yesterday.
Copies of Mr.
Hoge's W-2 form for 1991 were tacked to bulletin boards at the paper on Friday.
The Federal tax form showed that he received $1,917,980 in wages and other compensation, with Tribune New York Holdings Inc. listed as his employer.


Florida State Knocks Off Georgetown
For much of this week, Florida State was lost in the shadows of three high-profile teams competing in the West Regional: Georgetown, Indiana and Louisiana State.
And it seemed the Seminoles were out of the picture for most of their second-round game against the Hoyas.
With 8 minutes 41 seconds left in the game, Florida State trailed Georgetown, 57-47.
Even disregarding the score, from the feel of things the game seemed over with Georgetown comfortably ahead and playing out the string.


THE WORLD: New Ultimatum; Tick-Tock Iraq
After months of defiance, Saddam Hussein got the message last week that the American-led coalition against him may have a few cracks in it, but not so many that it cannot summon the will to strike at him militarily if he does not bend to the demands of the United Nations Security Council.
In what is proving to be a test of how the American superpower uses military force in the post-cold war era, Washington worked in uneasy tandem with the Security Council to give the Iraqi leader an ultimatum: Either submit a plan on how he will live up to his cease-fire pledge to dismantle the military industry that gave him weapons of mass destruction and the missiles to deliver them, or face the unstated consequences.


Making a Difference; Fedex's Troubleshooter Gets a Workout
The Federal Express Corporation knew it had problems in the European market when losses grew even as revenues rose sharply.
The company had to act, and act it did last Monday night, announcing that it would dramatically cut back operations in Europe, including halting so-called local deliveries between countries there.
The thankless task of explaining the retreat to the press and analysts fell to Thomas R. Oliver, executive vice president of worldwide customer operations.


All About/Financial Planners; Some Abuses by Planners Stir the Forces of Regulation
The financial planning industry is again coming into the limelight with the introduction of bills in the House and Senate to regulate practitioners.
Debate on the House legislation is expected to begin this spring.
The measures follow widely publicized incidents of chicanery by some financial planners who preyed on unsuspecting clients and defrauded them of large sums.
Although perpetuated by a handful of planners, the abuses nevertheless created a stir in Congress as well as among the public.


Patrolling Polluted Waterways And Discovering Surprise Boons
Pointing to a greenish blob on the patrol boat's Fathometer, Andrew Willner said it meant there was something strange eight feet below the surface.
"They're probably stripers down there," he said, navigating his craft south on the Arthur Kill, the narrow waterway between Staten Island and New Jersey.
"Spring is here, and the fish are just waking up."


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IT is a hell as ferocious as in any city.
Nearly everything has been leveled, and the unholy ground has been left fallow for so long that the ailanthus trees grow 25 feet high.
The sidewalks have been pummeled to dust; the street is just strips of jagged asphalt.
Only three buildings stand on the block.
One has been almost totally consumed by fire.
One is empty but for the old couple who have lived there for 45 years but who never come out.


Bush's Other Race: Defeating the Recession
With the Presidential race now narrowed, almost certainly, to George Bush versus Bill Clinton, another race is shaping up as critical: George Bush versus the sluggish American economy.
The question is whether Mr.
Bush can make the economy strong enough fast enough to insure his re-election.
No business cycle in America is more predictable than the four-year political one: Presidential election years are, with rare exceptions, years of economic expansion, and 1992 looks like no exception.


Wall Street; Baby Bells Go Skimpy on Dividend Raises
A sure sign of spring is a round of dividend changes from the Baby Bells.
But don't expect this year's increases to be worth phoning home about, warns Daniel P. Reingold, an analyst with Morgan Stanley.
By mid-April, all of the seven former Bell subsidiaries are expected to set dividend rates for 1992.
Ameritech announced a 3.5 percent increase in December, and last Thursday Nynex reported a 1.8 percent gain.
But Mr.
Reingold predicted in a recent report that the group's average dividend rise will be just 2.5 percent -- well below even the disappointing 4.3 percent average gain last year.


Summer Gardens of Granada's Kings
"THE greatest piece of gardening in the world is a little staircase in the Generalife," Russell Page, the late landscape gardener, once told me.
It was with this ringing commendation in mind that I set off for Granada in southern Spain to find the gardens of the Generalife, a summer villa of the Moorish kings who once ruled the region.
Granada, the last stronghold of the Moors in Spain, is a city built on hills.
The city is still an astonishing sight thanks to the backdrop of the Sierra Nevada mountains and to the uniformity of the architecture -- gleaming while stucco houses with roofs of terra-cotta tile, punctuated by towers and tropical foliage.


As It Cuts Back, Pentagon Faces Growing Pains
The cold war is over, the Soviet Union has collapsed and the United States is cutting the size of its military.
But the Defense Department says it needs more room.
The Pentagon's 6.5 million square feet, incorporating five floors and nearly 18 miles of corridors, are insufficient, the Defense Department argues.
And so it is charging ahead with a 10-year, $1 billion plan to renovate its behemoth of a headquarters on the banks of the Potomac River in Northern Virginia and build a 500,000-square-foot annex.


Stamps
Quite a lot of philatelic evidence can be found revealing the routineness of anti-Semitic activities that took place in Germany in the 1930's.
The Nazis, in their early efforts to control and demean Jews, issued dozens of control laws: Jewish birth announcements could not be published in newspapers, for example, and Jews were assigned only certain numbers on automobile license plates.


Making the Grass So Green in Spring
NITROGEN is one of the nutritional elements that helps to make spring so green.
It makes the grass grow, it helps seeds sprout, and it causes plants to thrive.
The element occurs in high quantities in plants, since it is part of every living cell.
And here is the most important part: nitrogen is also the element most easily lost, because it leaches easily in heavy rains and in eroding soils.
Addition of fertilizers to home lawns in spring, particularly those high in nitrogen, has become a suburban ritual.
The fertilizer is put on in super quantities, quite often much more than is necessary, and the excess runs off.


Gold Prices Take a Tumble
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
133.85
133.67
137.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6714
1.6697
1.6480
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1985
1.1973
1.1583
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7130
1.7075
1.7835
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$338.25
$346.75
$362.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


BRAZILIAN REMOVES ENVIRONMENT CHIEF
Ten weeks before this city is to be host to a mammoth international conference on environment and development, Brazil's President today dismissed his top two environmental officials.
Citing a need for "only one line of thought and action in the area of environmental protection," President Fernando Collor de Mello dismissed Jose Lutzenberger, a 65-year-old agronomist who served as Secretary of the Environment, and Eduardo Martins, the fifth appointee in two years to serve as president of Brazil's environmental agency.


Claire Svetlik, Student, Weds
Claire Svetlik, the daughter of Dennis Svetlik of Houston and Martha Beaty Svetlik of Beaumont, Tex., was married there yesterday to Christopher Louis Mann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Louis Mann of Beaumont.
The Rev.
Richard H. Elwood performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
,Ms.
Svetlik, who is 29 years old and is retaining her name, graduated from the University of Texas.
She received a master's degree in art history from the Institute of Fine Arts, where she is studying for a doctorate.


After Ballot, Soweto Trusts Whites More
The overwhelming white endorsement of negotiated political change in a watershed referendum this week has dissipated some, though not all, of the longstanding mistrust of white motives in this sprawling black township.
"The moves taken by whites have been such that confidence is being created," said Gibson Kente, a prominent playwright, as he pondered the effect that President F. W. de Klerk's referendum had on the majority of South Africans who could not take part because they are not white.


Linda Knows, Too
If BO JACKSON'S bad hip hastens the day he leaves sports behind to join his wife in developing a comprehensive day-care center for children, he won't have to wait for his wife to get up to speed.
LINDA JACKSON received a doctorate in education from Auburn on Friday.
Mrs.
Jackson, who focused her graduate work on the long-term effects of sexual abuse of girls, said that she and her husband had no concrete plans for their venture but that she would stay busy in the meantime.


JAPANESE SHIFTING THEIR INVESTMENTS BACK TOWARD HOME
After investing hundreds of billions of dollars abroad during the 1980's, Japan has reversed course and is pulling money into the country at a rapid rate.
Japanese banks are lending less to foreign customers, particularly in places where business conditions are difficult, like California.
Japanese corporations are building fewer plants abroad and acquiring fewer companies.
And big Japanese investors are selling, rather than buying, the American securities they spent nearly a decade buying in large sums.


All the Trimmings for a Sunday Spring Dinner
ALTHOUGH this winter was one of the warmest on record, it is now officially spring.
And with a change in the seasons, people's moods about menus also change.
Spring lamb, herbs, asparagus and light fruit desserts will now whet appetites sated with stews and casseroles.
The following menu is a fancy one, a lineup for a Sunday dinner.
It would actually qualify for Easter Sunday, still about a month away.


Political Talk
Mr. Chairman
A government watchdog group that prides itself on kicking Albany politicians in the seat of their pants has struck a nerve with its demand that legislators give up an 83-year-old perquisite that allows them to buy their chairs from the Senate or Assembly at bargain prices when they retire.


Mutual Funds; More to Come In the Upturn?
Recession or not, the Dow Jones industrial average reached another all-time high earlier this month, and the upward trend that began on Oct. 11, 1990 has far outlasted the median length of the 10 previous upturns, 384 days.
But it is lagging in terms of performance.
The current upturn -- measured by the Lipper Growth Fund Index, which charts funds much as Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index measures stocks -- has returned 51.4 percent, about nine percentage points less than the median for the 10 earlier upturns.


Dinkins Urged to Act on Police Review Board
Accusing his administration of "betrayal," civil rights groups demanded yesterday that Mayor David N. Dinkins fill four civilian vacancies on the 12-member review board that investigates charges of police brutality.
While insisting that the positions be filled, the groups said their eventual goal was the scrapping of the present Civilian Complaint Review Board, which they say favors the Police Department.
They want it to be replaced, as proposed in a City Council bill, by a body composed of 16 members unconnected to the Police Department.


Helmsley Released From Hospital Unit In Improved Health
Leona M. Helmsley, who nearly collapsed on Wednesday outside a Manhattan courthouse after a Federal judge ordered her to prison for tax fraud, was released from New York Hospital yesterday in improved condition.
Mrs.
Helmsley, the self-styled hotel queen whose lawyers had argued that a jail term for her would kill both her and her husband, left her private room in the cardiac care unit at 10:45 A.M.
She has been instructed to surrender on April 15 to begin a four-year jail term, probably at a Federal medical prison in Lexington, Ky.


Is the Recession Over?
Retail sales are up.
Industrial production is up.
So are housing starts, non-farm employment, exports and business confidence.
Even department store sales in the New York area are finally turning around.
At the same time, inflation, interest rates, new jobless claims and personal debt are all, gratifyingly, down.


Making the Grass So Green in Spring
NITROGEN is one of the nutritional elements that helps to make spring so green.
It makes the grass grow, it helps seeds sprout, and it causes plants to thrive.
The element occurs in high quantities in plants, since it is part of every living cell.
And here is the most important part: nitrogen is also the element most easily lost, because it leaches easily in heavy rains and in eroding soils.
Addition of fertilizers to home lawns in spring, particularly those high in nitrogen, has become a suburban ritual.
The fertilizer is put on in super quantities, quite often much more than is necessary, and the excess runs off.


Poems on the Politics of Seduction
LISTEN hard.
Sometimes, the force of Ntozake Shange's words cuts through the din at the Crossroads Theater Company, where "The Love Space Demands," an adaptation of her most recent poetry collection, is having a world premiere.
Actually, Ms.
Shange envisioned the poems, some 20 or so, in stage terms, and teamed up with a director, a composer, a choreographer and a photographic environmental designer to create a so-called performance piece (a category that has become useful for soloists and collaborators who resist categories).


U.S. and Israel at Sea
At a convention here last week for young American Jewish donors to Israel, the Israeli Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, made an impassioned and revealing appeal to get United States-Israel relations back on track.
Pointing to the Muslim republics of Central Asia that were once part of the Soviet Union, Mr.
Shoval asked, "Is there not a danger that they will become fundamentalist and anti-Western and present a danger to the Middle East more than the Soviet Union once did?" Therefore, he continued, is it wise for the Bush Administration to "disregard" Israel as a strategic ally at this time?
After all, he concluded, "the strategic relationship between the United States and Israel now is as important as it ever was -- even more."


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about creativity misstates the age of the Polish playwright Janusz Glowacki in some copies.
He is 51.


Sunday Dinner; Smallish and Friendly Italian Places
Smallish, friendly restaurants are often a happy choice for Sunday dining.
Here are three places in Manhattan that fill the bill.
Baci
412 Amsterdam Avenue (79th Street), (212) 496-1550 -- Fresh and vibrant pastas are the specialty of this spiffy little cafe owned by the Sindoni family, who also own Azzurro on the Upper East Side.


Ms. Troutman To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Goodkind of New Marlboro, Mass., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Rebecca Louise Troutman, to Paul Charles Curnin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Curnin of Larchmont, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Troutman, 27 years old, graduated from Harvard University and was until recently an associate in the research department at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
She is a law student at Columbia University.


Streetscapes: The New York Coliseum; From Auditorium To Bus Garage to . . .
HERE'S an early tip: Get ready for the next Coliseum controversy.
No, not the Coliseum at Columbus Circle -- that mega-project is almost dead.
This New York Coliseum is in the Bronx, at 177th Street and Devoe Avenue.
Now a Transit Authority bus garage, this 105,000-square-foot Coliseum was moved from Philadelphia in 1928, and not one, but two, civic groups want to reuse it as a sports arena when it goes out of service next year.


2d Trial in Death of Utah Tourist Set to Begin
The second of three trials for the 1990 killing of a Utah tourist in a mid-Manhattan subway station is to open tomorrow in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Selection of the jury was completed on Thursday night.


'Helter Skelter' Reveals The Evil of Banality
It's not hard to figure out why "Helter Skelter: L.A. Art in the 1990's" has become the most talked-about exhibition here in a long time.
Everything about this big survey show, organized by Paul Schimmel of the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, aims to be provocative -- from the intimations of Charles Manson's bloody rampage in the title, to the violent and ranting essays and poems by Los Angeles writers in the catalogue, to the actual works on view (through April 26) in the museum's Temporary Contemporary warehouse annex.
Those works, by 16 artists, are as full of images of tawdry sex and serial murderers as are the tabloid television shows that masquerade as news programs.
"Helter Skelter" seems even more closely related, in fact, to another recent small-screen phenomenon.
Like David Lynch's defunct "Twin Peaks," beneath its veneer of surreality is a cliche of America as one vast, roiling, sex-crazed, gun-toting wasteland.
The disappointment of the exhibition is less its attention-grabbing sensationalism than the pretense that this sensationalism amounts to something substantial and challenging.
At a time when the art world, always desperate for the latest trend, can cling to no dominant movement, the show eagerly celebrates one in Los Angeles.
Unfortunately, the movement turns out to be good old adolescent nihilism.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; There Are Still Enough Candidates for 4-Man Debate
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. was on good behavior at the Democratic debate today, so Gov.
Bill Clinton took a slap at him to show how tough he can be.
Larry Agran, the former Mayor of Irvine, Calif., spent much of his time complaining that he was not getting enough time.
And Eugene J. McCarthy delivered a series of one-liners and bittersweet political reminiscences.
"This is the highest-ranking Democratic organization that's let me talk to them for 20 years," said Mr.
McCarthy, the former Minnesota Senator who was making his first appearance with the other candidates.
"I've got a lot of things to say."


Garbage Could Raise Taxes 40 Percent
"Soaring Garbage Fees Plague Town Officials"  [ March 1 ]  accurately reflects the dilemma of towns' attempting to satisfy New York State mandates that balloon local taxes.
New York State law essentially says that towns must dispose of garbage in one or more high-tech ways or ship it out of state.
The usual high-tech solution is incineration, with the residual ash going to a double-plastic-lined landfill.
As your article points out, that costs about $500 per household each year.
Shipping garbage across the United States is no solution.
It is expensive, environmentally irresponsible and will not be tolerated for long by the importing states.


Is It Time to End Rent Regulation?
FOR almost half a century, rent regulation, which has provided virtual lifetime guarantees of inexpensive or below-market-price apartments to hundreds of thousands of families, regardless of means, has been politically untouchable in New York City.
In the last year, though, a rising vacancy rate, the city's urgent need for more tax revenues and studies projecting that deregulation would have a limited impact on most apartment residents have brought hope to landlords and fear to tenants that the controversial system will soon be reconsidered, if not revamped.


Car Crashes Into an Ice Cream Parlor on Staten Island


Making a Difference; 'What Am I Doing Here?'
In 1986, when Michael Patriarca, then a big-bank regulator at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, joined the Federal Home Loan Bank, he had no idea he was parachuting into a massive scandal.
"The first couple of things I looked at were Lincoln Savings and American Savings, which was just absolutely on the ropes," he said recently.
"I said, 'What am I doing here?' "
Mr.
Patriarca went on to play an important early role in exposing the widespread fraud and other excesses of the savings industry.
Now, the slightly owlish, slightly attitudinous Mr.
Patriarca has left the Office of Thrift Supervision, which superseded the F.H.L.B., to join Wells Fargo &amp; Company, the big California bank.


'Who's Happy Now?' in Croton Falls
FROM the late 1960's to the early 1970's, who would have doubted Oliver Hailey's claim as the most produced, least successful playwright in the New York theater?
For all his television credentials in consulting and story editing -- remember "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman" and "Rhoda"? -- the Texas-born writer turned out one failed play after another.
Even in the late 1960's and early 80's.
Remember "First One Asleep, Whistle"? (One performance in 1966.) Remember "I Won't Dance"? (One performance, a matinee, in 1981.) Only "Father's Day," a 1971 Broadway one-night stand, was more favorably looked upon in revival eight years later.


Lucille Messina Marries on L.I.
Lucille Marie Messina, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Messina Sr. of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Vincent A. LaBruna, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent V. LaBruna of New York.
Archbishop Renato Martino, the Vatican's permanent observer at the United Nations, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
LaBruna is the laboratory information system administrator at Cabrini Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from St.
John's University and received a master's degree in health science from Long Island University.
Her father is the president of the Hilco Construction Company in New Hyde Park, L.I.


John McKittrick Weds Faith Conlon
Faith Eleanor Conlon, an owner of the Seal Press, a feminist publishing company, and John Llwelynn McKittrick, a senior air-traffic-control specialist, both in Seattle, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Deborah Kaufmann of the Universal Life Church officiated at the Center for Wooden Boats on Lake Union in Seattle.
Ms.
Conlon, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Edythe V. Conlon of Glen Rock, N.J., and the late Andrew J. Conlon, a book printing sales executive in New York.


SPACE SHUTTLE LAB TO STUDY THE AIR
Above the stratosphere, the mesosphere and most of the thermosphere, the atmospheric layer cake enveloping the planet, the space shuttle Atlantis will be carrying scientific instruments this week to study the chemistry and physics of the air on Earth.
The eight-day mission, scheduled for launching at 8:01 A.M. tomorrow at Cape Canaveral, Fla., will take measurements of the upper atmosphere and its response to natural and human-induced changes, including the accumulation of gases that trap heat and could lead to a worldwide warming.


'A Fire in the Mind'
To the Editor:
In 1990 at Columbia University, we participated with Wendy Doniger and other scholars in celebrating the centennial of the noted Indologist Heinrich Zimmer.
Ms.
Doniger gave the keynote address: "The King and the Corpse and the Rabbi and the Talk-Show Star." Her talk was witty but outrageously anti-Campbell, casting aspersions on his scholarship and his character.
Ms.
Doniger's thesis was that Joseph Campbell, a Jungian, had inflicted a serious intellectual blemish, a "Jungian gloss," on the corpus of Zimmer's work, which he edited in English.
"Campbell's dirty pawprint soils the work of Zimmer everywhere," she said.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANANCY AND MR.
DRY-BONE.
Written and illustrated by Fiona French.
Little, Brown. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Using traditional characters from Caribbean and African folk tales, a gifted British artist tells a new courtship story.
The mostly black and white figures are silhouetted against dazzling sunset colors.
Anancy makes Miss Louise laugh, so he gets to marry her.


The Adults Were Disappearing
MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS
By Elena Bonner.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis.
Illustrated. 349 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Looking to Score With a Sports Complex
A $2.7 million excavation project for a new sports complex on 28 acres just south of the city's center marks the beginning of one of the largest downtown developments in recent history.
It is also one of the few projects on schedule in what has become a near standstill in development.
The site, just three blocks from Public Square, is being cleared for the $361.7 million Gateway project, a combination open-air stadium and indoor arena.


Bridge
By any measure, the American Contract Bridge League is by far the biggest bridge organization in the world.
It has close to 200,000 members in Canada, Mexico and Bermuda as well as the United States, and more than 4,200 clubs.
The average age of the members is 58, worryingly high for the future of the game, and the average income is $58,000.
Ninety percent are college-educated, and 60 percent are women, according to a survey conducted several years ago for the organization.
In the past 28 years the league's Charity Foundation has contributed more than $5 million to a variety of causes.
The National Multiple Sclerosis Society will be the major beneficiary this year.


Diana Goodman, a Designer, Marries
Diana Rochelle Goodman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald B. Goodman of Allentown, Pa., was married there last night to Dr.
David Albert Milich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Milich of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Martin Biefield performed the ceremony at Temple Keneseth Israel.
Mrs.
Milich, 30 years old, is the president of Diana Rochelle Designs, a New York etched-glass and furniture design firm.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of the Bethlehem-Buehler Manufacturing Corporation, a furniture maker in Allentown.
Her mother, Jane R. Goodman, is the president of Continental Galleries in Allentown.


Review/Film Festival; A Plea to Emancipate Africa's Women
"Finzan," the second feature film by Cheick Oumar Sissoko, a Malian director and leader in his country's democracy movement, takes place in a rural African village whose customs have changed little over the centuries.
The tribal life in this grass-hut community of subsistence farmers is orderly and ritualized.
But it is also a place of glaring sexual inequities.
The women work side by side in the fields with their husbands but share few of the men's rights and privileges.
When a young woman marries, she becomes a piece of property who can be "inherited" by a male relative when her husband dies.
As remote as it is, the village is not entirely untouched by modern urban life.
Enough information leaks in from the outside world to sow the seeds of a feminist rebellion.
"Finzan" tells the stories of two women who go up against the prevailing customs.
When Nanyuma (Diarrah Sanogo) a sturdy, stubborn field worker, is widowed, her brother-in-law Bala (Oumar Namory Keita), who is the village idiot, petitions the local chieftain for her hand.
Over Nanyuma's furious objections, his request is granted, and she is forced to marry him.
When she refuses to sleep with him, he attempts to rape her, and she runs away.
Eventually she musters enough support from the other women to make involuntary marriage an issue that begins to divide the community.


'A Fire in the Mind'
To the Editor:
I am not a fan of conspiracy theories, but I detect a vendetta against Joseph Campbell.


Educational Tours: Will Tax Rules Change?
ALMOST everyone who ever went to college or holds a museum membership receives a stream of shiny color brochures for trips to the Mediterranean, Prague, castles in Wales, the Amazon or Galapagos.
All of these brochures note that taking the trip will involve a tax-deductible gift to the sponsoring museum, cultural association or school.
Such brochures may soon have to make clear that the gift is voluntary and not required for joining the tour.
Further, some itineraries that allow a lot of shopping and "afternoons at leisure" may be beefed up in educational content, with lectures in classrooms, slide sessions and readings, which may make a $7,000 voyage on the yacht Argonaut sound less like fun and more like work.


CLEAN POOL
As a New York City- based billiards promoter for the past 13 years, I was gratified to see such an extensive article on the sport ("Clean Pool" by Alessandra Stanley, Feb. 23).
Yet I was disappointed that Stanley chose to focus so strongly on the negative aspects of pool that have so long been a traditional part of the news media's portrayal of pocket billiards.
I do not deny that as a sport we are still fighting years of pejorative perceptions.
However, this August, the Pocket Billiards U.S.
Open is being held in the ballroom of the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City, far away from the dimly lighted back rooms of Stanley's narrative.
BARRY DUBOW
New York, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Save Places For Champs Among the 64
SCARY news travels fast.
It was just a few hours after Syracuse had won the Big East basketball tournament last Sunday afternoon, and the Syracuse players were waiting at the airport when somebody broke the news about the pairings in the national tournament.
"Somebody told me we were going to play Princeton," recalled Andrew Moten, Syracuse's suave freshman.
"I just said, 'Oh, man.' "


Cuttings; For Window Boxes, a Change Of Pace (No Impatiens)
Everybody's been asking lately: "What can I plant in my window boxes and containers? What can I use besides geraniums and that vine that trails down. . . . What's it called?"
Trailing vinca.


Pull The Plug On PBS?
With the National Endowment for the Arts already a target in this political season, public broadcasting seems to be next on the right-wing hit list.
The Public Broadcasting Service, which oversees national programming, is taking heat from a conservative group called the Committee for Media Integrity for advancing left-wing views despite a Congressional mandate for balanced programming.
And a few weeks ago the Heritage Foundation, which often reflects or inspires mind-sets in the Reagan-Bush establishment, sent forth a paper calling for the "privatization" of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which distributes Federal money to public television and radio.
Laurence Jarvik, a resident scholar at the foundation, would have private investors take over the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, whose next three-year budget of about $1 billion is being stalled by some Republican senators.
His reason: "Many cable stations carry the education and cultural programs that it was once thought could be provided only by taxpayer-supported public television."


Underdog Status Is Gladly Welcomed
When the East Regional of the national collegiate basketball tournament resumes here at the Centrum with a second-round doubleheader Sunday, the four teams will share a strange coincidence.
Although three of the teams were the higher-seeded ones in their first-round games Friday, all four coaches are entering the next round proclaiming underdog status.


Convention Bureau Is Wooing Bus Tours
IN the latest attempt to bring an influx of new dollars to Westchester hotels and tourist attractions, a marketing campaign is under way to turn the county into what is known in the travel industry as a hub and spoke destination for bus tours.
"It's a concept that has worked very well in generating additional revenues for the hospitality industry in other parts of the country," said Richard Eisley, president of the Westchester Convention and Visitors Bureau.
"The plan is to get motor-coach companies to hub their coaches and passengers at Westchester hotels and spoke out every day, so to speak, to attractions in surrounding areas."


In Other Years, Brawls Began After the Parade
At a news conference on the steps of City Hall last Monday, the eve of the St.
Patrick's Day parade, Paul O'Dwyer, a spokesman for the gay group that had legally been shut out of the line of march, was heckled by a passerby on a bicycle.
"An Irish parade is an Irish parade and a gay parade is a gay parade," the man shouted.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about New York City's plan to build eight plants to convert sewage sludge to fertilizer omitted the proposed sites for two plants in some editions.
They are on Wards Island in the East River.


Sweden Redefines Sexual Revolution
These days, foreign journalists come to Katarina Lindahl's office searching for sin.
"There was a man here not long ago from Holland, writing about Sweden and sex," said Ms.
Lindahl, who is the executive director of the Swedish Association for Sex Education.
"He said he couldn't find it himself, so he asked me for help. I had to tell him, things aren't like they used to be."
From the 1950's through the early 1970's, Sweden was synonymous with the idea of an unfettered and open sexuality, a permissive, even promiscuous, society at the cutting edge of the sexual revolution.
In Stockholm, there were clubs with live sex acts that drew tour groups from Asia and America.
In the cinema, there were films like "I am Curious (Yellow)," a 1969 movie that candidly explored the sexual and political awakening of a young woman, and provoked the wrath of censors in the United States.


The Union Side of Employment-at-Will
To the Editor:
In an otherwise informative article on employment-at-will ("When Employers Rule by Whim," At Work, March 1), Barbara Presley Noble only obliquely mentions the positive role that unions play in preventing wrongful discharge.
Yet the role of unions is particularly important since, unlike other industrialized countries, the United States does not have national "just cause" legislation which would provide employees with due process rights and some semblance of workplace justice and equity.


'Playing Our Song' In Intimate Setting
THE original "Theaterama" at the 1964-65 World's Fair is now the Queens Theater in the Park.
The "Theaterama" became a legitimate theater in 1972, and it has had a checkered production history since then.
For a few years, T.R.G.
Productions has been working to re-establish an interest in the theater at the former New York State Pavilion in Flushing Meadows Corona Park by drawing audiences into a smaller space downstairs from the large main theater, which is undergoing much-needed renovations.


The Looking Glass World of Julie Taylor
The banquet is a scene out of a Bruegel nightmare, or Henry VIII gone berserk.
The pompous king has cheeks like sides of mutton and narrow evil eyes.
Around him are his grotesque courtiers, with obscene folds of flesh and distorted features.
One has a pointed beard as sharp as his stiletto nose, another looks as if his face has been crushed by a pestle and one woman's spiraling hair towers like twin Babels above her head.
These are all characters in "Fool's Fire," Julie Taymor's first movie for television.
They are bizarre and bulbous puppets, gargoyles molded out of latex with actors inside manipulating the creatures to make them look amazingly alive.
"The true quintessence of gastronomy," toasts one of the king's ministers.
But, before anyone can eat, the food comes to life.
The braised pheasant flies from its bed of truffles, the fish flips and flops, the wild boar spits out an apple and snorts.
Nothing discourages the diners from gorging themselves from the groaning board -- and groaning their delight.
Then the camera pans under the table, where we find Hopfrog, the dwarf who is the court jester, the object of the king's malice and the tragicomic center of the tale.
Hopfrog is played by Michael Anderson, known to television viewers as the dwarf on "Twin Peaks" and one of two live actors seen on camera in major roles in "Fool's Fire." As the monarch reaches down to hand Hopfrog a bone, there is a glint in the jester's eye.
Before the story is over, he will have his fiendish revenge.
Based on an Edgar Allan Poe short story, this is a chilling Gothic tale in which justice triumphs over wickedness.


Sweet Intentions, Sour Notes
To the Editor:
Kudos to Edward Rothstein for his essay on music written for children's stories and for his emphasis on the need for "good" music in this field  [ "An Evening at the Pops. Lolli, That Is," Feb. 23 ] .
There has been, and still is, what can only be called an attitude of condescension by the adult public regarding what is acceptable in this area: pop songs, jingles, kitschy instrumental effects are deemed adequate for undeveloped tastes.


The New York Times Guide to Rotisserie Leagues; Price and Prejudice to Aid in the American League Action
Rotisserie baseball is a game made up of teams composed of real players who are selected at an auction draft at the beginning of the season.
Each team is made up of 23 players taken from the active rosters of American or National League teams.
A team consists of five outfielders, two catchers, one second baseman, one shortstop, one middle infielder (either a second baseman or a shortstop), one first baseman, one third baseman, one corner man (either a first baseman or a third baseman), nine pitchers and one utility player (a designated hitter in an American League Rotisserie league, although some leagues now allow a 10th pitcher to occupy this slot).


Technology Hasn't Kept Its Promises
To the Editor:
In "Cut Off from the New Reality" (Op-Ed, Feb. 23), David Gelerntner laments the decline of science and technology as American ideals: artists and visionaries nowadays ignore the glamour of new inventions, students avoid science courses, commercial desktop computers sit idle, and no one looks forward anymore to a future made brighter by jet planes, atomic power and robots.


Janis Gottfried and Ronald Lipson Are Married
Janis Melinda Gottfried, a daughter of Alex and Judy Gottfried of Edison, N.J., was married last evening to Ronald Dan Lipson, the son of Joseph and Eva Lipson of Edison.
Rabbi Gerald Zelizer officiated at the Richfield Regency in Verona, N.J.


GOVERNMENT THAT MEANS BUSINESS
David Osborne's proposal to create an "entrepreneurial" government may harm the people most in need of government aid -- those who lack the education and skills required to succeed in the marketplace ("Goverment That Means Business," March 1).
Though calls to "empower" individuals and "reward" success have visceral appeal, experience shows that these principles can hurt the poor as much as help them.
For example, the principle of "results-oriented government," introduced to federal job-training programs in the early 80's, caused programs to exclude the least skilled in favor of those better able to meet job-placement goals.
This predictable response to "a reward" for success denies job training to those who need it most.


Tech Notes; Early Zap for Auto Pollution
When an auto engine starts, it spews out unchecked pollutants for the first few minutes because the catalytic converter that neutralizes them has not warmed to its job.
California and other states believe that in the future they must control that initial blast of pollution in the fight for better air quality.
To tackle the problem, a number of companies, including W. R. Grace and Precision Combustion, have experimented with adding electric preheaters to catalytic converters to warm that first blast of gas quickly.
The latest entry comes from Corning Inc., whose prototype is installed in the exhaust system close to the engine.
In a recent laboratory test, the device easily met tough regulations that California has imposed for the 1997 model year.


Pondering the Riddle of Creativity
There is something bedazzling about the creative act: always a surprise, it shocks with its unimaginable perfection, its strange eloquence, its balance between the fresh and the familiar.
Perhaps it's because we want to make such magic ourselves that we are so intrigued by how others do it.
And so we turn to psychology to unravel the mysteries of creativity.
But despite a long fascination with the creative mind, psychology has been singularly uncreative in explaining it.
There is, for example, the popular if romanticized view that takes van Gogh as its prototype of the creative genius: an emotional cripple who, if cured of his neurosis, would lose his talents.
That theory, with roots as ancient as Aristotle, has gone out the window with findings that show creativity flourishing with emotional maturity (though a little manic depression in the family may not hurt, especially for writers).


Faulty Concorde Lands Safely
A British Airways Concorde that reported problems with one of its engines landed safely at Kennedy International Airport yesterday morning with a large section of its rudder sheared away, officials said.
None of the 58 passengers aboard the supersonic jetliner -- Flight B1 from Heathrow Airport in London -- was injured or apparently even aware there had been a problem.


Adm. George W. Anderson, 85; Was in Charge of Cuba Blockade
Retired Adm.
George Whelan Anderson, the Chief of Naval Operations in charge of the American blockade of Cuba during the Soviet missile crisis in 1962, died Friday at the Arleigh Burke Pavilion nursing home in McLean, Va.
He was 85 years old and lived in Washington, D.C.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Q and A
Calculating Co-op Tax  Question: We are a small 16-unit co-op.
As a non-profit corporation we have a small interest-bearing savings account and an account that holds maintenance money to cover the cost of repairs.
If there is no money in our account at the close of our fiscal year can we avoid incurring either Federal or state tax obligations?  . . .
Isabel Hall, Jackson Heights, Queens Answer: No.
Your tax liability would have less to do with the balance in your accounts at the end of the year than with how the income was earned.
Robert Kobel, a spokesman for the New York office of the Internal Revenue Service, said Federal tax rules give residential co-ops options in calculating their income taxes.
As a corporate entity you could elect to be taxed as a regular corporation according to a graduated scale based on income.
Using this formula for calculating your taxes would require that you file forms 1120 or 112A.
I.R.S. rules give co-ops the ability to exempt certain types of income like shareholders' maintenance from their taxable income.
However, other income, such as rent from any commercial space, fees from building concessions or interest earned on savings accounts or investments, would be taxed at a flat 30 percent rate.
A co-op taking these deductions would file using Form 1120H.
New York state tax policy follows the Federal rules in what it allows co-ops to deduct for unrelated business income.
The basic corporate tax rate in New York state is 8 percent on taxable income under $290,000 and 9 percent for income above that level.
But the taxable income of most co-ops is so small that the majority end up paying only the minimum flat tax required of all corporations, which is $325.
Currently in effect is a 10 percent temporary surcharge for tax years ending between July 1, 1992, and June 30, 1993, as well as a 15 percent Metropolitan Transportation Business surcharge that would apply to co-ops in the M.T.A.'s 12-county commuter region.
More information on New York State tax rules is available by calling 1-800-225-5829.
Breaking a Lease Question: I am 23-year-old person in-between jobs.
In an effort to cut down on expenses, I have considered finding a cheaper place to live.
My lease runs for several more months.
Would I face monetary penalties if I moved out? . . .
Kevin Curton, Stamford, Conn.
Answer: Not penalties, but the laws that govern residential leases in Connecticut make tenants responsible for the rent, during the term of their leases, until the landlord finds a new tenant.
However, Victor Feigenbaum, the attorney who is in charge of the Housing Session in Connecticut State Court, said that in this situation a landlord has the obligation to mitigate the tenant's losses by making an effort to relet the apartment.
The landlord would have to show, for example, that he had advertised the apartment or listed it with an agent.
Some leases have an unemployment escape clause that would release a jobless tenant who moves out from responsibility for the rent, but they are rare.
Nevertheless, you should check your lease for such a clause.
SCRIE Eligibility Question: I am 67 years old and retired and living on a limited income.
I have lived for more than 25 years in an apartment in a two-family house.
Do I qualify for the city's Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemption program? . . .
Eugene Myer, Bayside, Queens Answer: No.
According to Roz Post, a spokesman for Department of Housing Preservation and Development, the program is limited to tenants in rent-controlled, rent- stabilized and Mitchell-Lama apartments.
Tenants in two-family houses are not covered.
However, you might qualify for assistance under the Section 8 program, a Federal rent-subsidy program.
In order to take advantage of it, your landlord would have to agree to participate.
If he does, your rent could be reduced to no more than 30 percent of your income.
For more information on Section 8 eligibility call 212-306-3000.


Den Fujita, Japan's Mr. Joint-Venture
The first thing you need to know about Den Fujita is that he is the man who made the hamburger a Japanese icon.
In the 21 years since he launched the fast-food phenomenon here in a 50-50 venture with the McDonald's Corporation, Mr.
Fujita has so saturated Japan with golden arches that they often seem etched in the popular imagination as deeply as the Imperial chrysanthemum.
Many young Japanese would be surprised to learn that the Bi-gu Ma-ku was not invented on the Ginza.


Sinan's Mosques
To the Editor: Olivier Bernier's article bears testimony to how statements about facts and events, when taken out of a larger context in which they are meaningful, can betray the biases of the author.
In this case, the author is clearly convinced that no worthwhile architecture exists in Turkey with the exception of the mosques of Sinan who "was, in fact, not an ethnic Turk at all." After all, how can one expect great architecture from the Turks, "until fairly recently a nomadic people"?
Even an imperial mosque like Beyazit is "a clumsy imitation of Justinian's great church," while most of the mosques around the Golden Horn (those that do not bear the name of Sinan) "seem more like a catalogue of errors than triumphs of design."
We would have expected a lecturer at the Met to give a little more credit to the acknowledged examples of great architecture produced by Turks from Samarkand to the Seljuk cities of Anatolia, or even the early Ottoman architecture in Bursa.
Furthermore, his perception of architectural history as the history of masters and masterpieces seems to blunt his appreciation, for instance, of a remarkable urban vision (as in the case of the city of Bursa) or of a ceremonial residential concept remarkably different from European palace architecture (as in the case of the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul).
However, since it is not the intention here to challenge the author on grounds which may be misread as defensive nationalism (particularly since the ethnic complexity of the Ottoman Empire is precisely what makes it culturally and architecturally interesting and nobody in his or her right mind will argue for the undiluted "Turkishness" of any achievement), we will just take issue with his particular definitions of "imitation" and "copy."


It Started With Anna
DAUGHTERS OF THE NEW WORLD
By Susan Richards Shreve. 471 pp. New York:  Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $20.


Business Diary/March 15-20
INTERNATIONAL De Klerk's Mandate Frees South Africa for a New Day


Voter Rally Offers Shelter From Feinstein's Tempest
Amid questions of whether he is being squeezed between labor leaders and fiscal monitors over New York City's budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins was cheered yesterday morning by one union, and two of the city's influential labor leaders said they would not decide whether to support the Mayor in 1993 until later this year.
Questions about labor's support for the Mayor resurfaced last week after Barry Feinstein, president of Local 236 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, sent a letter to 350 union colleagues proposing a meeting and calling attention to a recent column in The New York Times that suggested Mr.
Dinkins not run for re-election.


Review/Fashion; Matchless Pair of Avant-Garde Belgians
Martin Margiela and Ann Demeulemeester both came from Belgium and knew each other in school, but their design attitudes have little in common.
Mr.
Margiela is one of the enfants terribles of Paris, known for pinned-together clothes with seams on the outside.
Ms.
Demeulemeester's forte is finely tailored jackets, quirky but wearable.
Part of Mr.
Margiela's mystique derives from where he holds his shows, generally some obscure quarter of Paris.
One was a rubble-strewn lot.
Yet his admirers make the trek.
Like knights in quest of the Grail, they keep searching for the novel, the exciting, the different.
They got what they were looking for Thursday night.


No Inside-the-Parkas
Commissioner FAY VINCENT has thrown his support behind a bid to move the Giants from San Francisco to San Jose, 45 miles to the south, not so much because he loves San Jose but because he gets the shivers just thinking about Candlestick Park.
Vincent, who once got so cold at a game there that he fled to the press box, called San Francisco fans the toughest in the world.
"In July, everyone's wearing a parka, like a football game in November," he said.


RECORD BRIEFS
Zeisl: Piano Trio Suite, String Quartet No. 2, 'Arrowhead' Trio
Brandeis-Bardin Ensemble (Suite, Quartet); Debussy Trio ("Arrowhead").
Harmonia Mundi HMU 907044; CD.


Making the Grass So Green in Spring
NITROGEN is one of the nutritional elements that helps to make spring so green.
It makes the grass grow, it helps seeds sprout, and it causes plants to thrive.
The element occurs in high quantities in plants, since it is part of every living cell.
And here is the most important part: nitrogen is also the element most easily lost, because it leaches easily in heavy rains and in eroding soils.
Addition of fertilizers to home lawns in spring, particularly those high in nitrogen, has become a suburban ritual.
The fertilizer is put on in super quantities, quite often much more than is necessary, and the excess runs off.


Review/Fashion; On a Designer's Easel, Splashes and Dabs
In a city where fashion is considered an art form, designers with serious esthetic intentions attract an almost reverential following.
The challenge is to see how completely unusual one can be and still fall within the range of what fashion acolytes can wear.
Yohji Yamamoto, a Japanese designer who shows in Paris, uses fashion as an easel upon which to splash and dab, to explore the line between art and commerce.
His collections are closely followed by his admirers, who find enough intricately devised black clothes to fulfill their most somber fantasies.


TV Producer Focuses on True-Life Programs
SHE has produced "Adam," a television drama on missing children; "Unspeakable Acts," about a successfully prosecuted case of sex abuse in a day-care center, and her most recent film, "Last Wish," about a woman's battle with breast cancer.
She is Joan Barnett, who grew up in Lido Beach in the same house where her mother still lives, and she has become one of the "first ladies" of true-life television programs.


Marylee R. Deland Weds Peter M. Schwarzer
Marylee Rawle Deland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thorndike Deland of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Mark Schwarzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peregrin Schwarzer of Harvard, Mass.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors officiated at Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church in Scarsdale.


Technology; Gridlock at the Chip-to-Microprocessor Intersection
The push to build ever-faster desktop computers has hit a bottleneck.
Microprocessors, the brains of such computers, continue to increase in speed.
But like powerful engines that are starved for fuel, these microprocessors are often kept waiting because memory chips, which store information, cannot supply them with data fast enough.
Because of the bottleneck, both semiconductor companies and computer designers are devising faster dynamic random access memories, or D-RAM's, the main type of memory used in computers.
They are also devising faster data highways to shuttle information between the microprocessors and the memory.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
Let us not forget that the right to have an abortion in America is not only a women's issue.
An angry army of men will join that "angry army of women" on Pennsylvania Avenue in April and anywhere else it is necessary to make sure Roe v.
Wade is not overturned.
DAN KAGAN
New York, N.Y.


5 Sides, 5 Floors, With Plans to Grow
The Pentagon's 6.5 million square feet, incorporating five floors and nearly 18 miles of corridors, are insufficient, the Defense Department says.
And so the department is moving ahead with a 10-year, $1 billion plan to renovate and add a 500,000-square-foot annex to its huge headquarters on the banks of the Potomac.


The Second Time Around for a Legendary Show
It's not in the playbill or in the cast or even in the script, but there is a dybbuk present in Herb Gardner's new play, "Conversations With My Father." The dybbuk, an otherworldly Jewish spirit that takes up residence in the bodies of the living, keeps creeping into the main character, Eddie Ross, when you least expect it.
Eddie is the get-along, go-along guy, the guy who changes his name from Goldberg to Ross in the late 1930's to "make it in the goyisher world," the guy who refuses to believe the Holocaust is under way, the guy who tries to outsmart God right to the edge of the grave.


Adelphi Plans to Add 550 Dorm Rooms
On behalf of Adelphi University, I am responding to the extremely misleading and inaccurate letter by Alfred Urban Jr.  [ March 1. ]  Mr.
Urban, a trustee of the Village of Garden City, is very well aware that the numbers he cites are not correct.
Far from planning to add "between 3,000 and 5,000 resident students," the university's Academic Master Plan only calls for the construction of three additional dormitories, providing accommodations for 550 added students.
In fact, on July 18, 1991, the university's attorney, Jeffrey Forchelli, appeared before the Village Trustees to correct Mr.
Urban and confirm the facts of our application.
If the proposed construction is approved by the village, there will certainly not be "upward of 6,000 or more students" living on campus.
If approved, there will be approximately 1,650 students in residence.
In addition, there will be a concurrent reduction in the total number of students attending the Garden City campus, which has declined from 8,041 in 1985 to approximately 6,750 in 1991.


Legacy of Anita Hill
Senator Alan J. Dixon's vote to confirm Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas last year upset many women, among them Carol Moseley Braun, the Cook County, Ill., Recorder of Deeds.
On Tuesday Mrs.
Braun defeated Mr.
Dixon in the Illinois primary.
If she beats Richard S. Williamson, a Republican who's never held elective office, in the general election this fall, she will become the first black woman to serve in the United States Senate.
The opposition vote was split last week between Senator Dixon and Alfred Hofeld, a personal injury lawyer, allowing Ms.
Braun to win with support that included a coalition of blacks and women.
A University of Chicago Law School graduate who served in the Illinois General Assembly and became assistant majority leader, Ms.
Braun said the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings shattered her view of the Senate as "a Valhalla where decisions were made by serious men -- instead we saw they were just garden-variety politicians making bad speeches."


A Title for Brandeis Amid Garden Delights
All week long, his players, all eight of them, did not stop talking about "the Garden." At a pep rally Friday at Brandeis High School on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, Maurice Hicks thought about trying to calm them down, about getting them focused on the upcoming opponent and nothing more.
"I was worried that they were thinking too much about the Garden," said Hicks, the Brandeis basketball coach.


Wall or Ceiling Projects Not for Inexperienced
INEXPERIENCE can be a harsh teacher, as when a seemingly straightforward project like remodeling a wall or ceiling by attaching paneling or new wallboard goes awry because of uneven surfaces underneath.
Unless the surfaces for new wall and ceiling materials are flat and smooth, and either plumb in the case of walls or level in the case of most ceilings, panels will not fit squarely, nor will they mask the bumps and hollows they are intended to conceal.


Focus: Cleveland; Looking to Score With a Sports Complex
A $2.7-MILLION excavation project for a new sports complex on 28 acres just south of the city's center marks the beginning of one of the largest downtown developments in recent history.
It is also one of the few projects on schedule in what has become a near standstill in development.
The site, just three blocks from Public Square, is being cleared for the $361.7 million Gateway project, a combination open-air stadium and indoor arena.


A 90's Movie Sees 40's War Through 60's Eyes
"Mediterraneo," the Italian nominee for the Academy Award for best foreign film, satirizes the Italian occupation of Greece during World War II, but it is at least as much about the predicament of the Italian left today.
"It reflects the disillusionment of a generation that was unable to change the world," says its director, Gabriele Salvatores.
The story of Italian soldiers abandoned on a small Greek island who decide to sit out the war, "Mediterraneo," which opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse in Manhattan, was seen as a denunciation of the gulf war when it was released in Italy last year.


All the Trimmings for a Sunday Spring Dinner
ALTHOUGH this winter was one of the warmest on record, it is now officially spring.
And with a change in the seasons, people's moods about menus also change.
Spring lamb, herbs, asparagus and light fruit desserts will now whet appetites sated with stews and casseroles.
The following menu is a fancy one, a lineup for a Sunday dinner.
It would actually qualify for Easter Sunday, still about a month away.


Health Plans On the QE2
A program of lectures, exercise and diet called "Living Well on the QE2" is being offered during the ship's trans-Atlantic crossing leaving New York on May 17.
During the five-day voyage to Southampton experts will discuss the uses of ginseng and gingko bilboa as medicine, as well as nutrition, stress, the use of blue green algae for personal and ecological healing, the value of aromatherapy and other topics.
Among the lecturers scheduled to take part are Dr.
Serafina Corsello, founder of the Foundation for the Advancement of Innovative Medicine; Daryl Kollman, a pioneer in the healthful use of algae, and Lieve Reynolds, an aromatherapist.


Review/Film Festival; Sardonic Look at the Puerto Rican Image
Why are there so few Puerto Rican celebrities?
Why, when Puerto Rican characters appear in films, are they usually played by non-Hispanic actors like Lou Diamond Phillips, who was born in the Philippines, or Armand Assante, who is from New York?
Why are the anchors on the Spanish-language network Telemundo "whiter than Chuck Scarborough"?
These are just a few of the questions posed by the stand-up comedian Luis Caballero in "The Puerto Rican Mambo (Not a Musical)."
The film, which opened on Friday at the Public Theater and moves to the Quad Cinema, 34 West 13th Street, next Friday, is a darkly comic exploration of the image of Puerto Ricans in the media and in society.
One of the conclusions it draws is that a negative image of Puerto Ricans in the media contributes significantly to a generalized lack of self-esteem among Hispanic people.


Why the Guilt And Ambivalence?
To the Editor:
The portrayal of black characters in film is deeply entwined with black history and its tragedies.


By Jove! British Candidates, American Lingo
As Britain Charges through the first week of its monthlong election campaign, voters sometimes find their perspective blurred by the latest fog from the other side of the Atlantic: suddenly, the air over England is thick with the jargon of American politics.
On television and radio, voters are now regularly counseled by "spin doctors," or campaign aides assigned to recast even the most horrific gaffe in a favorable light.
The phenomenon is old, but for Britons, the terminology is not.
Even the carefully precise announcers on the British Broadcasting Corporation can't help themselves.
This week, one newsreader described with apparent relish what the Conservative Party had just done to "kick-start, if I might use the fashionable new jargon, their campaign."


New York Medicaid Strained by Newly Poor
BARRY T. BERBERICH, the director of long-term care for New York's Medicaid program, has a favorite horror story.
It involves a New York City woman who qualified last year for Medicaid by impoverishing herself a few weeks before applying.
To get Medicaid to pay for the health-care services she was receiving in her home, the woman transferred her assets -- enough to generate $168,000 in annual interest income -- to another person.


Pharmer, Spare That Cow
To the Editor:
Regarding "The 'Pharmers' Who Breed Cows that Can Make Drugs," Feb. 9: Will the introduction of human genes into cows force the students of ethics to re-examine the definition of cannibalism?
BERNARD SCHULAK W. Bloomfield, Mich., Feb. 10


IN SHORT: FICTION
DISAPPEARANCE By Yury Trifonov. Ardis, $23.95.


Barefoot in the Loft: A Real New York Story
A rambling duplex loft in SoHo.
It was a dappled afternoon, and a biting wind carried the mournful tune of a lone saxophone player emptying his soul.
Domestic drama was gently unfolding in the kitchen.
Mild fright in her eyes, Becky was on the phone.
"Mom, it's me," she said.
"I need help."
She had gamely volunteered to cook dinner for her six roommates but was stumped over what to serve.
Her mother mentioned spaghetti. 'No, we've had spaghetti every night practically," Becky said. Turkey? Becky sighed. "That's going to take hours."


Getting to Work: Other Views
In reference to "Getting to Work Will Never Be the Same" and compliance to the 1990 Clean Air Act as it pertains to New Jersey:
This is an extremely important issue for every resident of New Jersey; however, the article omits what has become a major factor in this state, especially since 1987: the exhausts of commercial jet aircraft.


Miss Humphreys to Wed Robert P. Heckler Jr.
Henry J. Humphreys of Bronxville, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter Maureen Kelly Humphreys to Robert Philip Heckler Jr., the son of Linda Eck of Phoenix and the late Mr.
Heckler.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Humphreys graduated from Villanova University and is the director of operations at Gracecare Inc., a nursing home corporation in Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
Her father, the executive director of the American Association of the Knights of Malta, retired as a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
The future bride is also a daughter of the late Eileen Kelly Humphreys.


Bounty Hunter: 'I Do Whatever I Have to Do'
UNDER the glare of a street lamp outside a police station in Irvington, Marion Sanders slipped on a dark blue bulletproof vest.
Then he slid into the driver's seat of his Ford LTD, flicked on the overhead light and removed a photograph from a sheaf of papers under the visor.
"This is the individual we're looking for," Mr.
Sanders said.
The image of an angry-looking 19-year-old man stared out from the photo.
Mr.
Sanders said he was wearing the vest because there were rumors on the street that the man might be carrying a weapon.
"There's no point taking any chances," Mr.
Sanders said.


New Insights From the Outback
Like the sound of one hand clapping, the notion of a blind photographer dances on the edge of logic.
For Jocelyn Moorhouse, the 31-year-old Australian writer-director, the idea was the key to a creative puzzle.
Her debut feature film, "Proof," which opens in New York today at the Angelika Film Center, concerns two exquisitely tormented young people: Martin (played by Hugo Weaving), who trusts no one because he is blind, must constantly depend on others; his housekeeper, Celia (Genevieve Picot), who loves her employer passionately, is driven by his coldness to torture him with petty cruelties.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Feb.92
Jan.92
Feb. 91
Rents
179.7
+1.2
+3.3
Homeowner's costs
174.5
+0.3
+4.8
Fuel and utilities
105.2
0.0
-1.4
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset
and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.10
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.21
6.13
7.52
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.95
8.91
9.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.08
5.99
7.35
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.04
9.01
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.08
6.00
7.36
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.23
9.16
9.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.62
6.49
7.73
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.64
4.55
6.32
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.02
8.02
9.49
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Protest Sentiment Is Expected to Hurt Mitterrand in French Regional Voting
Frustrated by a stagnant economy and rising unemployment, troubled by the new strength and size of their neighbor Germany, abruptly uncertain of their place in the world, the French appear ready to register a vote of overwhelming protest on Sunday in regional elections likely to deal a major setback to the governing Socialist Party of President Francois Mitterrand.
With television programs repeatedly asking whether France still has an identity and the leading newsweekly L'Express suggesting that next month's opening of Euro Disneyland will turn the Paris region into the 51st state of the American union, a country renowned for its pride and sense of destiny has seldom seemed at such a loss.


Nannini Makes Return
The Formula One driver ALESSANDRO NANNINI drove in his first race yesterday since his right forearm was severed in a 1990 helicopter crash.
Nannini, who had the severed portion of the arm sewed back on in microsurgery, finished sixth in the Italian Grand Tourism Championship in Monza.
He avoided a collision with Alfa Romeo teammate NICOLA LARINI, who lost control of his car, by spinning off the track.


Four New Shows at Universal
Universal Studios Florida, the theme park and movie production complex in Orlando, is introducing four new attractions.
"Lucy: A Tribute," an archival shrine to the late comedienne Lucille Ball, opens in late May.
Each section of the exhibition will be devoted to one aspect of Lucy nostalgia, including family home-movie footage and memorabilia.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Mar. 7  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 325,000
39 East 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. triplex co-op in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, dining area, den, private space in rear garden; maintenance $1,222, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Silverman Group)  Greenwich Village 390,000
61 James Street  (Cezanne)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, remodeled, windowed kitchen, marble bath, common roof garden, Hudson River view; maintenance $984, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  West Side 370,000
140-142 West 66th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, balcony, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,371, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: G.S.A. Realty)  Upper West Side 373,000
200 West 86th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, windowed kitchen, sunken living room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,356, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale 78,000
3600 Fieldston Road  (Van Buren)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 980-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, sunken living room, 3 exposures, parking space; maintenance $589, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield 198,000
4241 Barnes Avenue  2-family detached frame house; dining room in upper floor unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, 2-car garage, 45- by 100-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,669 (Brokers: J.A.V. Realty Corp. - Highland Realty Services)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 300,000
201 Amity Street  2-family, 4-story brick house; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room, in primary triplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in first floor simplex; 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Gravesend 157,500
1651 East 9th Street  2-family attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 3 baths in each unit; finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  Park Slope 175,000
420 12th Street  (Ansonia Court)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; raised dining area, high-beamed ceilings, exposed brick walls, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,583, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria 385,000
30-97 47th Street  3-family attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in upper floor units; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $650 (Broker: Century 21/Triboro Real Estate)  Flushing 195,000
160-10 Booth Memorial Avenue  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, dinette in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 20- by 108-ft. lot; taxes $1,418 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Dongan Hills 150,000
405 North Railroad Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining room, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $950 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  Grant City 148,000
378 Husson Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, 1-car garage, 38- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $950 (Brokers: Rand Properties - Berns Agency)  Oakwood 173,500
2032 North Railroad Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining area, family room, remodeled kitchen, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $914 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


Bret Jacobson Weds Deborah Isaacs
Deborah Alice Isaacs, a daughter of Stephen and Diane Isaacs of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bret Alan Jacobson, the son of Susan Racca of Potomac, Md., and Jerry A. Jacobson of McLean, Va.
Richard S. Salzman, an Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia, officiated at the Cosmos Club in Washington.
Mrs.
Jacobson, 28 years old, was until recently an accounting assistant at the Lerner Corporation, a real-estate developer in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated from Inver Hills Community College.
Her father is a professor and an associate dean at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
Her mother heads the English departments of the middle and high schools in Nyack, N.Y.


Karen Williams Is to Marry in May
Waltraud Williams and Richard E. Williams, both of Upper Nyack, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Lee Williams to Andrew Mack Zuckert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Zuckert of New Castle, N.H.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Williams, 26 years old, graduated from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and is the assistant to the director of the Snyder Fine Art Gallery in New York.
Her father retired as a technical research associate for General Foods in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Aiming to Improve Wetlands


Review/Film Festival; Free at Last From Sexist Tyranny
On the cinematic evidence of the past week, the repressive treatment of women in China has lately generated feminist film making of remarkable cogency and power.
Yeh Hung-wei's "Five Girls and a Rope," which like Zhang Yimou's current "Raise the Red Lantern" unfolds from the viewpoint of young women imprisoned by Chinese customs, is a potent and radical film with the lulling veneer of a gentle soap opera, and with a decorous style that belies its galvanizing message.
This film begins with the image of five pretty young women dressed in festive garb, and with the echo of girlish giggling.
But the women are dead, having collectively hanged themselves in reaction to the conditions under which they lived.
Hoping to ascend to a kind of paradise where sex roles are reversed and where they will be reunited with the souls of fellow sufferers, they have earnestly embarked upon this grim mission, which the film manages to render with unexpected sweetness.
It is later revealed that even disposition of the rope is decided according to patriarchal rules in rural China.
The rope will be returned to one of the girls' fathers, who grows flax.


Three Peat Dashes Away With Bay Shore Stakes
The route to the Kentucky Derby wound through New York with plenty of dash yesterday when Three Peat came out of California and ran the third fastest Bay Shore Stakes in the 32-year history of the race at Aqueduct.
It was only the third time that John Sadler had sent Three Peat to the races, but the colt for the third time showed exceptional hustle.
He led all the way as he cruised the seven furlongs in 1:213/5 , carrying Chris Antley and a total of 114 pounds.
Only Hoist the Flag in 1971 and Bold Forbes in 1976 ran the race faster.


Nancy E. Tarman Is Married to Martin J. Black
Nancy Ellen Tarman, the daughter of Melvyn Tarman of San Antonio and Sandra Tarman of North Haven, Conn., was married last night in Philadelphia to Martin Jay Black, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Black of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Eugene Wernick performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel.
Mrs.
Black, 29 years old, is an associate at the Philadelphia law firm of Manta &amp; Welge.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Temple University.


Valerie Roberts Has Wedding
Valerie J. Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Roberts of Newton, Mass., was married there last evening to Mark A. Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Friedman of Miami Beach.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel officiated at Temple Emanuel.
Mrs.
Friedman, 28 years old, is a vice president in London for Salomon Brothers.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her mother, Nancy Roberts, is a professor of education at Lesley College.


Where Was the Crime in House Bank Affair?; A in Cash Management
To the Editor:
I praise the members of Congress who overdrew their accounts in the House Bank -- the more frequent the overdrafts and the higher the amounts, the higher the praise!
They get an A in cash management from me, being able to get interest-free loans when banks are so reluctant to lend money.
They are the people I would trust to run the fiscal affairs of our Government.


Nina Essman, A Student, Wed
Nina Essman, a daughter of Leonard and Zora Essman of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married last evening to Jon Tyler Freeman, a son of Sheldon and Linda Freeman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
Ms.
Essman, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Colorado College, she is a third-year law student and an editor of The Law Review at Yeshiva University.
Her father, a retired internist and oncologist, practiced in Yonkers.
Her mother teaches Russian at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y.


Undelivered Adoptions Investigated in 3 States
The authorities in three states are investigating a group of private adoption agencies that collected at least $20,000 from each of more than 100 couples nationwide and kept them waiting up to two years for babies who never came.
The three agencies, in Arizona, Massachusetts and Washington State, are among the new breed of private adoption services appealing to affluent couples who will pay high prices in their quest for a baby from the dwindling pool of healthy infants placed for adoption.
The agencies advertised aggressively for pregnant women willing to give up their new babies.


This Week
Wake Up Your Garden
Spread ground limestone on your garden if the soil pH is below 6, too acidic for vegetables and annuals.
They thrive in a soil pH of 6 to 6.8 (pH is a measure of acidity or alkalinity; a pH of 7 is neutral).
Use three pounds of ground limestone per 100 square feet on sandy soils and five pounds on soil heavy with clay.
Apply lime a few weeks before planting so it can be absorbed by the soil.


Julia J. Wright Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Norton Stevens of New York have announced the engagement of her daughter Julia Jennings Wright to Peter Gordon Ziv, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard G. Ziv Jr. of Northfield, Ill.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wright, 32 years old, is a senior teacher and therapist at the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services' Child Development Center in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and has master's degrees in special education from the Bank Street College of Education and in social work from Columbia University.
Her stepfather is a private investor and management consultant in New York.
Her mother, Margaret Love Stevens, is a former chairman of Bank Street College.
Ms.
Wright is also a daughter of the late Philip Campbell Wright.


BEST SELLERS: March 22, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
3
4
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
3
2
6
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
4
5
2
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
5
4
5
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
6
6
13
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
7
8
24
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
8
16
2
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $21.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
9
12
2
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire developer in rustic mountain country.
10
7
6
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
11
1
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force threatening to upset plans for galactic peace.
12 *
9
9
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
13
10
6
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) A private eye probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
14 *
15
2
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
15
5
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
8
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
3
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
3
4
18
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
3
23
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
5
1
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
6
7
16
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
7
6
12
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
8
5
4
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his heritage through three generations, from Italy to Ocean City, N.J.
9
8
4
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) A Scottsdale, Ariz., attorney argues that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
10
16
3
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) An economist argues that in the past 20 years Americans' leisure time has greatly diminished, with foreboding consequences.
11 *
11
6
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America now faces.
12
10
10
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
13
1
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
14
2
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) A political philosopher considers where two powerful historical forces are now leading us.
15
12
27
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
4
16
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
3
3
11
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
2
16
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
5
5
7
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BARCELONA, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) An elegant, often witty, survey of the history and culture of a great city that fate has made relatively unfamiliar, by an art critic for Time magazine.
EDNA ST.
VINCENT MILLAY: SELECTED POEMS.
The Centenary Edition, edited by Colin Falck. (HarperCollins, $18.) Both the selection and the editor's introduction intend to re-establish Millay as a superior modern poet, unjustly buried.
"I'VE SEEN THE BEST OF IT," by Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt. (Norton, $29.95.) The lively, elegant autobiography of a born patrician who made himself an outstanding reporter, columnist and Washington insider; completed after his death in 1989.
LIFE ITSELF: Abortion in the American Mind, by Roger Rosenblatt. (Random House, $20.) Arguing that most people are in their hearts somewhat ambivalent about abortion, Mr.
Rosenblatt offers a solution: permit abortion but discourage it, and let all parties learn to live with less than they really want.
MOLEHUNT: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA, by David Wise. (Random House, $22.) In his seventh nonfiction book on intelligence, Mr.
Wise tells how the agency was crippled in the 1960's by a paranoid hunt for a Soviet penetrator.
SCAR LOVER, by Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $19.) Mr.
Crews's 12th novel, set among country folk in Florida, concerns a man running from a wound in his own heart that will not heal.
MAPPING THE NEXT MILLENNIUM: The Discovery of New Geographies, by Stephen S. Hall. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Hall's fascinating thesis is that the vast gobs of data generated by modern scientific research yield the clearest and most useful results when rendered in graphic form -- that is, as maps.


The Dark Side


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THANKS, MR.
PRESIDENT The Trail-Blazing Second Term of George Washington.
By North Callahan.
Cornwall, $19.95.


Dispute Disputed
To the Editor:
In his article "Leo Castelli in His 85th Year, a Lion in Winter"  [ Feb. 16 ] , Paul Taylor reported that I left Mr.
Castelli's gallery "with some bitterness." Neither Mr.
Castelli nor I provided such a provocative impression.
I talked to Mr.
Castelli about what he had told Mr.
Taylor before I declined an unnecessary interview.
DAN FLAVIN Wainscott, N. Y.
Mr.
Taylor replies: Leo Castelli did indeed provide a "provocative impression" about Dan Flavin's departure from his gallery.
He told me that Mr.
Flavin left amid a "dispute" with Morgan Spangle of the Rubin Spangle Gallery, which, along with Leo Castel
li's gallery, was representing Mr.
Flavin.
Mr.
Castelli added that Mr.
Flavin did not even tell him that he was leaving, and that he learned about it from Mr.
Spangle.
Mr.
Spangle also characterizes Mr.
Flavin's departure from both galleries -- which involves disputes over money -- as "bitter and unpleasant."


'A Fire in the Mind'
To the Editor:
As one of the directors of "A Hero's Journey," a film documentary tracing Joseph Campbell's intellectual path, I would like to respond to Wendy Doniger's review.
When Campbell, in his 80's, appeared on television, his message brought new life to the dusty wasteland.
But the power and curse of the electronic age tempt us to spurn our pop heroes as quickly as we fall in love.
Serious debate is sacrificed to scandalmongers and jealous contenders.
What say his true peers?
Campbell's contemporary Mircea Eliade, on hearing about "The Historical Atlas of World Mythology," Campbell's work in progress at the time of his death in 1987, declared: "Beautiful. . . . The only person who can do this is Joe."  JANELLE BALNICKE Beverly Hills, Calif.


Review/Film Festival; Roundelay Of Love On an Isle In Wartime
Gabriele Salvatores's "Mediterraneo" is a deliberately charming comedy whose most daring conceit is that love, in one form and another, makes the world go around.
Actually, it's somewhat better than it sounds, having the good sense not to slop over into the sentimentality that awaits it at every turn.
"Mediterraneo," the Italian nominee for this year's Oscar as the best foreign-language film, opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse.


Clinton In New York


Keeping the Faith In the Gas Patch
This is a cruel season for drillers of natural gas.
Depressed prices and revenues have driven hundreds of small, family-owned companies out of business and pushed giants like Mobil, Chevron and ARCO to explore overseas, where costs are lower and big discoveries more likely.
But George P. Mitchell, an iconoclast in the gas patch for more than 40 years, is still at it.
Creator of one of the nation's biggest independent producers and processors of natural gas, the Mitchell Energy and Development Corporation, the 71-year-old Mr.
Mitchell is laying plans to drill for more gas, not less, near home.
He sees the swarming by rivals into South America, Russia and the Middle East as charged with political risks.
Computer-enhanced techniques will so bolster the efforts of exploration geologists over the next 10 years, he says, that a dry hole in North America will prove rare in the next century.


Wall or Ceiling Projects Not for Inexperienced
INEXPERIENCE can be a harsh teacher, as when a seemingly straightforward project like remodeling a wall or ceiling by attaching paneling or new wallboard goes awry because of uneven surfaces underneath.
Unless the surfaces for new wall and ceiling materials are flat and smooth, and either plumb in the case of walls or level in the case of most ceilings, panels will not fit squarely, nor will they mask the bumps and hollows they are intended to conceal.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
Your cover story on Ireland misrepresented the circumstances surrounding her coming out in the Dec. 17 issue of The Advocate, the national gay-and-lesbian news magazine.
The Advocate has a clear policy against outing except in the rare instance that a gay man or lesbian in a position of significant power promotes homophobic policies or actions while remaining hypocritically closeted.
Ireland in no way meets those criteria, and The Advocate never threatened her into talking about her female companion.
BRYN AUSTIN Managing Editor, The Advocate
Los Angeles


Quotation of the Day
"They've already taken the sex and drinking out of politics. Hell, if they get this thing to where you can't exhibit a little sense of power -- that's what drives this city. If you can't have a private elevator and be able to cash checks, I really don't see any reason to go through this rigamarole." -- JOHN C. WHITE, former Democratic national chairman.  [ 18:1. ]


Devils and Islanders Get Locked Up Again
Overtime is a common word in the vocabularies of the Devils and the Islanders this season.
This afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the two teams played the fourth overtime in their six games this season, and ended up deadlocked at 2-2, which was a lot better for the Devils than it was for the Islanders.
The Islanders needed a victory to get closer to the last playoff spot in the Patrick Division, currently occupied by the Pittsburgh Penguins, who are 8 points ahead of the Islanders.
The tie moved the Devils into third place in the division and put them a point ahead of the idle Penguins with eight games left for both teams.


End Kashmir's Misery
When imperial Britain agreed to partition India and Pakistan, some 562 princely rulers had to decide which country to join.
The Maharajah of Kashmir, a Hindu, couldn't make up his mind.
As he hesitated, his predominantly Muslim subjects rebelled in favor of Pakistan and their cause was taken up by invading Muslim irregulars.
This marked the beginning of a bitter conflict that has bred wars between Pakistan and India, and brought misery to the people of Kashmir.
In a transformed world, both countries would benefit from a solution, preferably under U.N. auspices.
Washington could help by discreetly nudging two proud countries toward settlement.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
On Valentine's Day this year, while many women were opening cards and unwrapping flowers, I lay atop an examination table having an abortion.
I am a 22-year-old student at an Ivy League university.
I am a member of the media-heralded "model minority." My parents are both holders of Ph.D.'s.
I was not raped.
I did choose birth control, which consequently failed.
And now, I join the ranks of women who whisper "it happened to me." I was born and raised in this country to believe that women are empowered by the choices they can make.
Next year, I may choose to walk down the aisle with my fiance.
I may choose to begin law school.
I may choose to buy a car with the money from my savings.
I may even choose to sink my investments into a mortgage on a home.
But on Feb. 14, I made a decision, too, that allows me to continue making these choices.
Does Patricia Ireland speak for today's women?
Oh yes, she does.
NAME WITHHELD
New York, N.Y.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about new services for telephone subscribers referred erroneously to a recent action by the Federal Communications Commission concerning customer blocking of Caller ID, the feature that displays a caller's number.
The F.C.C. has proposed that telephone companies offer blocking at the customer's expense; no final order has been issued, nor is the proposal for free service.


Clinton Starts Setting Sights on Fall and Bush
Gov.
Bill Clinton campaigned across New York and Connecticut yesterday, courting teachers' votes, fighting off Edmund G. Brown Jr. and asserting that President Bush vetoed the Congressional tax and economic growth package as "cover" for a reluctance to raise taxes on the upper class.
Starting his day in New York City, Mr.
Clinton collected the endorsements of local members of Congress and the New York State United Teachers union.
He also used the Bush Administration's decision to relax restrictions on abortion counseling in federally financed clinics as a chance to needle the President on an issue that has divided Mr.
Bush's own party.


An Abortion-Rights Idea That Backfired
Abortion is one of the most common gynecological procedures in the United States, chosen by 1.6 million women each year.
Yet it is less and less a part of mainstream medical practice -- and many abortion-rights advocates now think that may be partly their own fault.
Over the last decade, fewer doctors have been willing to perform abortions, fewer doctors have been trained in abortion techniques and fewer hospitals have included abortions among the services they offer.


Camera
Kodachrome, a film synonymous with superior color quality, appears to have become a victim of its own high standards.
One result is that photographers around the nation are having a harder time finding a local laboratory that can process it.
There are several reasons for this.
But first, a brief explanation of why processing a roll of Kodachrome is such a demanding task.


Choreographing Deaths of the Heart In a Singular Age
Toward the end of his new performance piece "Akin," John Kelly moves to the front of the stage, spreads his arms and begins a song that might be the haunting -- and haunted -- anthem of the age of AIDS.
"You go on ahead," Mr.
Kelly sings in that eerie countertenor of his, so artificial yet so unadorned.
"I'll catch up with you."
The chorus of the song, which is called "To a Friend Dying," speaks of "11 years and counting," referring to the time that has passed since the disease first surfaced and since Mr.
Kelly first lost a friend to AIDS.
"There's no hope in sight./ Close your eyes and say good night./ So many deaths untolled./ We're too young to be so old./ And all of us are innocent." The song is followed by a succession of wordless embraces and kisses exchanged in a tangle of five people.
They are childlike exchanges freighted, these 11 years later, with an angry edge of mockery and the hopefulness that resides in defiance.


'Maiden' Is a Thriller in Spite of Itself
It's been several days now since I caught Glenn Close in "Death and the Maiden," but one adjective keeps edging to the forefront of my mind to describe her remarkable performance: glistening.
I've been telling myself there must be other adjectives more appropriate.
The actress is playing Paulina Salas, a deeply traumatized woman, who, 15 years after she was raped and tortured in a dictatorship not unlike that of the Chilean general Augusto Pinochet, still starts at the noise of an unfamiliar car chewing up the gravel in the driveway.
She is all nerve endings just waiting to scream out.
Compounding the old terror, which never went away, is a new terror that somehow, where and when she least expects it, she will lock eyes with her torturer.


Getting Serious
When Stanford University marked its 100th anniversary last fall, not everyone felt like celebrating.
The school's president, Donald Kennedy, had recently announced his resignation after accusations that Stanford had overcharged the Federal Government as much as $231 million for research overhead costs, using some of the money for maintenance on a yacht used by the university's sailing program and for luxury upgrades to the president's house.
In the midst of all this, a Stanford neurosurgeon was accused of sexual harassment by a female colleague and an instructor in the school's computer science department was suspended for advocating marijuana.
Last week, as part of its attempt to regain a more serious image, the school named a new president, Gerhard Casper, the German-born provost of the University of Chicago.
"I think it will be a difficult job," he said, "but no more difficult than the presidency of any of the other major private research universities in the country."


The Melancholy That Forged A Comic Genius
If there are any human virtues Sir Richard Attenborough thinks especially important, they are, he says, courage and perseverance.
He admires them in others and he possesses them himself.
That explains why he battled for decades to make "Gandhi" and why he filmed the life of the black African martyr Steven Biko.
That also explains why he was recently to be found in a derelict Victorian hotel, shooting a particularly painful episode in the story of the most remarkable performer ever to appear on the screen.
The performer is Charlie Chaplin, and the film that nearly wasn't was "Charlie." Sir Richard, as director and producer, went through his customary struggle to secure money to make it.
Shooting finally began in California in early January, then moved to the comedian's native London.
The finished picture, with Robert Downey Jr. as the adult Chaplin, will be released in December.
It covers Chaplin's life from early childhood through his years of achievement, exile from America and triumphant return to Hollywood in 1972.
Altogether, it should be a story of great highs and terrible lows.


TEACHERS' LEADER BACKS OLD VALUES
Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, sounded a battle cry yesterday for a new, conservative brand of radicalism: the return to tradition in American education.
Speaking in Manhattan to the annual meeting of the United Teachers of New York, Mr.
Shanker all but pronounced moribund the movement for change that has characterized American education for decades.
He called for a new look backward at such discarded notions as a national curriculum, national achievement tests, standardized teacher training and the grouping of students by achievement level.


Vote for the First Candidate Who Says, 'Between Him and Me'
To the Editor:
Stephen L. Carter begins his discussion of the Presidential campaign message of Patrick J. Buchanan, "Nativism and Its Discontents" (Op-Ed, March 8), with a reference to Mr.
Buchanan's "command of the English language." I am not sure about Mr.
Buchanan's written English, as I do not usually read the local newspaper in which his column appears, but it must be that to which Mr.
Carter refers.
He cannot have heard Mr.
Buchanan speak, as he often does, of "the difference between President Bush and I."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Automobile sales, annual rate, millions
6.0
6.0
Wednesday
Existing home sales, millions
3.2
3.35
Durable goods orders, percent change
1.5
1.1
Thursday
Gross domestic product, percent
0.8
0.8
Friday
Personal income, percent change
-0.1
1.0
Personal consumption, percent change
0.2
0.6
Monday: Canadian retail sales *
British trade figures  Tuesday: Two-year note auction *
Canadian treasury bond auctions *
Bank of Japan monthly report  Wednesday: Five-year note auction *
Canadian international securities transaction report  Thursday: Corporate profits *
Japan's retail trade  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc)


Tsongas Departure Changes the Game For State's Moment In the Political Sun
THE state's Democratic Presidential primary campaign changed abruptly last week, leaving supporters of Paul E. Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, adrift and available to be courted all over again by the remaining candidates.
Mr.
Tsongas, a native of Lowell, Mass., had been heavily favored at one time to win the Connecticut primary on Tuesday.
But he dropped out of the race on Thursday, saying his campaign was running out of money.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 205,000
106 Mount Pleasant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; 2-zone heat, full basement; taxes $3,224.
Glen Rock 153,000
106 Ellsworth Terrace  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; large backyard, close to transportation, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,616.
Mount Laurel 220,500
2 Bridle Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; Jacuzzi, skylights, large entrance foyer; taxes $4,318.
North Haledon 325,000
8 Hartwig Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; multilevel deck, pool, fireplace; taxes $5,883.
Waldwick 168,000
57 Stuart Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 46-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen and stove, screened porch; taxes $4,026.
Wanaque 180,000
28 Wilson Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; new kitchen, large rooms, deck; taxes $5,071.
OTHER AREAS Weston, Conn. 512,500  91 Eleven O'Clock Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 51-year-old French country home; stone facade, pond, 3 acres; taxes $5,762.
Armonk, N.Y. 600,000
4 Devoe Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; sun room, eat-in kitchen, family room, playroom, 1 acre; taxes $7,356.
Commack, L.I. 169,000
12 Cobb Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800.


Susan Cuoco Has Wedding
Susan Adrienne Cuoco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel A. Cuoco of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Timothy Owen McMullan, a son of Rose Mary Grennan McMullan of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Robert J. McMullan.
Msgr.
Vincent W. Jeffers performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church.
Mrs.
McMullan, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin in Madison and is the director of human resources at Griffin Bacal Advertising in New York.
Her father is a vice president and the general counsel for Biogen Inc., a Boston biotechnology company.


The Nobel Prize In Misanthropy
PATRICK WHITE
A Life. By David Marr. Illustrated. 727 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y. 725,000
60 Hampshire Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 63-year-old Norman Tudor; fireplace, sun room, family room, eat-in kitchen, pantry; taxes $8,364.
Larchmont, N.Y. 836,000
81 Prospect Avenue
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 95-year-old Victorian; 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, office, rec room, porches; taxes $13,913.
White Plains, N.Y. 475,000
18 Cobblefield Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial;fireplace, eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, den, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $7,800.
Avon, Conn. 236,000
26 Forge Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; ceiling fans, skylights, sunroom, 1 acre; taxes $3,435.
Norwalk, Conn. 125,000
11 Nelson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 82-year-old colonial; handyman special, h/w floors; taxes $2,663.
Ridgefield, Conn. 302,500
28 Boulder Hill Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; new heating system, w/b stove, 1 acre; taxes $4,252.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 147,500
15 Lydia Lane
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; new roof, new garage door, new driveway; taxes $3,400.
Commack, L.I. 172,000
18 Wesleyan Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Head of the Harbor, L.I. 425,000
Rhododendron Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 240-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room, basement, 2.7 acres; taxes $7,400.


Making the Islanders Their Business
The four investors about to take control of the Islanders do not have extensive backgrounds in professional hockey management, but all have learned about the sport in peripheral ways.
If their partial purchase of the troubled franchise is approved, as expected, this week, they will attempt to turn around a sports business that has plunged in less than a decade from one of the most successful in the sport to one of the worst managed in the front office and least effective on the ice.


All the Trimmings for a Sunday Spring Dinner
ALTHOUGH this winter was one of the warmest on record, it is now officially spring.
And with a change in the seasons, people's moods about menus also change.
Spring lamb, herbs, asparagus and light fruit desserts will now whet appetites sated with stews and casseroles.
The following menu is a fancy one, a lineup for a Sunday dinner.
It would actually qualify for Easter Sunday, still about a month away.


Kebab Offers Invitation to Afghan Cuisine
THOUGH Afghan food is unknown to many Americans, shish kebab is a staple in many places, so calling an Afghan restaurant in Hartford Shish Kebab House of Afghanistan is good marketing.
Diners have a choice of several quiet areas, each decorated attractively with Afghan artifacts and clusters of greenery.
Under each glass-top table is a woven mat, and the entire look is simple but immaculate.


The Executive Computer; In a Turnabout, I.B.M. Says, 'We'll Talk to Anybody'
Responding to studies that show a steady decline in customer satisfaction in the personal computer industry, the International Business Machines Corporation last week established a toll-free "800" telephone service and support center to address its customers' questions about PS/2 computers or OS/2 software.
It also announced a 30-day money-back guarantee for all PS/2 computers, an aggressive trade-in policy, the establishment of a nationwide training program, buying and leasing options and other programs.


Wedgwood's Gift
To the Editor: Paula Weideger's illuminating article on the Staffordshire Potteries ("In the Cradle of English China," Travel, Feb. 16) begins with the sentence: "A statue of Josiah Wedgwood stands opposite the railway station in Stoke-on-Trent." It is little known that this 18th-century potter was a vigorous social activist in efforts to abolish slavery.
Wedgwood's handsome medallion (to be pinned on one's coat) is made of basalt and jasper.
It shows a kneeling slave in chains, asking the question, "Am I not a man and a brother?" and was created for the London Society for the Abolition of Slavery.
Wedgwood made 20,000 of them, and in February 1787 sent a package to Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia for distribution to the champions of the anti-slavery cause.


Review/Opera; Russian Visitors Offer 'Pique Dame'
Tchaikovsky's "Pique Dame," which is set in St.
Petersburg and had its premiere there in 1890, is being performed in New York this year by two St.
Petersburg companies.
Perhaps each should automatically be accorded a certain benefit of the doubt in terms of authenticity.
But the ponderous staging presented on Thursday evening at the New York State Theater by the St.
Petersburg National Opera, despite rudimentary sets modeled closely after the actual settings, seemed to represent merely the tiredest of traditions, with every hint of foreboding heavy-handedly underscored.
When the likable Nina Romanova, as Pauline, sang, "Oh, I'm tired of all this gloom," late in the first act, it was hard to disagree.


An All-You-Can-Eat Feast, Chinese Style
IF restaurants were movies, Uncle Dai Oriental would be "Uncle Dai Meets the Ghost of Homer Lee." The Quality Inn in Woodbury, which once housed Homer's International, is now home to Uncle Dai Oriental.
Homer's International, with its extensive buffet and Mongolian barbecue, ranked as an innovator in Homer Lee's Cedarhurst-to-Centereach empire.
Uncle Dai Oriental hails from another dynasty, with restaurants also in Great Neck and Glen Cove.
The new Woodbury site offers the familiar Uncle Dai menu, plus creative holdovers from Homer's.


Ms. Jensen Weds Dr. Richard Chen
Rikke Ingrid Jensen, a daughter of Anne Lise Jensen and Ib Villads Jensen of Roskilde, Denmark, was married last evening in Roslyn, L.I., to Dr.
Richard Dai Yu Chen, a son of Shu Chuang Chen and Yuan Chen of Pleasant Hill, Calif.
The Rev.
Stark G. Jones performed the ceremony at the Roslyn Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Chen, 26 years old, graduated from Copenhagen Business School, where she also received a master's degree in business economics.
Her father is a kiln maintenance technician at the Royal Copenhagen porcelain factory in Copenhagen.


RECORD BRIEFS
Tori Amos: 'Little Earthquakes'
Atlantic 82358; CD and cassette.


Lisa Dodman, Student, Weds
Lisa Keyes Dodman, a daughter of Susan C. and Donald P. Dodman of Orchard Park, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Ready Treanor Jr., a son of Patricia Lou Treanor of Tuckahoe, N.Y., and Michael R. Treanor of Pelham, N.Y.
Msgr.
Kevin T. O'Neill officiated at the Nativity of Our Lord Roman Catholic Church in Orchard Park.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross, as did the bridegroom, and is a student at Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is a partner in the Buffalo law firm of Jaeckle, Fleischmann &amp; Mugel.
Her mother is a bookkeeper at Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in East Aurora, N.Y.
Mr.
Treanor, 25, is a law student at Fordham University.
His mother teaches English at Mount Vernon (N.Y.) High School.
His father is a partner in the New York law firm of Treanor, Harvey, Sullivan, Trowbridge &amp; Mullen.


Two College Choirs Offer Programs Today
AMATEUR instrumental groups can rarely hope to equal the standards of professionals, but it is a different story with voices.
Given fine leadership and extended rehearsals, many college and other avocational choirs rank with the best in the country.
Two examples appearing today are the Concordia Choir and the William and Mary Choir.


MAID FOUND DEAD IN MIDTOWN HOTEL
A 67-year-old maid was found early yesterday morning, her wrists and ankles bound and her throat cut, lying dead face up in a bathtub in a room in the midtown Manhattan hotel where she worked, the police said.
She was fully clothed and did not appear to have been sexually assaulted, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
"She was beaten as well," she said.


How Cezanne Evokes a Bach Fugue
SEEING in the original the art that has grown familiar through reproduction is like encountering a much photographed celebrity in the flesh: one may know every inch of the face yet still be undone by its reality.
Those who visit the Art Museum at Princeton University are in for several such shocks, beginning with Van Gogh's "Tarascon Diligence," which depicts the stagecoach, seemingly propped up by a ladder, that awaits horse and driver on a sunny street in Arles.
The 1888 canvas is in the Henry and Rose Pearlman Collection, and this, on loan to the museum since 1976, is currently enjoying the spotlight.


Prosecution Using Rebuttal In a Last Attack on Noriega
As the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega draws to a close, the Government's rebuttal has become a final battleground, with lawyers for both the prosecution and the defense trying to extract every last bit of advantage before the case goes to the jury.
Judge William M. Hoeveler of Federal District Court said Thursday that he hoped closing arguments in the case would begin late next week.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PASSIONS OF THE MIND Selected Writings.
By A. S. Byatt.
Turtle Bay Books/Random House, $25.


Performing Double Duties Doesn't Ruffle Gartner
The Rangers are a team with two missions, and Mike Gartner personifies both.
On the ice, the Rangers have the best record in the National Hockey League.
They hope to maintain it and finish first in the six-team Patrick Division and first over all in the 22-team league.


Local Firms
To the Editor:
In "Glass Sheathing for Open Cages"  [ March 1, 1992, Letter to the Editor ] , Joseph Kiell expressed concern about the awarding of a contract to an architecture firm not based in New York City.


At Long Wharf, 'An Enemy of the People'
"AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE" is never untimely.
When self-interest overrules conscience and the perpetuity of double dealing is a basic assumption of life, the play's pertinence is, pitifully, a given.
It was in 1882 that Ibsen wrote this prototypical work of righteous indignation, fanatical idealism and single-minded allegiance to truth.
As the playwright most likely to follow in Ibsen's path of moral certitude, Arthur Miller wrote a spruced-up adaptation, with some alterations, in 1950, three years before "The Crucible."


Making the Grass So Green in Spring
NITROGEN is one of the nutritional elements that helps to make spring so green.
It makes the grass grow, it helps seeds sprout, and it causes plants to thrive.
The element occurs in high quantities in plants, since it is part of every living cell.
And here is the most important part: nitrogen is also the element most easily lost, because it leaches easily in heavy rains and in eroding soils.
Addition of fertilizers to home lawns in spring, particularly those high in nitrogen, has become a suburban ritual.
The fertilizer is put on in super quantities, quite often much more than is necessary, and the excess runs off.


Deanne Mayrowetz, Therapist, Wed
Deanne Susan Mayrowetz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Mayrowetz of West Caldwell, N.J., was married last evening to Steven Lloyd Sabin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Sabin of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Bayar performed the ceremony, with Cantor Samuel Glatt, a grandfather of the bridegroom, assisting, at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Sabin, 27 years old, is a physical therapist at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is an internist in Caldwell, N.J.
Her mother, Evelyn Mayrowetz, is a pharmacist at St.
Mary's Hospital in Passaic, N.J.


Noreen Dvorkin Wed
Noreen Dvorkin, the daughter of Fran and Sol Dvorkin of Bayside, Queens, was married last evening to Robert Schneiderman, a son of Elsie and Norman Schneiderman of Little Neck, Queens.
Rabbi Jerome Berkowitz officiated at the Fresh Meadows, Queens, Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Schneiderman is an operations manager for American Dental Examiners, a consulting company in New York.
The bridegroom is a pharmacist with Thrift Drug in Wayne, N.J.


Ms. Fishelman Weds M. H. Urbain
Laura Denise Fishelman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Fishelman of Englishtown, N.J., and Boston, was married yesterday to Michael Herve Urbain, a son of Prof.
Henri Urbain and Jacqueline Morvan, both of Beverly, Mass.
Mayor Michael Wilson of Freehold, N.J., officiated at Van's Freehold Inn.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts, as did the bridegroom.
She is a network technician for the Computer Sciences Corporation in Washington.
Her father is executive vice president of the


Images in Motion, in Style, in Bloom
THURSDAY -- Barbara Walters was the guest of honor at the Waldorf-Astoria at a benefit gala for the American Museum of the Moving Image.
The museum, in Astoria, Queens, preserves and exhibits old movies and television shows.
Ms.
Walters, an anchor of the ABC News program "20/20," was cited for her work in television.
MONDAY -- A preview cocktail party was held at the Fashion Institute of Technology for an exhibition of designer clothes collected by the late Tina Chow.
The show was put together with the cooperation of the Kyoto Costume Institute.
Both institutions will receive big parts of the 500-piece collection.
The exhibition of 54 pieces ranges from an early pleated gown by Fortuny to examples of work by contemporary designers.
It was organized by Richard Martin and Harold Koda, the authors of "Flair: Fashion Collected by Tina Chow," which is being published this month by Rizzoli.


Sunday Outing; On a Covered Bridge, Reverence Is Required (Horse and Buggy Optional)
Two covered bridges, nostalgic reminders of America's horse-and-buggy days, span the fast-flowing waters of the Housatonic River, here and in West Cornwall, Conn.
The bridges, 17 miles apart, are old, quaint and picturesque and still function as integral parts of the highway network in both communities.
They are also major tourist attractions in western Connecticut.


Admiral Compton to the Lifeboat!
To the Editor:
"Adm." Ronald E. Compton of the U.S.S.
Aetna Life and Casualty Company appears to have forgotten that he served as captain and was on the bridge when the good ship Aetna sailed into the treacherous waters of real estate in the late 1980's ("The New Marching Orders at Aetna," March 1).


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on page 25 of the Westchester Weekly today about Andre Previn renders a word incorrectly in the opening sentence.
It should read, "Since settling his family in the county three years ago, Andre Previn has done the neighborly thing by lending his name to local efforts, a common but appreciated gesture of the famous."


Clinton Turns His Energies To Bush Battle
After all the candidate forums, all the Holiday Inns, all the box lunches, all the tarmac news conferences, all the panic and the exhaustion and the adrenaline buzz of watching large groups of people whipsawed by gossip and rumor and personal attacks, the Democrats finally seem close to choosing a nominee.
Sometimes it felt like Lonesome Dove, a cross-country cattle drive with amphetamine timing.
Now, of course, it will begin anew.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Kings Top Flames Corey Millen scored twice to cap a four-goal first period yesterday as the Los Angeles Kings scored three times in a 4:44 span to beat Calgary 5-2 in Inglewood, Calif.
The loss left Calgary four points behind the idle Winnipeg Jets in the race for the fourth and final Smythe Division playoff slot, with seven games remaining for both teams.
The Flames missed the playoffs only twice in their first 19 seasons and have qualified in every season since 1974-75, winning their only Stanley Cup in 1989.
Mike Vernon became the Flames' first goalie with 30 losses since the franchise moved from Atlanta to Calgary in 1980, surrendering three goals on the Kings' first five shots of the game.
He was pulled in favor of Jeff Reese after only 5 minutes 55 seconds of play. (AP) GOLF Couples Soars in Gusts


TOOTH AND NAIL
There's a neat, psychological connection between those built-in beauty accessories, tooth and nail.
Exquisite if cared for, hideous when ignored, they're the stuff of obsession.
Consider tooth: "Your mouth is the center of your presentation to the world," says Dr.
Alan J. Goldstein, a Manhattan specialist in cosmetic dentistry.
"If it's not drop-dead gorgeous, at least it should be something that doesn't detract from the face." And nail: "Of course, nails are an obsession," says Margarete Din, owner of Dinmar Salon in Manhattan and a manicurist to the stars. (Din was rushed to the set of "The Prince of Tides" when Barbra Streisand broke a nail.) "I change the color of my nails every day," she says.
"Once you have nails like this" -- she flutters her fuchsia-tipped fingers -- "you get hooked."


Leslie Schwarz Has Wedding
Leslie Ann Schwarz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredric G. Schwarz of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Gregory Glenn Allison, the son of Mrs.
W.
John Allison Jr. of Dallas and the late Judge Allison.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Allison, 30 years old, is a trader at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
Her father, who is retired, was the treasurer of Salomon Inc., the investment firm, in New York.


World Markets; In Tokyo's Decline, a Glint of Silver
Is there any hope for Tokyo?
The blue-chip Nikkei index of 225 shares crashed below 20,000 last week and approached 19,457.90, exactly half of what the index was worth at its record high at the end of 1989.
The optimists say the market is down so far that it is poised for a rebound.
The Japanese economy is in a slump, but a turnaround should be at hand.
The Japanese Government is expected to take actions soon, including cutting official interest rates, to revive the economy and the stock market.


Newness That Makes No Apology
The lobby of the $72 million Wortham Theater Center in Houston is peculiarly revealing about that city's cultural life.
The main entrance to the three-acre complex, which houses both the Houston Grand Opera and the Houston Ballet, opens almost immediately onto a grand escalator flanked by enormous sculptures of banners and torches.
But on reaching the top, one can only gasp in surprise.
There is no statuary as at La Scala, nor is there the cramped artificiality of the Metropolitan Opera lobby.
The entrances to the 2,176-seat Alice and George Brown Theater and to the 1,066-seat Lillie and Roy Cullen Theater are nowhere to be seen.
The reception area is simply an enormous empty space.
A football field further in (or so it seems), there are a coffee bar and souvenir stand, a winding line of cushioned benches and a small cafe, all dwarfed by the room itself.
Walking through it is like entering a train station.
This is a place, it seems, built for thousands of commuters, all on their way somewhere from someplace else.
Despite the escalator's heraldic sculptures, this entrance does not really serve as an induction into a particular world; it makes no claim on one's attention aside from its sheer size.
It is, curiously, a monument to the transience of its visitors and seeming testimony to the impermanence of the artistic objects contained within.
The lobby is simply a celebration of newness.


Shush!
To the Editor:
As a native Chicagoan and an avid, ardent reader, I take exception to Paul Goldberger's praise of the Harold Washington Library  [ "Chicago Unveils a Proud New Temple of Books," March 1 ] .


Sinan's Mosques
To the Editor: Since Mr.
Bernier's article weighs much more heavily on the architectural, as opposed to the historical-human interest side, I would like readers to get a fuller picture of this singular architect Sinan.


Sinan's Mosques
To the Editor: The article on Sinan's mosques was of special interest to my wife and me, since we had been in Istanbul last December.
Standing high amongst that city's most fascinating attractions are, of course, Sinan's superb mosques.
Unfortunately, both the Shehzade and Rustem Pasha mosques were closed for restoration, although the Shehzade, standing near the Aqueduct of Vanels and the wide Shehzadebashi Caddesi, can be readily admired from without.
As compensation we found a particularly charming Sinan work situated right at water's edge in Uskudar, the intimate Semshi Pasha mosque, and sweeping vistas of the Bosporus, the Golden Horn and the minaret-studded, bedomed skyline of old Istanbul.


Patricia Schoor Wed in Queens
Patricia Ann Schoor, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Schoor of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married last night in Long Island City, Queens, to Daniel Aron Rube, a son of Ned J. Rube of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Diane H. Rube.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Building.
Mrs.
Rube, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University, where she is a law student.
Her father is the associate chairman of the periodontology department at Temple University in Philadelphia.


The Student as Tutor And Also as Neighbor
Four Southern Methodist University students here are taking their education a step further in a new course this semester by living in an urban neighborhood to learn about urban living firsthand.
The students are living in what had been a crack house in a predominantly Hispanic neighborhood, East Garrett Park, which is being renovated by Dallas Habitat for Humanity, a nonprofit housing agency that builds homes with low-income families.
Each family has to devote 400 hours of work to building their own home.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Organization; Brown, Off-the-Cuff Campaigner, Gets Advice the Same Way
Hewing to his decision not to accept contributions larger than $100, Edmund G. Brown Jr. is running a Presidential campaign that is short on traditional features.
There are no polls, studies, white papers, media consultants, buttons or badges.
Instead, Mr.
Brown, who remains the sole challenger to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, now that Paul E. Tsongas has suspended his campaign, does quick-hit research, uses appearances on radio talk shows to get his message out and relies on volunteers gleaned from his "800" number for everything from housing to transportation to suggestions on where to campaign.
For campaign and political advice he relies on a setup that is both improvisational and free.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
UNBEATEN LADY TIGERS
JIM RUCK of Northport was in his glory.
A former basketball player in college, Mr.
Ruck was watching his two teen-agers play in a Long Island basketball championship.
"I've got two kids on the same championship team," he said.
"What more could you ask for?"


Sports of The Times; Hockey's 'Ongoing' Concern
IT'S as if Gordie Howe, Bobby Hull and Andy Bathgate, among hundreds of former National Hockey League players, might score again, long after unlacing their skates for the last time.
It's as if the N.H.L., while grappling near the boards with one opponent, might be blindsided by a much more ferocious foe.


In Mozart, Levine Remains a Romantic
THE 1991 MOZART BIcentenary has occasioned innumerable recordings -- probably too many for his, or our, good.
The conductor James Levine has not been exempt from this largess.
For several years he has been embarked on Mozart projects, both symphonic and operatic, designed to bear fruit for the bicentenary, the most recent results of which are now on the table.
The releases include one opera, "Le Nozze di Figaro," and as points of comparison there are two other new recordings of Mozart operas: another "Figaro," from Daniel Barenboim and the Berlin Philharmonic, and a "Cosi Fan Tutte," with Nikolaus Harnoncourt and the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam.
As a Mozartean, Mr.
Levine seems eager to embrace the composer within the late-18th- to early-20th-century mainstream.
Instead of adjusting his focus under the influence of the early-music specialists, he approaches Mozart almost as part of the Romantic tradition.


Camera
Kodachrome, a film synonymous with superior color quality, appears to have become a victim of its own high standards.
One result is that photographers around the nation are having a harder time finding a local laboratory that can process it.
There are several reasons for this.
But first, a brief explanation of why processing a roll of Kodachrome is such a demanding task.


Giants Stadium Sitting Pretty as '94 Cup Site
Governors have made impassioned phone calls.
Senators have sent wailing telegrams.
Mayors have offered personal sightseeing tours of their sports-conscious cities.
All this, over soccer. In the United States. More than two years from now.


Veda Land: Theme Parl For Ontario
Doug Henning, the magician, and the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, a spiritual adviser, want to turn 1,400 acres near Niagara Falls, Ontario, into Maharishi Veda Land, a theme park combining recreation with spiritual enlightenment.
"Most theme parks are superficial," said Mr.
Henning last week after unveiling the plan for the $1.5 billion resort.
"The idea of combining a theme park with awakening human consciousness has been very well received."


POLICE SIFT LEADS IN EDITOR'S KILLING
More than a week after the slaying of a crusading Hispanic journalist in a Queens restaurant, the police yesterday were sorting through dozens of leads in New York, Puerto Rico and Colombia but said they had no clear sense of who the killer might be.
They said they were ruling out no possibilities in the death of the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, a 49-year-old former editor in chief of the city's largest Spanish-language daily newspaper, El Diario-La Prensa.


Do Teachers Lead The Greediest?
Each year, newspapers run a section on the "neediest" people in the community.
I propose an additional list of the "greediest" people.
Until recently that dubious honor would have gone to the top political people in the Nassau government.
But now they have accepted 5 percent cuts in salary (it should have been at least 10 percent, but let's be thankful for small favors), and the teachers and administrators in our school districts are winning the title of "greediest" hands down.
We have been hit with a severe recession.
Woolworth's, Grumman, Newmark &amp; Lewis, General Motors, Pan-Am, Macy's, etc., have been closing shop or reducing operations and firing people left and right.
Many local stores on Long Island, unable to keep up with the unending tax increases and reduced sales, have gone out of business and lie empty.


How Twins Dealt Themselves a Winning Hand
Tom Kelly was at the dog track the other night minding his own business when, he said, "This lady grabs me and says, 'You're Tom Kelly, aren't you?' "
After Kelly, the Minnesota Twins' manager, acknowledged that she was correct, he related, she said, "How did you get John Smiley from the Pirates?"


Tatars Vote on a Referendum All Agree Is Confusing
At Kazan's Lenin University, in the red-walled museum established to honor the schooldays here of the patriarch of Soviet Communism, the citizens of Tatarstan voted today in a referendum on sovereignty that threatens the unity of the largest part of what remains of Lenin's state, the Russian Federation.
Sitting at a felt-covered table, a Russian woman marked off registered voters and talked about her fears for the future.


Buchanan Gets Some Campaign Advice From His Former Boss


'A Fire in the Mind'
To the Editor:
In a brilliant review Wendy Doniger strips away the masks of a culture hero and exposes a bare skeleton beneath the myth.


Iberia Plans 9 New Routes At Miami Hub
Iberia Airlines, the Spanish carrier, says it is considering delivering service to nine countries in Latin America and the Caribbean from the hub it plans to establish in Miami this spring.
Iberia hopes to inaugurate its expanded service on May 1, but said it was not able to announce a precise date because negotiations with the governments of the countries it will serve had not been completed.
Among destinations being considered are Mexico, Peru, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Panama, the Dominican Republic and Jamaica, the company said.
The planned service is the result of an agreement between the United States and Spain, signed last June, enabling American Airlines and United Airlines to begin new services to Madrid.
In exchange, Iberia, Spain's largest airline, was granted rights to serve Latin America and the Caribbean from a United States hub.


To the End, Kennedy Tried to Pull Back From Vietnam Brink
To the Editor:
Not surprisingly, Walt W. Rostow, a former Vietnam adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, would have us believe that John F. Kennedy would not have withdrawn from Vietnam in 1965, and accuses those who suggest this as "self-serving as well as unscientific" (letter, Feb. 15).


Turning a Celebrity's Story Into a Salable Book
Whose voice do we hear in "Darryl," the as-told-to "jockography" of Darryl Strawberry?
That of the former New York Met or of his writer, Art Rust Jr.?
The book has gained notice as much for Mr.
Strawberry's opinions about his old teammates and personal problems, as for how ornately they are expressed.


Casting a British Glance at the South
With his impeccable British credentials, Jonathan Lynn was an improbable choice to direct "My Cousin Vinny."
After all, the successful, low-budget comedy about a profane, streetwise fledgling New York lawyer with barely a shred of legal experience who finds himself tangling hilariously with Southern justice, is a considerable stretch for a director who has a law degree from Cambridge University and a distinguished career as a theater director and co-author of one of the most successful series on British television.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Gamble Leads Celtics  Kevin Gamble scored 16 of his 25 points in the third period and was joined in double figures by five Boston teammates yesterday as the Celtics beat the Golden State Warriors in Boston, 114-97, for their third consecutive victory.
Kevin McHale had 22 points, Reggie Lewis 15, Robert Parish 12 and John Bagley and Larry Bird 11 each for the Celtics against the Warriors, the National Basketball Association's top-scoring team with an average of 118 points per game.
The Celtics have won 4 of their last 5 games and 10 of their last 11 at home. (AP) Hornets 113, Pistons 101: Larry Johnson scored 22 points as Charlotte set franchise records for victories and home victories by beating Detroit for only the second time in 15 games.
The Hornets, 27-39 in their fourth season, surpassed their records set last year of 26 overall victories and 17 home triumphs.
They have won 10 of their last 13 games to move into the race for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff spot. (AP) N.H.L.
Capitals Beat Oilers  Dino Ciccarelli scored twice during a four-goal second period as the Washington Capitals defeated the Edmonton Oilers, 6-2, yesterday at Landover, Md.
Al Iafrate scored on a breakaway to snap a 1-1 tie early in the second period and also had an assist for the Capitals, while goaltender Jim Hrivnak made 18 saves. (AP) GOLF  Hill Wins Playoff  Mike Hill sank a 5-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole yesterday in Indian Wells, Calif., to beat Tommy Aaron and Jim Colbert in the Arco Vintage Senior golf tournament.
Hill, who was three shots off Aaron's lead when the day began, shot a two-under-par 70 to complete 54 holes at 203, 13 under par for the 6,830-yard Mountain Course at the Vintage Club. (AP) Ammaccapane Takes Ping Title: Danielle Ammaccapane, employing the home-course advantage in Phoenix, shot a four-under-par 67 to win her second consecutive L.P.G.A.
Standard Register Ping title by two strokes.
Ammaccapane, 26 years old, birdied the first three holes to pull away from Spain's Marta Figueras-Dotti, who was only one stroke back when play began Sunday on the Moon Valley Country Club course.
Ammaccapane, a Phoenix resident whose high school team played its home matches at Moon Valley, completed 72 holes in 13-under 279. (AP) AUTO RACING A Victory in 'Paradise'  Emerson Fittipaldi overtook his Penske teammate, Rick Mears, with less than three laps to go yesterday to win the rain-plagued Gold Coast Indy Grand Prix in Surfers Paradise, Australia, the opening event of the Indy-car racing season.
It was the 14th victory for Fittipaldi, a two-time Formula One champion.
The Brazilian averaged 77.561 miles an hour for 65 laps of the 2.855-mile street circuit.
Mears, like Fittipaldi driving a Penske Chevy, was 2.81 seconds behind at the finish, with Bobby Rahal third in the debut of the Rahal-Hogan Chevy. (AP) Mansell Wins Mexican Grand Prix: Nigel Mansell of Britain, driving a Williams, won the Mexican Grand Prix Formula One auto race in Mexico City.
Riccardo Patrese of Italy finished second in the second Williams, while Germany's Michael Schumacher was third in a Benetton car. (Reuters) EQUESTRIAN  Dover Makes U.S.
Team  Robert Dover of Wellington, Fla., won the final phase of the United States Equestrian Team dressage Olympic selection trials yesterday in Orlando, Fla.
After his Grand Prix Special victory on Lectron, Dover was named to the six-rider squad the United States will send to Europe in preparation for this summer's Barcelona Olympic Games.
Also named to the squad based on the selection trials at Clarcona Horsemen's Park were Michael Poulin of Fairfield, Me., on Graf George; Jane Savoie of Randolph Center, Vt., on Zapatero; Hilda Gurney of Moorpark, Calif., on Willy the Great, and Charlotte Bredahl of Solvang, Calif., on Monsieur.
Minikus Takes Top Prize: In Tampa, Fla., Todd Minikus of Lake Forest, Ill., and his mount, Thrilling, took the top prize in the $50,000 Grand Prix of Florida for horse show jumpers over a rain-soaked course with a clear jumpoff round in 35.11 seconds.
COLLEGE HOCKEY  Plattsburgh Is the Story  Plattsburgh State won the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III championship at its home rink Saturday night in upstate New York, defeating Wisconsin-Stevens Point, 7-3.
The Cardinals (32-2-2), who lost to the Pointers (25-7-4) in the 1990 finals, got first-period goals by Larry Zinger, Chris Fess and Jim Duran in a 2-minute-49-second span to go ahead by 3-0 in the first 12:23 and keep Stevens Point from playing its hard-hitting game. (AP) CRICKET  England Is in the Final  England advanced to the World Cup final in controversial circumstances as rain spoiled South Africa's chances yesterday.
In a chaotic finish, South Africa's run target was amended from 22 off 13 balls, to 22 off 1 ball.
England advanced to Wednesday's final against Pakistan at the 108,000-seat Melbourne Cricket Ground in Australia.
South Africa was playing in its first World Cup after nearly 22 years in sporting isolation because of the country's apartheid policy of racial separation.
Pakistan advanced to the final by defeating New Zealand on Saturday. (AP)


Stanford Doctor to Get Training in Sensitivity
A Stanford University surgeon accused of harassing a female colleague has been demoted and has agreed to undergo sensitivity training, the dean of the university's medical school said Friday.
The surgeon, Dr.
Gerald Silverberg, who was acting chairman of the neurosurgery department, demonstrated a "troubling insensitivity" in his working relations with female students and physicians, said the dean, Dr.
David Korn.


Berlin Journal; The New German Jews: Living in a Haunted Land
The young computer programmer stroked his cheek and talked in fractured German of meat shortages, soaring prices and the continued oppressive presence of Russian soldiers and bureaucrats to explain why he and his wife left their home in Latvia to move to Germany, the land that half a century ago tried to wipe out the Jews, his people.
Now they have sought refuge in Germany and have been invited to settle here -- and, in six to seven years, obtain German citizenship.


Ms. Brown Wed At Golden Gate
Catherine Elaine Brown, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
Melvin Brown of San Mateo, Calif., was married yesterday to Lawrence Arch Kramer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Kramer of Clifton, N.J.
Rabbi Herbert Morris performed the ceremony at the Conservatory of Flowers in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco.
Ms.
Brown, 30 years old, is a litigation associate at Klein, Chapman in Clifton.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from the Hastings College of Law of the University of California.
Her father, a psychoanalyst, is the medical director of the Pain Control Clinic in San Mateo, where her mother, Ann C. Brown, is a nurse.


Albany Talks Still Clogged Over Budget
Although state leaders worked feverishly through the weekend, the prospects for a timely budget remained highly uncertain today because of a continuing impasse over how to wring more than $1 billion in savings from New York's Medicaid and welfare programs.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders met here this afternoon for the eighth consecutive day, with only nine days separating them from the start of the fiscal year on April 1.
But they again failed to strike an accord on the complex and politically charged issues of Medicaid and welfare, which they have been debating since November.


U.C.L.A. Pounds Louisville Nonstop
There are reasons why U.C.L.A. won 25 games during the regular season, won the Pacific-10 title and entered the West Region as the top-seeded team.
When the Bruins are good, they are awfully good.


Alfred J. Bohlinger, 89, Led Fight For New York Car Insurance Law
Alfred J. Bohlinger, a former New York State Insurance Superintendent who helped win compulsory automobile insurance and fought against fraud in union welfare funds, died on Thursday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 89 years old and lived in Palm Beach.
He died of multiple ailments, his family said.


EAST 69th STREET JOURNAL; Down 800 Feet, in Case of Drought A Co-op Prepares by Digging Up Its Own Reserve of Water
NEVER mind whether there is gold in the hills of California or coal in Kentucky or oil in Texas.
Under East 69th Street there is water, which is exactly what Dr.
Robert Kurtz and Jerrold Gertz were hoping to strike when they hired a 30-ton rig and started drilling.
Right there, below their apartment-house driveway, they discovered a gusher, and not because they hit a city water main: They had to go down 800 feet, below the underground parking garage and the mystifying ganglia of the city's infrastructure, at a cost of $15 a foot before the payoff.
"Fifty gallons a minute," Dr.
Kurtz said.
"We only need on the order of 15 to 20."


The Winter That Just Won't Go Away
With winter supposedly a thing of the past, the weather outside yesterday was frightful and the forecast sounded like a leftover refrain: Let it snow, let it snow, let it snow.
After an almost snowless winter, the New York region got its second snowstorm in four days.
Spring arrived on Friday, hours after Central Park was carpeted with 4.6 inches of white.
At 10 P.M. yesterday, the National Weather Service reported that 3 to 5 inches of snow had fallen throughout the region.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices rose in Tokyo this morning.
At the midday recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 164.84 points, or more than eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 20,349.93.
The Japanese markets were closed on Friday in observance of Vernal Equinox Day.
On Thursday, the index gained 420.78 points.


City-Sized Trouble Sours Dairy-Town Life
Years back, tiny Sussex was the bustling commercial hub of the dairy industry in surrounding Wantage Township.
But the farms are fading and Sussex's good fortunes are ebbing.
Now, deep in the countryside of northwestern New Jersey, far from any urban center, it is wrestling with its own version of big-city woes.
The state has ordered the town's aging sewer plant replaced at a potential cost of $10 million.
Sussex has to build a $2 million water filtration plant.
And it faces a $1 million bill to rebuild a rickety dam so that Clove Lake, now a marshy shadow of its old self, can be refilled and residents can fish, swim and boat in it again.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; No More Summer Vacation for Networks
Like millions of other hard-pressed Americans, most television programmers have come to the conclusion that they can't afford to take a summer vacation anymore.
And this summer, more new programs will be on television than ever before -- a radical change from the days when summer television was an unbroken line of reruns.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Brown, in New York, Assails Clinton With a New Ferocity
Breathing fire and brimstone as he opened his New York City campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Edmund G. Brown Jr. shouted from the pulpit of a Harlem church yesterday his portrayal of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas as a hypocrite, as a man who curried black support but who had done nothing for blacks and who had even played golf at a whites-only country club.
Mocking suggestions by Democratic Party officials that he run a gentler campaign so as not to weaken Mr.
Clinton, the party's presumed standard-bearer in November, Mr.
Brown let loose with both barrels, raising the prospect that New York's would be perhaps the meanest primary campaign yet.
Golf Club Incident Cited
The former Governor of California hit the racial issue the hardest yesterday, hoping to wrest from Mr.
Clinton a consituency that Mr.
Brown desperately needs and believes is rightly his.
But throughout the day Mr.
Brown was unrelenting in his attacks on a broader front, portraying the Democratic front-runner as unelectable, as an abuser of the public trust, and as fiscally and perhaps morally irresponsible.


Some Americans Aid Their Russian Colleagues
To the Editor:
Newspaper accounts of American (and other Western) attempts to distribute food in Russia the last few months have implied it is a dismal failure.
Your correspondents describe chaos on the receiving end: pilfering, arbitrary customs regulations, red tape or black markets presenting insurmountable obstacles to orderly distribution.


John Ireland, 78, Longtime Actor With Role in 'All the King's Men'
John Ireland, a stage, film and television actor nominated for an Oscar for his role as the reporter in "All the King's Men" in 1949, died on Saturday at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 78 years old and lived in Santa Barbara. He died of leukemia, his family said.


Era of the Tiny PC Is Nearly at Hand
Two years ago, Morris E. Jones Jr. began designing a computer chip that takes all the chips in an original I.B.M. compatible machine and squeezes them onto one superchip.
Now Mr.
Jones's chip and others like it are making possible a new generation of more portable machines that will fit in a pocket and deliver the power of a desktop computer, all for as little as a few hundred dollars.


We Need Statistics for Ballplayer Sales Appeal; Steinbrenner's Status
To the Editor:
In "Baseball's Bottom-Line Logic" (Op-Ed, March 6), Marvin Miller, former executive director of the Major League Players Association, mischaracterizes the basis for the disciplinary status of George Steinbrenner, holder of a 55 percent interest in the New York Yankees.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  STRUCTURAL IMPEDIMENTS IN SUMO
The monolithic sumo wrestler Konishiki may seem as Japanese as Mount Fuji, but he is still an outsider when it comes to choosing a grand champion of the tradition-bound sport.
A1  PLUTONIUM DIPLOMACY BLOCKED
America's stocks of plutonium 238 are dwindling, but the Government is blocking a plan to buy the isotope from Russia, a plan with implications beyond the practical.
A1  SOCIALISTS STUMBLE IN FRANCE
Based on partial results and projections, France's Socialist Party has turned in its worst performance at the polls in 23 years.
And as voters turned away from the traditional leading parties, some embraced the extremes.
A1  KOHL-BUSH TRADE TALKS STALL
Trade talks between President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany ended with no suggestion of progress on a dispute over farm goods that is blocking an international pact to lower trade barriers.
A3  WHAT IS UKRAINIAN?
Fresh paint can't quite cover the patina of the old Soviet order in Ukraine, in spite of new stamps and currency and other trappings of nationhood.
A6  TATAR VOTE A DEFEAT FOR YELTSIN
A vote for independence in the Tatar region was a vote against President Yeltsin's Russian federation.
A6  ISRAEL ARMS SALES EXAMINED
U.S.
Army inspectors began investigating allegations that Israel sold Patriot missile technology to China without American approval.
A7  A VICTORY FOR ALBANIA OPPOSITION
The opposition Democratic Party declared a landslide victory over the former Communists in Albania.
A3  ELECTIONS ON HORIZON IN IRAN
President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran began a campaign to wrest Parliament from the control of hard-line fundamentalists.
A8  STUMPING FOR LABOR IN WALES
The industrial area of Wales belongs to the Labor Party and 10 Downing Street may, too, if enough voters follow the lead of some people on the home turf of the party leader, Neil Kinnock.
A8  JUNTA BACKERS WIN IN THAILAND
Parties aligned with Thailand's junta won more than half the parliamentary seats in elections.
A9  GERMANY AS A REFUGE
Berlin Journal: Jews, some the descendants of those who fled Germany to escape the Nazis, are seeking refuge there today.
A4  National A10-15, A18, B7  GLOOMY DEFICIT FORECASTS
A year after White House economists predicted that the Federal budget would have a surplus by the mid-1990's, they are now predicting a deficit of nearly $200 billion in 1996.
And Congressional forecasters take an even dimmer view.
A1  DELAY IN HOUSE BANK INQUIRY
The head of the ethics committee investigating overdrafts at the House bank said so many members had complained of errors in the bank's records that the panel could not issue its report on the 24 worst abusers this week.
A13  BROWN'S SERMON OF BRIMSTONE
From the pulpit of a Harlem church, former Governor Brown denounced Governor Clinton as a hypocrite in his treatment of blacks, raising the prospect that the primary campaign in New York could be the meanest yet.
A1  WOMEN WIDEN THE DOOR TO POWER
The victories of women in the Illinois primary and strong turnouts in other contests raised hope among women active in politics that a long-anticipated electoral breakthrough might be near.
A14
Clinton and the country club with 500 members, all white.  A15
Jackson led Clinton and Brown on a march through the snow.  A14
The voters are nervous in Connecticut's suburbia.  A14  UNITED WAY AT FINANCIAL CRISIS
The acting head of the United Way apologized for past management extravagance and warned that if local affiliates continued to withhold dues the national charity might have to be dismantled.
A10  WHITE HOUSE ASSAILS RED TAPE
The Bush Administration is aggressively trying to lighten the Government's regulatory burden, an area where it has considerable ability to act on its own.
A13  . . .
FEDERAL JUDGES DO, TOO
In case after case, judges are throwing out environmental and safety regulations or limiting the effect of Federal laws.
B7  NEW RULES FOR NEW AFRICA HAND
Early in his foreign service career, Herman Cohen used to match wits with his Soviet counterparts.
Now he is Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, and the rules have changed.
A12  REMEMBERING 4 'TEXAS ANGELS'
Three and a half months after four teen-age girls were murdered in a yogurt shop in Austin, Tex., the city worries about the growing dangers to its young.
A10  TRUSTING THE WORDS OF CHILDREN
The trial of an Edenton, N.C., day-care center operator accused of sexually abusing children at the center is moving to a close after eight months of testimony, including that of a dozen 5- and 6-year-olds.
A18  Minnesota's plan to extend health insurance to the uninsured.
A10  Poor weather threatened to delay a space shuttle launching.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 PLANE CRASH AT LA GUARDIA
A Cleveland-bound US Air jet crashed as it tried to take off in a snowstorm from La Guardia Airport, killing at least 19 people after tumbling off the runway and into a the bay near Rikers Island.
A1  SURVIVING ON THE MARGIN
A warren of illegal cubicles in a Chinatown building told the story of tens of thousands of poor immigrants, who somehow find a way to survive, and even some money to send to families back home.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Sotheby's plans to auction a painting with a questionable past.
C13  Talk with "My Cousin Vinny" director.
C13  Music: Music Notes C13  Marthe Keller and Blanche d'Harcourt.
C13  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Position switches are not always popular.
C1  Steinbrenner is back, sort of.C5  Basketball: Knicks' defense toughens up.
C2  UMass upends Syracuse in overtime.
C1  U.T.E.P. upsets Kansas.
C1  Obituaries B10  Georges Delerue, composer for films  Martin Robinson, leader of protests for gay rights  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Losing seats in Congress.
Leverage on China.
Karl Meyer: Bookman.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Target Al Atheer.
A17  William Safire: Canada's comeback kid.
A17  Graham E. Fuller: Afghanistan's jagged mosaic.
A17  Jeremy Rifkin: Big, bad beef.
A17  Elizabeth McCaughey: Judgeships should be color-blind.  pageA17


Dance in Review
Kate Thomas Dance Company
Pace Downtown Theater
On Saturday night, the Kate Thomas Dance Company presented a program that was expertly produced and danced.
But it was also a strangely unevocative evening, given Ms.
Thomas's themes of a longtime friendship between two young girls that was later abandoned and of an Italian matriarch and her worlds.


Dance in Review
Debra Wanner
Bessie Schonberg Theater
One could never predict what Debra Wanner would think up next in "Partnerships," the quirky program she presented on Thursday night.


Market Place; Trouble for Broker And Penny Stocks
ONE of the hazards of buying stocks from penny stockbrokers who operate over the telephone is the possibility that the Securities and Exchange Commission will eventually conclude that the brokers are operating an illegal "boiler room" operation and take disciplinary action against them.
When that happens, stocks that the broker is promoting can abruptly plunge.
That lesson was driven home again on Friday, when the S.E.C. went to court to seek an injunction against Stratton Oakmont Inc., a Lake Success, L.I., brokerage firm.
In documents filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the commission charged that Stratton had defrauded customers by manipulating stock prices and misrepresenting the merits and risks of the penny stocks it promoted, and that it had exaggerated the firm's professional experience in dealings with the public.


Hidden Lives: New York's Poorest Immigrants -- A special report; Crammed in Tiny, Illegal Rooms, Tenants of the Margins of Survival
Up three flights of broken stairs in a garment factory building on the western edge of Chinatown was the windowless 8-by-10-foot cell that Abdulaye Kamara, an immigrant from Senegal, was happy to call home.
His neighbors were mostly people like himself, resourceful immigrants from China, Vietnam, Mexico and a few other countries, living quietly in a warren of 16 cubicles constructed illegally, with no apparent regard for building codes.


Apple Printer For Windows
In a foray into enemy territory, Apple Computer Inc. will introduce on Monday a laser printer and a scanner tailored for computers using the Microsoft Corporation's Windows operating system for I.B.M.-compatible equipment.
The products represent efforts by Apple to increase its revenues by spreading its technology beyond users of its Macintosh computers.
Apple has recently begun making some software available for computers other than the Macintosh.


Big Molestation Trial Nears Its Close
Closing arguments are set to begin on Monday in the eight-month-old trial of an Edenton day-care center operator accused of sexually abusing children at the center.
As with other cases of this kind, the outcome will probably depend on how the jurors view the testimony of a dozen 5- and 6-year-old children who, with gentle coaxing, gave prosecutors one version of events two years earlier and another version to defense lawyers seeking to highlight the suggestibility of the children.


World Economies


When the Light Is Green, The Mets Get Up and Go
Slowly, but surely, the change is taking place.
The Mets, using the signature plays of a Jeff Torborg team, are shedding an old image.
Today, in a five-run inning against the Atlanta Braves, the Mets showed off a bunt-and-run, a double steal, a hit-and-run.
They took bases routinely against a shaky Braves defense and forced Atlanta into throwing errors by lighting a green light at third, in the form of an arm-waving Mike Cubbage, the third-base coach.


Used-Car Auction Houses Accused of Violations
The New York City Commissioner of Consumer Affairs charged eight used-car auction houses yesterday with violating numerous city, state and Federal laws, including barring prospective customers from inspecting cars, selling cars that were unsafe and failing to make necessary repairs on cars before they were bought.
The Commissioner, Mark Green, charged the auction houses with 8,969 violations and accused the houses, which are in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx, of acting as "illegal fronts" for used-car dealers.


Pro Basketball; Despite Coleman's Efforts, Heat Too Intense for Nets
Derrick Coleman drew his fifth foul against the Miami Heat tonight with 4 minutes 6 seconds left in the third quarter and the Heat ahead, 68-65, at Miami Arena.
The Nets' power forward waved off attempts to substitute for him.
What happened after that was something of a highlight film for Coleman, except for the ending.
Over the next 9:35, Coleman clicked for 16 points and helped give the Nets a 98-93 lead with 3:04 left.


F.D.A. to Investigate Safety Of 5 More Medical Devices
A Food and Drug Administration official has told makers of medical equipment that the agency will follow up its recent hearings on silicone-gel-filled breast implants by beginning similar investigations this year of five other devices.
The devices that will next be scrutinized are artificial testicles, penis implants, breast implants filled with saline solutions, centrifugal pumps used in heart-bypass operations and electrical stimulators used to treat alcoholism, depression and anxiety, said James S. Benson, director of the agency's Office of Devices and Radiological Health.


Maine, St. Lawrence Get Top Seedings in Hockey
Maine and St.
Lawrence, the two champions of Hockey East and the ECAC League, are seeded first and second in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament that begins on Thursday at Providence and Detroit.
In all, 12 teams will be competing in the tournament.


Steinbrenner Back, but Not Really
It had been agonizingly long since Yankee owner George Steinbrenner attended a major league baseball game.
Almost 20 months between pitches.
Banished from baseball by Commissioner Fay Vincent in 1990, Steinbrenner could not witness a game unless he purchased a ticket.
So he stayed away.
Until today.
Steinbrenner said he paid $7 for a box seat ticket at Jack Russell Stadium and then he sat two rows behind the Yankee on-deck circle and watched his team in person for the first time since July 1990.
He gleefully accepted a free beer from a vendor, said he had no intention of selling the Yankees and would prefer keeping them in the Bronx.
Steinbrenner added that he had no idea if he would be reinstated to baseball and, when asked what the club needed this year, quickly responded, "Me."


Tatar Area Vote Backs Autonomy Push
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia suffered an important defeat this weekend, as voters in the ethnically mixed Tatar region voted in favor of a referendum question that threatens the unity of the Russian federation.
Mr.
Yeltsin, in two appeals to voters, the second over nationwide television on the eve of the election Saturday, first urged the abandonment of the referendum, and then a no vote.
He warned of ethnic conflict and of a confrontation with Russia.


House Panel Expects Delay In Its Report on Overdrafts
The head of the ethics committee investigating overdrafts at the House bank says so many members are complaining of errors in the bank's records that there is "no way" the panel can issue its report this week naming 24 members who abused their banking privileges.
On March 12, the House approved a resolution authorizing the release of the names after 10 days.
Ten days after that, the panel was to release the names of 331 other current or former House members who overdrew their accounts at any time from July 1988 to October 1991.


Players Involved in a Difficult Game
Since no charges have been filed against the three Mets players named in a rape complaint here, there remains the possibility that none will ever be, that no jury will ever have to vote guilty or not guilty.
But professional sports and the life styles of their rich and famous superstars will be on trial more than ever before.
There is a netherworld evolving around professional athletics, and its existence is increasingly undeniable.
And for the public-image-minded spin doctors of sports, that world is becoming impossible to keep from public view, if today's headlines are any indication.


Washington at Work; His Vineyard in Shade, Africa Hand Stays Cool
When Herman J. Cohen was a young Foreign Service officer in some of Africa's most unpalatable posts, one of the enjoyments of the diplomatic game was matching wits with his Soviet counterparts.
The newly sovereign states of Africa were a sprawling playing field for the boisterous and intense ideological rivalry of the 1950's.
Mr.
Cohen worked to win the loyalties of up-and-coming local leaders with such blandishments as trips to America; the Soviet Union countered with trips to Moscow.


Foreign Affairs; Target Al Atheer
Saddam Hussein is outwitting and outwaiting President Bush and the U.N.
Soon, there will be little backing for using force against Iraqi military factories.
And force is likely to be the only way to insure the destruction of these facilities as mandated by U.N. resolutions.
Saddam stalls and doles out concessions when he has to.
Meanwhile, election days approach in America and Britain, where voters may dump Mr.
Bush and Prime Minister John Major, the leaders most likely to take military action against him.
Meanwhile, opposition to force grows in American military and political circles and in allied countries.


Times Sq. Deal Shows Where the Bargains Are  To the Editor:   The acquisition by Bertelsmann A.G., the international news media group, of a Times Square building at Broadway and 45th Street (news article, March 4) is a sign of the future strength of New York City and not, as you state, an "indication of the weakness of the city's real estate market."


Correction
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's investigation of the market for seven-year Treasury notes omitted a word and thus misstated the bank's position on the inquiry.
While confirming that the bank had asked 38 dealers for information on their holdings of the notes, a bank spokesman, Peter Bakstansky, said Friday, "We are not suggesting there is a squeeze."


Comex Votes For a Leader Amid Slump
In a bull market, few members of an exchange worry about who sits in the chairman's seat.
But when members of the Commodity Exchange elect a new chairman on Tuesday, amid a sagging market, they will look to the new leadership to turn things around.
The candidates are Donna Redel, the 39-year-old executive vice president of the Redel Trading Company, and Sidney Rothberg, 67, an independent floor trader.


Golden Slumbers; 'Feuding' Dancers
Generous contributors to America's Olympic teams can mingle with gold medalists at a shipboard slumber party on April 14.
The site is the new Majesty of the Seas, where athletes like BOB BEAMON, JEFF BLATNICK, MIKE ERUZIONE and DONNA WEINBRECHT will be on hand for the Olympia awards.
These will be given to American Olympians who have made significant contributions to the Olympic movement.
The entire package, from 6 P.M. cocktail reception to breakfast the next morning and all the music, mingling, entertainment and five-course dinner in between, will cost $500 ($350 if you want to skip the slumber part).
Reservations may be made by calling (212) 551-3003. . . .
The Knicks' City Dancers are donating to charity any winnings from their "Family Feud" television appearance against the Laker Girls.
The show was taped over the weekend and will be broadcast during the week of April 20.
The beneficiary will be the Boys Brotherhood Republic, a Manhattan youth center.


Bush-Kohl Talks Stalled on Farm Trade
A weekend of talks between President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, leaders of the two biggest exporting nations, ended today with no suggestion of progress on a dispute over farm goods that is blocking a global agreement to lower trade barriers.
At a news conference at the White House, the two leaders expressed optimism that the proposed trade accord among 108 nations can be completed in mid-April, as negotiators have pledged.


2d Anniversary of Happy Land Fire Is Remembered


Mourning-O'Neal Dream Duel Goes Down in Defeat
From the moment competition began on Thursday until it ended Saturday night, the Boise bracket lived up to its potential of being one of the more colorful subregionals in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament.
The presence of Georgetown, Indiana and L.S.U. brought together three of the nation's most successful programs and three of its most complex personalities: John Thompson of Georgetown, Bob Knight of Indiana and Dale Brown of L.S.U.


Will District Mappers Ever Draw the Line?
TO save Representative Olin Teague's Congressional seat, map makers once configured a skinny district that snaked hundreds of miles across Texas, from Fort Worth to the Gulf of Mexico.
"If you drove through that district with both car doors open," a fellow legislator suggested, "you'd kill everybody in it."
The same may be said about a narrowly defined district proposed for New York City, but with one difference: you might have to drive through it in a boat.
The proposed district again tests the lengths to which the reapportionment process will go to protect an incumbent or to enhance the voting power of a minority group.


Trenton Moves to Reclaim Old Factories Left for Dead
They can be seen on the outskirts of any city from Baltimore to Boston, the acres of jumbled brick and cinder-block factory buildings, industrial ghost towns as much as any abandoned Rocky Mountain mining camp, their windows broken and dark, smokestacks cold, loading yards choked with weeds.
Some of them, favored by location or architectural detail, have been converted into glossy upscale shopping arcades, like Oil City, the once dingy refinery on the Onandaga waterfront in Syracuse.
Others, like the former American Bank Note Company in the South Bronx, have been recycled into industrial incubators for small businesses.


E. G. Levine Weds Wendy Solowey
Dr.
Wendy Ellen Solowey, a resident in psychiatry at New York Hospital, and Dr.
Edwin Gregg Levine, a fellow at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, were married yesterday in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner officiated at Temple Israel.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.D. degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Carl Solowey and Dr.
Madelon Solowey of Kings Point, L.I.
Her father is a dermatologist in Rego Park, Queens.
Her mother is the director of the Center for Gifted Youth at Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Amcast Industrial Corp., 1.7 million shares. Dillon, Read &amp; Co.


Review/Music; Words of the Romantics, Accompanied by Piano
So charged were the emotions of many Romantic writers that poetic statement was barely repressible within one medium.
Words leaped out of their natural frame.
One destination was musical sound, to which descriptive stories were routinely attached.
Another was, again, music, but now as a form of partnership.
From it came the wedding of speech and music once called melodrama.
Marthe Keller and Blanche d'Harcourt, a Swiss actor and a French pianist, brought the German melodrama out of retirement and into Weill Recital Hall on Friday night.
Collaborations between Eichendorff and Nietzsche (the philosopher also composed), Goethe and Wagner, Hebbel and Schumann, Eichendorff and Kienzl, Goethe and Schneider, Uhland and Richard Strauss, Ruckert and Nietzsche, Pratobevera and Schubert were interspersed with piano pieces by Liszt, Chopin, Schumann and Schubert.


College Basketball; A Star Is Born In Overtime
Harper Williams has done many things to help the basketball resurgence at the University of Massachusetts, but making pressure 3-point shots was not among them.
Not until late this afternoon, in the ear-splitting din of The Centrum, when the finest season in UMass history reached the moment of its greatest urgency.
With his Minutemen holding a 1-point lead over Syracuse in a second-round game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament, three ticks from a potentially decisive 45-second violation in the final minute of overtime, the junior demanded the ball and launched the second successful 3-pointer of his career, a 21-foot shot that became the biggest of the day and most unforgettable of his life.


Will Recovery Stumble Over Long-Term Rates?
Now that everyone agrees that the economy has made some recent gains, economists are arguing over whether long-term interest rates -- which determine how much it costs to build a factory or finance a three-bedroom ranch house -- will head higher or lower.
Take the spirited exchange recently at the World Economy Lab, a new forum in Cambridge, Mass., where executives from Wall Street, banking and industry can mingle with some of the brightest lights of the economics department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


We Need Statistics for Ballplayer Sales Appeal
To the Editor:
Your assessment of the best buys in baseball, or which players produced the most for the least pay (Sports pages, March 2) offers interesting information about salaries and performance of ballplayers.


Quickly, the Effects Are Felt at Kennedy
When USAir flight 405 skidded into the water at La Guardia Airport last night, the effects were quickly felt seven miles to the southeast, at Kennedy International Airport.
With hundreds of rescue workers fanned out across La Guardia's runways, some arriving flights were immediately diverted to Kennedy.


Review/Television; A Simon Play Fits the Small Screen
Before Gary David Goldberg's "Brooklyn Bridge" on television, there was Neil Simon on Broadway.
Growing up as a New Yorker in a tightly knit Jewish family is at the very heart of Mr.
Simon's autobiographical trilogy, "Brighton Beach Memoirs" and "Biloxi Blues," both of which became movies, and "Broadway Bound," now a television production that can be seen tonight at 9 on ABC.
Cast to near perfection, it's a show very much worth catching.
Serving as the narrator, Eugene Jerome (Corey Parker) observes at the outset that "if you want to find out who you are, you have to find out who you were." Going back to 1948 and the modest lower-middle-class Jerome family home in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, the play focuses on only a handful of characters:


White House Sees a Mission to Cut Business Rules
Saying that the tax-cut measures passed by Congress will not revive economic growth, the Bush Administration has aggressively turned to measures that would lighten the Government's regulatory burden, an area where it has considerable ability to act on its own.
It is not clear whether deregulation, an idea held in some disrepute as a result of the 1980's disaster in the savings and loan industry, has broad political appeal.
But the Administration seems to have decided that at minimum it can be used to portray President Bush as a man with a domestic, perhaps even an ideological, program.


Sharpshooting Cowboys Are Next for Michigan
Michigan's youthful starters might be freshmen in the classroom, but they're way ahead of their class on the basketball court.
They made that case clear in a 102-90 victory over East Tennessee State University today in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Southeast Regional.
The Wolverines (22-8) advanced to play Oklahoma State (28-7) next week in the round of 16 at Lexington, Ky.
The Cowboys, shooting an N.C.A.A. tournament-record 80 percent from the field, advanced by whipping Tulane, 87-71.


Jackson Leads Candidates in Protest Rally
In a powerful mix of the emotion of religion and the politics of rage, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. joined hands today to march through the snow, preach in memory of slain children and assail President Bush for abandoning "the victims of the madness."
Mr.
Jackson, pointedly reminding everyone that he had "chosen this year not to run for President," stole the show, while the two Democratic Presidential candidates were left to smile bravely as the crowd screamed, "Run, Jesse, run."


Sotheby's and Museum in Dispute Over a Painting With a Murky Past
A painting believed by some to have been stolen from a German museum by a Soviet soldier during World War II is to be auctioned by Sotheby's in London on April 1 despite its questionable provenance.
The forthcoming sale has stirred considerable outrage among art dealers, art historians and auction-house experts.
Many of them believe that the 17th-century painting, "The Holy Family With Saints John and Elizabeth and Angels," by the Dutch Mannerist Joachim Wtewael, should be returned to the Schlossmuseum, a small museum in a castle in Gotha, in central Germany, where it hung before World War II.
But Sotheby's displays the painting prominently on the cover of its catalogue for the auction and maintains that it is free to sell it.
The auction house contends that the painting was never stolen, but rather was given as a gift to a Soviet officer during the war.


Books of The Times; And He Grew Up to Write Happily Ever After
A Day at the Beach  Recollections  By Geoffrey Wolff 259 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
In his sparkling new collection of essays, "A Day at the Beach: Recollections," Geoffrey Wolff refers often enough to the harrowing childhood he described more than a dozen years ago in a memoir of his erratic father, "The Duke of Deception," to remind the reader what a miracle it seems that Mr.
Wolff survived that childhood psychologically intact.


Awaiting Word in Cleveland
Marilyn and Sidney Nudelman of Cleveland were returning yesterday from a visit to their daughter Jodi in New York.
They separated at La Guardia Airport, though.
Mrs.
Nudelman took a Northwest Airlines flight so she could use her frequent flier miles.
Her husband took USAir Flight 405.


Winter Continues Its Assault on Spring


Music Notes; A Heldentenor and a Foundation At Odds Over a Contest's Top Prize
Musical competitions and their winners usually have a comfortably symbiotic relationship.
For young musicians, a victory can mean headlines, prize money and laurels that will help them start their careers.
And when the winners go on to the big time, the competitions can bask in reflected glory.
But sometimes the relationship turns out to be a nightmare for both sides.
Ask Tim Tobin, a 31-year-old American tenor, and Betty Smith, the president of the Lauritz Melchior Foundation, whose heldentenor contest Mr.
Tobin won.


SALE OF PLUTONIUM BY RUSSIA TO U.S. FACES UNSEEN SNAG
A $6 million deal is being blocked within the United States Government, in which the Energy Department would buy plutonium 238 from Russia and fashion it into nuclear batteries for American deep-space probes and other purposes, Federal and industry experts say.
American stocks of plutonium 238 are running low.
If no other supply is found, a prohibition of the purchase could in time derail plans for a new fleet of American spacecraft to explore the heavens.


People
*
Jeff Schur was named executive vice president at Earle Palmer Brown Advertising, Bethesda, Md.
He had been president and chief executive at Doner Schur Peppler Advertising, Toronto, where a successor has not yet been named. *
Jerry L. Gibbons was named senior vice president of the western region of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
Mr.
Gibbons, who will be based in Los Angeles, had been president of the Gibbons &amp; Dickens Group, San Francisco and San Jose.


Baseball; Players Move With a Flick Of a Switch
George Brett remembers when the Kansas City Royals asked Amos Otis to move to left field so that their young speedster, Willie Wilson, could play center.
"Amos said: 'Yeah, I'll play left. Buy me a new car,' " Brett said, recalling how Otis wanted inducement to move.
"He played left field for a week. In Baltimore, he missed a fly ball, went over, picked it up, threw it in, took off his glove and punted it."


Quotation of the Day
"If I had a dream that this was going to be my life in New York, I would just have stayed in my country and been poor." -- ABDULAYE KAMARA, an immigrant from Senegal whose Manhattan home was for six months a circuit-breaker closet.  [ B2:6. ]


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None Tuesday  Auto Sales . . .
Mid-March Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
Feb.
Thursday  G.D.P. . . . 4th Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Personal Income . . .
Feb.


130 Abravanels Celebrate a Different Hero of 1492
Five hundred years ago Don Isaac Abravanel, a Jew who was finance minister to Queen Isabella of Spain, was given a choice: Convert to Christianity or be exiled forever from Spain.
Together with thousands of other Jews, Abravanel chose exile, and in the words of one scholar, became the classic wandering Jew, journeying to Naples, Sicily, Corfu and Venice.
Over the weekend, 130 of his descendants gathered in Queens to pay tribute to the courage of Abravanel and to bask in his name.
There were Abravanels, Abarbanels, Barbanels and Barbanells, among other variations, and they brought with them ancient books and documents and stories and family trees going back eight generations and more.


Dance in Review
Keith Glassman
Dia Center for the Arts
Keith Glassman's "Backfield," presented in SoHo on Friday night, got off to a slow start but grew more interesting as it continued.
An exploration of sports and its appeal to observers and players, "Backfield" failed to evoke, unsettlingly at first, either the crisp and rigorous activity of athletes or the softer, less purposeful moves of dancers.


Big American Wins Big, and Sumo Is Akimbo
For years now, Japan's tradition-bound sports world has neatly sidestepped the question of how to handle the country's most famous American import, a 576-pound behemoth more fearsome than a pack of angry trade negotiators, considerably more competitive than General Motors and more popular among young Japanese than jazz bars and delivery pizza.
The American invader is Salevaa Atisnoe of Hawaii, but to millions of Japanese sumo wrestling fans, some more adoring than others, he is known simply as Konishiki.


Dance in Review
Risa Jaroslow and Dancers
University Settlement
There is a refreshing directness about Risa Jaroslow's dances.
She does not decorate movements with gestural frills.
Nor does she allow performers to exaggerate any choreographic stresses or strains.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Kentuckians Outlasted Bad Old Days
IN that first season, the air-freight packages would be scaled onto the court by opposing fans, a graphic reminder that Kentucky was on major probation.
"Monopoly money, phony money," John Pelphrey recalled.
"You had to have a sense of humor about it."


Minnesota Health Plan Accord
Minnesota legislative leaders have reached tentative agreement on a plan to extend basic health insurance to uninsured state residents.
A vote in the Legislature is expected in the next three weeks, and Gov.
Arne H. Carlson, a Republican who vetoed a version of the measure last year because of its cost, has said he will sign the bill.


U.S. Army Team Is in Israel for Inquiry on Missiles
A team of United States Army inspectors began an investigation today into allegations that Israel had sold Patriot missile technology to China without required American approval.
The 15-member team, made up mostly of Army technical specialists, arrived in Israel this weekend, and plans over the next few days to inspect sites where Israel keeps the two Patriot batteries sent here a year ago as a defense against Iraqi Scud missile attacks during the Persian Gulf war.


Pro Hockey; Messier Shoots. He Scores. 4 Times.
Mark Messier, egalitarian grammarian, likes to talk in terms of "we" and "they," not "he" and "I."
But yesterday at the Garden, the ultimate team player had a four-goal, first-star kind of game.
After the Rangers' 6-3 rout of the collapsing Devils, Messier was forced to change his pronouns in the locker room while explaining how he scorched the first-time goaltender Chad Erickson.


Almanac


Accounts
*Gemstar Development Corp., Pasadena, Calif., to Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., for its VCR Plus account with $10 million in billings, previously at DDB Needham Worldwide in Los Angeles. *
Ross Roy Group, Atlanta, was named agency of record on two accounts with combined estimated billings of $4 million: Club America Vacations, Atlanta, and Weight Watchers of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Pro Basketball; In the Knicks' Defense, Everyone Comes to Rescue
It doesn't matter to the Knicks whom they play, or where they play.
Whenever they take the court, the Knicks expect to hold their opponent to fewer than 100 points.
New York has transformed itself into one of the best defensive teams in the National Basketball Association, a development that is directly responsible for their first-place standing in the Atlantic Division.


On Own Turf, Kinnock Stirs Welsh Valley
Keith J. Price, who owns several small furnishings stores in the Welsh valleys with his wife, Linda Ann, voted for the ruling Conservative Party in the 1987 elections.
This year, he's not sure what he'll do.
"Maybe it's time for a change," he said this morning.
"We're in a deep recession, and it's getting deeper. We need to get people back in work." There was nobody in the store, which sells draperies and upholstery fabric; the town was waiting for a visit from its local Member of Parliament, Neil Kinnock, the Labor Party leader.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury plans to hold its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
Tomorrow it will offer two-year notes, and on Wednesday five-year notes.
Late in the day on Friday, the three-month bills traded at 4.05 percent and the six-month bills at 4.22 percent.


Squandering Leverage on China
America's China policy is locked in stalemate.
President Bush refuses to demand much of anything from China's leaders.
Congress insists that every issue be addressed before extending normal trade.
These extreme positions cancel each other out, allowing Beijing to disregard American interests with impunity.
Last week the charade played itself out again.
Congress had passed a bill attaching a wide variety of human rights, trade and anti-proliferation conditions to China's "most-favored-nation" privileges -- the basis for normal trade relations with the U.S.
Mr.
Bush vetoed it.
The Senate failed to override the veto.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of March22: MONDAY  American Express Co BellSouth Corp Cascade Nat Gas Corp Hartford Steam Boiler Geo A Hormel &amp; Co TUESDAY  H F Ahmanson &amp; Co Centerior Energy Corp Hexcel Corp Montana Pwr Co WEDNESDAY  Brooklyn Union Gas Central Me Power  Home Depot Inc Northern Sts Pwr Co Minn Washington Gas Lt Co THURSDAY  Boston Edison Co Charles Schwab Corp Wyle Labs FRIDAY  Southwestern Bell Corp


Socialist Party Is Dealt a Loss In French Vote
Confirming France's current mood of disgruntlement, voters dealt a major political setback to the governing Socialist Party in regional elections today, with nearly complete results giving it 18 percent of votes, its worst performance at the polls in 23 years.
A coalition of the two main conservative parties came out on top with 33 percent of the votes, but fared worse than it has in recent elections.
And as voters turned away from traditional parties, the main beneficiaries were the far-rightist National Front and two environmentalist parties.


Woman, 20, Shot to Death At Social Club in the Bronx
A gunman opened fire early yesterday in an illegal Bronx social club, killing a 20-year-old woman and wounding five other people at a crowded private party, the police said.
Accounts of the attack varied, but investigators said the man may have shot the woman because she refused to dance with him.


World Cup Set to Name Sites; Silverdome Seems a Shoo-In
Senior officials from FIFA, the world governing body for soccer, arrived in New York yesterday and met for a final review of the sites that have been selected for the 1994 World Cup, the sport's premier event, which is being held for the first time in the United States.
The leadership of FIFA is expected to approve the use of nine venues for the 52-game tournament, including the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., which would become the first indoor stadium ever used in the World Cup.


CHRONICLE
How do you get celebrity artists to perform for a cause that may not be well known?
In some cases, it's enough just to ask.
That's what HERBERT and EVELYN STRAUSS learned when they decided to organize a benefit concert to raise funds for the Lauri Strauss Leukemia Foundation, named for their daughter who died of the disease in 1984 at the age of 25.
Some people have turned them down, but others like JUDY COLLINS have been involved since the first concert three years ago.


INSIDE
As Ukrainian as . . .
Now that Ukraine is a nation, it is experiencing something of a national identity crisis as it makes the transition from being a part in the machinery of the old Soviet Union to a newly minted sovereign state.
Page A6.
A Vote for Change in Albania
Official results were not announced, but the opposition Democratic Party declared a landslide victory over the former Communists.
Page A3.
Judges and the Environment
For years, environmentalists considered the Federal courthouse a friendly citadel.
No longer.
In case after case, judges are throwing out environmental regulations or limiting the effect of Federal laws.
Page B7.
Delay on House Bank Report
A flurry of complaints by representatives and former members will delay the ethics committee's report on overdrafts at the House bank, the panel's head said.
Page B6.


Giants Trying to 'Sell' a Sellout Team
In a sense, the Giants' income is fixed -- they have sold out since moving to Giants Stadium in 1976 and they receive the same amount of network television revenue as Green Bay or Cincinnati.
Even though Giants-endorsed clothing and equipment sales make them the National Football League's third-top seller (behind the Raiders and 49ers), that revenue, too, is shared.
But when BOB TISCH, the president of Loews Corporation, shelled out more than $70 million last year to buy half the team, he was looking to expand income as well as own the club he has rooted for since childhood.
One answer: A resource the Giants have in abundance -- their good name.


Pro-Military Parties Win Majority In Vote for Thailand's Parliament
Political parties aligned with Thailand's junta won more than half the parliamentary seats at stake today in general elections, the first since the military toppled a democratically elected Government in a coup 13 months ago.
While the results should allow the pro-military parties to dominate the new government, their victory was slim enough that it could dash hopes within the junta that one of the coup leaders will be named Prime Minister.
Those parties -- Chat Thai, Samakkhi Tham and Social Action -- won 190, or 53 percent, of the 360 seats in the lower house of Parliament, according to a complete but unofficial tally.
Junta Selects Entire Senate
The elections were held on the same day that the junta, which calls itself the National Peacekeeping Council, named all 270 members of Parliament's upper house, or Senate.
More than half the new senators are military or police officers, and among them is the junta's leader, Gen.
Sunthorn Kongsompong.


Worries Persisting At the Fed
Federal Reserve officials say recent data indicate that the economy is picking up steam, but they remain worried that the incipient recovery could peter out.
In interviews last week, two Federal Reserve governors who agreed to speak on the record said that recent reports showing upturns in retail sales and housing starts were the most convincing evidence so far that the stubbornly persistent downturn was ending.
But they also said that the manufacturing sector remained subdued and that employment growth was likely to lag.


Essay; Canada's Comeback Kid
For the first time since 1932, a pair of centrists are competing for the Presidency of the U.S. (President Hoover was coming up with radical ideas like reconstruction finance; F.D.R. was soberly promising to balance the budget. We have polarized them in retrospect.)
As George Bush and Bill Clinton blur ideology in a mist of moderation, we can expect the rise of factions behind each side's lines.


Dollar Rallies, but Reasons Are Still to Be Determined
Since early January the dollar has been rallying strongly, a move that caught many forecasters by surprise.
Behind the surge are some signs of economic recovery and a hint of higher interest rates later in the year.
But there has also been a general scramble by investors and speculators to get ahead of the game, to buy the dollar early so that any rally will mean really nice profits.


In the Case of a Missing Publisher, All the Cards Are Now on the Table
Should anyone make a movie about Domer Ringuette, it would probably be called "Domer, Run," in tribute to John Updike's Rabbit.
And behind the opening credits, a gleeful Mr.
Ringuette would be humming "On The Road Again," Willie Nelson's anthem to the exquisite joy of leaving it all behind.
On a Monday last August, Mr.
Ringuette -- weekly newspaper owner, pillar of small business and local politician in Chicopee, Mass. -- abruptly disappeared without a word to employees, bankers, customers, newspaper readers or even the mayor.


Agency Shake-Ups By Four Advertisers By STUART ELLIOTT
Four large advertisers have announced changes in their agency lineups.
The Pearle Inc. unit of Grandmet U.S.A. in Dallas realigned its Pearle Vision Centers account, with billings estimated at $42 million, among three agencies: Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago; GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, Tex., and Wyse Advertising in Cleveland.
Before a review that began in February, which included those three shops and Tracy-Locke in Dallas, Foote, Cone and GSD&amp;M had been on Pearle's agency roster, with Foote, Cone handling the creative portion of the account.


Mark's Cousin Is in Rangers' Future
Deep in his own zone, the veteran skated with the puck in the big National Hockey League arena.
On the front of his shirt was the familiar captain's "C." On the back were the familiar double numerals and the familiar name "MESSIER."
His pass, long and crisp, met a teammate's stick in the neutral zone.
The teammate rushed in and scored a goal.
The pass by MESSIER, along with other elements of his game, suggested that the New York Rangers have made another good decision.


Brooklyn Cabdriver Is Killed by Gunman
A 42-year-old livery-cab driver, who had been in this country just 14 months, was shot to death early yesterday in Brooklyn in what appeared to be a robbery, the police said.
The victim, Alejandro Guerrero, had come to East New York from the Dominican Republic with his wife, Elizabeth, and three children.
Although he had worked as a telephone repairman in his native country, he was unable to find work in New York until about eight months ago when he signed on as a driver for the ATB Car and Limo Service in East New York, said its president, Luis Florentino.


For Some New Newspapers, Spain Proves to Be a Trap
With Spain's economy booming and advertising jumping by as much as 25 percent a year, Spanish and foreign business groups scrambled in the late 1980's to start new newspapers, unconcerned that Spaniards have never been avid newspaper readers.
Now, with an economic slowdown hurting advertising, the tide has suddenly turned.
On Wednesday, after less than two years on the stands, El Sol became the third Spanish newspaper to close in eight months, while several others are desperately seeking partners in order to keep going.


Robert Waitman Weds Shira Prince
Shira Prince, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Prince of Indianapolis, was married there yesterday to Robert Michael Waitman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Waitman of Fayetteville, N.C.
Rabbi Daniel Yellin performed the ceremony at the Radisson Plaza Hotel.
Mrs.
Waitman, 29 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Wien, Malkin &amp; Bettex in New York.
She graduated from Touro College and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is an optometrist in Indianapolis.
Her mother, Sylvia Prince, manages his office.


CLOUDS MAY DELAY SHUTTLE'S FLIGHT
A cold front bringing low, dark clouds and showers threatened to wash out the plans for launching the space shuttle Atlantis on Monday morning.
Air Force meteorologists said there was only a 20 percent chance of acceptable weather at the scheduled time for liftoff, 8:01 A.M.
Launching crews can wait two and a half hours for the weather to clear, after which the mission would have to be postponed at least 24 hours.


Leaders Say Charity May Be Dismantled
The leaders of the United Way of America apologized to angry local affiliates today for the extravagance of the former president and warned that if they continued to withhold dues the national charity might have to be dismantled.
At the United Way's annual convention here, the national leaders said they were moving quickly to trim management costs after the former president, William Aramony, resigned last month over his extravagant life style and $463,000 in salary and benefits.


David Ben Raphael, Israeli Diplomat, 43
David Ben Raphael, an American-born lawyer who represented Israel in a number of diplomatic posts, died on Tuesday in the bomb blast at the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires, where he was the deputy chief of mission.
He was 43 years old.
Mr.
Ben Raphael was listed as missing until his body was discovered by rescue workers on Thursday.


Courthouse Is a Citadel No Longer: U.S. Judges Curb Environmentalists
In the two decades since a burst of legislation to protect natural resources and wild habitats, environmental groups have often turned to the Federal courts to force the Government to comply with the laws or to expand the reach of regulations.
But environmentalists no longer consider the Federal courthouse a friendly citadel.
In case after case, judges are deciding to throw out environmental and safety regulations or limit the effect of Federal laws.


Cut in Road Budget Imperils New York Drivers
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to slash highway spending in the New York City Department of Transportation's capital budget embodies the worst of bureaucratic decision making (news article, March 4).
The Dinkins administration has moved not only to make the life of a car owner even more precarious, but also to threaten the long-term economic well-being of the future of our city.


Film and Broadcast Awards
The films "Thelma and Louise" and "The Silence of the Lambs" won Writers Guild of America awards for outstanding film screenplays in the 44th annual awards announced last night at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York and the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Among the television shows honored were "Thirtysomething" and "Cheers." A posthumous tribute was given to Jim Henson, the creator of the Muppets.
News program winners included two public television documentaries, the CBS news magazine "48 Hours," and the "CBS Evening News." CBS News also won three awards in the category of radio documentaries, and one for spot radio reporting.
These are the winners of this year's Writers Guild awards:


Steady as He Goes, Chang Derails Mancini
No histrionics, no tantrums, no shots so daunting that they prevented him from giving chase.
This was vintage Michael Chang, the little tennis player who could.
He got the job done quietly, convincingly, and carefully today and defeated Alberto Mancini of Argentina, 7-5, 7-5, in the final of the Lipton International Players Championships.
The victory was Chang's fourth in his last four finals, gave him an ATP Tour-leading third title for 1992, and extended his career-high unbeaten streak to 12 matches.
Chang's ranking has climbed to sixth in the world, his best showing in two years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Club Where Clinton Has Golfed Retains Ways of Old South
The Country Club of Little Rock, where Bill Clinton has played golf several times a year since he became Governor, sits on a graceful hill in an exclusive neighborhood called the Heights, its greens sloping down to the Arkansas River.
Opened just after the turn of the century, it recalls an older South in many ways, including its membership: 500 white men and women.
Last week Mr.
Clinton, his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination seemingly wrapped up, found himself under fire for playing at the club, and he quickly admitted he had made a mistake and vowed never to play there again until it was integrated.


Dance in Review
Muna Tseng and Phill Niblock
St. Mark's Church
Muna Tseng pours herself with complete intensity into the small, deft moves and gestures she choreographs for herself, but she maintains a slightly chill distance from it all.
That was the case in "Collaboration," a full-evening dance, music and video piece created with Phill Niblock and presented on Thursday night.


WIDER U.S. DEFICITS ARE NOW FORECAST FOR THE MID-1990'S
A year after White House economists forecast that the Federal budget would have a surplus by the mid-1990's, they are now predicting a deficit of nearly $200 billion in fiscal 1996.
And Congressional economists take an even dimmer view.
Projections released this month by the Congressional Budget Office said this year's deficit would be a record $368 billion and that after dropping in the next few years, deficits would soar in the second half of the decade.
By 2002, the office said, the deficit could reach $423 billion.


CHRONICLE
Are women taking over that quintessential male domain, haute cuisine?
"Not yet but we hope one day to share power -- not seize it," says ANNE ROSENZWEIG, the culinary director of this year's James Beard Awards reception and herself a nominee for Best Chef.
These awards are the Oscars of the food and beverage industry.


BASEBALL: Sleepers, Keepers and Weepers in the Senior Circuit; Bashers of Rotisserie Leagues Aren't Worth a Thin Dime
While an estimated 2 million baseball fans find enjoyment in playing Rotisserie baseball, last year a small group of critics assumed the responsibility of telling the public exactly how they should be enjoying the national pastime.
They included:


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Anxiety and Loss Shape the Mood in Connecticut
Almost everyone in Connecticut these days seems able to name a seemingly unshakable institution that the recession and a changing world have diminished or erased.
Banks drenched in state history have closed.
Insurance companies have laid off thousands of white-collar managers.
Military contracts that once poured into the state to fight the cold war have shrunk.
A state that once attracted wealthy people because it had no wage tax has imposed one for the first time to balance its budget.
Home values that once looked like blue-chip stocks have dropped.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Preferred  *
Mid Am Inc., Bowling Green, Ohio, has filed for one million shares of cumulative convertible preferred stock, series A, with a proposed sale price of $25 each, through McDonald &amp; Co.
Securities, Cleveland.
Mid Am is a multibank holding company and owns three commercial banks and a savings institution in Ohio.


Editorial Notebook; America's German Voice
Nobel Prizes are accorded to poets, scientists, peacemakers, economists.
But no such laurel is bestowed on publishers and translators, the unsung mediators who open minds and frontiers.
A notable example was the legendary German publisher Heinrich Maria Ledig-Rowohlt, who died this month at age 83.
Though he prospered as a bookseller, his delight was to render into German the distinctive prose of foreign authors, especially Americans.
"It's like making a good salad," he would say.
"You need pepper, salt and spice to bring out the flavor. Henry Miller, Jimmy Baldwin, John Updike are not so difficult; the real challenge is a novel like Vladimir Nabokov's 'Lolita.' "


Report Cites Rise in Complaints Against Manhattan Cable Systems
New York City regulators have fired another round in their fight with cable television companies: a report that showed that the two cable systems serving Manhattan generated a disproportionate number of consumer complaints last year.
The city's Department of Telecommunications and Energy, which has jurisdiction over cable companies under their franchise agreements with the city, said in its report that it received 1,395 complaints from subscribers in all five boroughs last year, compared with 1,040 the year before.
Eighty percent of the complaints involved service and billing issues that cable customers maintained they had been unable to settle with the cable operators.


A Broker's 90's Theme
Any lingering doubts that the 1980's are indeed over are the target of a new advertising campaign for Quick &amp; Reilly, the first for the discount brokerage firm by Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York.
Television commercials and print advertisements, which carry the theme "A new breed of broker," compare values of the 1980's unfavorably with 90's values.
The spots contrast a day in 1985, when frantic brokers glibly schmoozed clients ("You're talking a one-way ticket to Moneyville!"), with a day in 1992, when Quick &amp; Reilly brokers "work on salary, not commission."


Austin Prolongs Grief Over 4 Victims
Three and a half months have passed since the night that four teen-age girls were bound, shot and set on fire in a yogurt shop, and this city still grieves.
"We will not forget" has become an unofficial slogan used on buttons, T-shirts, banners and even coffee mugs.
White ribbons adorn clothing, trees and automobile radio antennas, symbolizing the innocence of the victims who have come to be known as "the four Texas angels." A song has been recorded and memorial funds have been established.
Billboards, placards and handbills advertise a $25,000 reward for information leading to arrests.


'89 USAir Wreck Killed 2
On Sept. 20, 1989, another USAir jet crashed after an aborted takeoff at La Guardia Airport.
Two passengers died and 45 were injured when Flight 5050, a Boeing 737 bound for Charlotte, N.C., skidded off a rain-slicked runway into the East River.
In July 1990, a report by the National Transportation Safety Board put the blame squarely on the plane's captain, saying he had failed to take several actions that would have prevented the jet from skidding off Runway 31.
The union representing airline pilots denounced that finding.


Moscow State Joins U.S. Trade Group
The American Advertising Federation has accepted its first Russian member.
The new member is a student chapter at Moscow State University, which was formed last fall with the help of Prof.
Ludmilla Gricenko Wells of Moscow State's sister school, the University of Miami in Coral Gables, Fla.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PLANE CRASHES AT LA GUARDIA AIRPORT
A Cleveland-bound USAir jet crashed at La Guardia Airport in a snowstorm last night, killing at least 19 people.
USAir Flight 405 was carrying 47 passengers and four crew members when it skidded off the runway into Flushing Bay.
A1.
Chaos at the scene.
B6.


Anderson Guides Bishop Loughlin to a Title
One play told the story of the Catholic High School Athletic Association championship game better than any other.
It came in the second half, with the ball in the hands of a junior point guard for Bishop Loughlin High School named Sherwin Anderson.
A 6-foot left-hander, Anderson beat his man, Sean Wise of Rice, off the dribble and sped toward the basket.
While his layup attempt missed the basket, the backboard and the rim, Anderson fell and landed on his back.


Knights Suffer the Effects Of Too Many Turnovers
The New York/New Jersey Knights were looking to reverse their fortunes against the London Monarchs, the team that beat them three times last year and captured the World League's first championship title.
Turnovers made sure it didn't happen.
With the game tied at 20-20 in overtime, Monarch linebacker William Kirksey intercepted Knight quarterback Reggie Slack and ran 24 yards for a touchdown to give the Monarchs a 26-20 victory before a crowd of 30,167 at Wembley Stadium in both clubs' season opener.


Iranian Seems Set to Oust Hard-Liners
Iran is embarking on a divisive election campaign in which President Hashemi Rafsanjani appears to have put in place mechanisms that could enable his supporters to take control of Parliament from hard-line fundamentalists next month.
Parliament, one of the most important strongholds for the hard-liners, has been effective in obstructing moves by President Rafsanjani to open the country up to the West and institute free-market changes to rebuild the economy in the aftermath of Iran's devastating 1980-88 war with Iraq.


Dance in Review
Merce Cunningham Dance Company  City Center 131 West 55th Street Through Sunday
Merce Cunningham allows the viewer an unusual variety of ways in which to observe and respond to his dances.
It was possible, in a performance presented by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company on Saturday afternoon, to pluck elements like playful feet and witty encounters from "Neighbors," to be drawn in by the mysterious organizing principles of "Inventions" and to wonder at the relative clutter and inconsequence of "August Pace."


Chaos at Crash: Lights, Officers And Victims
It was a scene of grim and glittering chaos.
Shortly after USAir Flight 405, taking off for Cleveland in a snowstorm, skidded from a La Guardia Airport runway into the chill waters of Flushing Bay, emergency workers swarmed over and around the wreckage, their lighted hats aglow.
About 250 firefighters responded to calm the initial blaze, which had lighted up the sky as though the sun had suddenly risen.


Predators vs. Traps
To the Editor:
In "At Times, Nature Too Is Cruel to Animals" (letter, March 5), Douglas C. Stange states that a Feb. 9 article about trapping presupposed a cruelty-free balance of nature (it did not).
Mr.
Stange defends trapping by stating that predator animals often kill more than they need for sustenance and kill their prey inefficiently.


Couples Stands Alone After Latest Triumph
It's been more than a decade since a player has truly dominated the PGA Tour, but with his wire-to-wire victory today at the Nestle Invitational, Fred Couples is on the threshold of that status.
Employing power and touch with frightening ease, Couples cruised to a closing 70 for a total of 19-under-par 269 that gave him a nine-shot margin of victory over Gene Sauers.
Five other players tied for third, 12 shots behind the winner.


Bridge
One of the world's most celebrated players captured the first major title at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here Saturday night.
Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., who is one of a handful of players to have won all three major open world titles, captured the National Open Pair Championship with Perry Johnson of Farmington Hills, Mich., who won his first national event.
At the finish they were more than three boards ahead of their nearest rivals.
The standings were: 1st Meckstroth and Rodwell, 1,746.24 match points; 2d Tony Glynne and S. James Elliott of Portland, Ore., 1,589.09; 3d Michael Moss and Jon Greenspan of Manhattan, 1,572.02; 4th Gene Freed of Los Angeles and Mike Passell of Dallas, 1,564.33.


Teachers' Leader Calls for a Return to Tradition
Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, sounded a battle cry on Saturday for a new, conservative brand of radicalism: the return to tradition in American education.
Speaking in Manhattan to the annual meeting of the United Teachers of New York, Mr.
Shanker all but pronounced moribund the movement for change that has characterized American education for decades.
He called for a new look backward at such discarded notions as a national curriculum, national achievement tests, standardized teacher training and the grouping of students by achievement level.


Ms. Davis Wed To D. J. Lyness
Nancy Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Davis of Scarsdale, N.Y., and David J. Lyness, a son of Bonnie Brown of Flushing, Queens, and the late Alan Lyness, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Norton Shargel officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Lyness, 26 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is a student at Brooklyn Law School, as is her husband.
Her father, a partner in the law firm of Davis &amp; Singer in White Plains, is a town judge in Scarsdale.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Women; Female Candidates Poised For Breakthroughs in 1992
A wave of victories for women in this week's Illinois primary, plus relatively heavy turnouts by women in other early contests, have raised hope among women active in politics that a long-anticipated electoral breakthrough may be close at hand.
"Sometimes you feel like Chicken Little in this business," said Harriett Woods, president of the National Women's Political Caucus.
"We always seem right on the verge of making it, then don't quite do it. But this year I'm beginning to think it's going to happen in a very big way."


Ukraine Fleshing Out Dreams of Nationhood
The fresh lettering on the row of jets parked on the tarmac of Kiev's airport illustrated the pride of new-found sovereignty: the names of Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Russia and the other new states, each plane with the new national flag emblazoned on the high tail.
The planes had brought the presidents to the Commonwealth of Independent States meeting, each an equal and sovereign leader, and from the airport they had roared into the city in limousines with national flags flapping from their prows.


Please Speak Into the Mike
The National Football League is going red-zone crazy these days.
Scoring is down to 30.8 points a game (its lowest level since 1978 when it was 36.7 a game) and the pigskin powers are trying to help offenses punch that ball in by any means necessary.
But it hasn't been happening inside the opponents' 20-yard line, which is known as the red zone.
Eight coaches recently met with Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE to complain that crowd noise when the visiting team is inside the 20 is helping kill the their team's touchdown drives.
There are, however, penalties on the books intended to shield the visitors from crowd noise.
But the officials are biting their tongues, er, whistles, rather than have a game decided by penalties against the home crowd.
Instead, the league is considering "miking" the quarterback and putting speakers in the helmets of the tackles, the offensive linemen farthest from him.
The league will monitor this experiment in the World League season starting this weekend.


Trade Mission of Sorts Finds Hartford Lawmakers Roughing It in Las Vegas
Would gambling in Hartford create a seedy environment rife with flesh peddling, debauchery and lawlessness?
A group of Connecticut legislators decided it was their duty to come and take a close look.
"This may seem glamorous to some," said Reginald G. Beamon, a Democratic State Representative from Waterbury, who also attended a trade mission in Taipei last year.
"But to me, it's just part of the job."


At Least 19 Killed in Crash at Snowy La Guardia
A Cleveland-bound USAir jetliner crashed as it tried to take off from La Guardia Airport in a snowstorm last night.
The police said at least 19 people died when the plane tumbled off the runway and into Flushing Bay about half a mile from Shea Stadium.
The airline said the plane, a Dutch-made Fokker F-28, was carrying 47 passengers and 4 crew members.
It was the second time in three years a plane has skidded off a runway at La Guardia.
Both times they were USAir flights.


A New Ingredient for Many Papers: Soybean Ink
The versatile soybean, already used in products ranging from cardboard to hot dogs, has found yet another market: newspaper ink.
Color news inks based on soybean oils are being promoted as brighter and environmentally safer than conventional inks made of petroleum.


Martin Robinson, Leader of Protests For Gay Rights, 49
Martin Robinson, an organizer for gay-rights causes for 27 years who was known for his provocative protests, died on Thursday at home in Brooklyn.
He was 49 years old.
He died of complications of AIDS, friends said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A year after White House economists forecast that the Federal budget would have a surplus by the mid-1990's, they are now predicting a deficit of nearly $200 billion in fiscal 1996.
Congressional economists take an even dimmer view.  [ Page A1. ]


Musical Chairs in Congress
New York, about to lose three seats in Congress, will probably lose four incumbents.
Shifts in population to other parts of the country account for the three.
The fourth seat involves a new Hispanic district in New York City.
Which incumbents should be sacrificed in this high-stakes game of musical chairs?
That's what leaders of the State Legislature have to decide soon, as they put together their redistricting plan.
Redistricting provides plenty of room for punishing enemies, rewarding friends and ignoring merit.
But Saul Weprin of Queens, the new Speaker of the Assembly, seems above such petty politics.
He says that in drawing new lines he will above all consider an incumbent's record and value to the state, and sounds as though he means it.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Conde Nast Plans to Offer Family-Plan Rate Discounts
SALES executives at Conde Nast Publications Inc. are hoping that better things come in a large package.
Conde Nast is changing its magazine advertising sales packages, which offer advertisers and their agencies the opportunity to earn discounts of between 3 and 30 percent on ad-page rates.
Effective with the July issues of its 12 magazines, which range alphabetically and demographically from Allure to Details to Self to Vogue, two separate packages will be combined into one.


This Couple Has All the Highlights
MITCH and MARISA KAUFMAN worked until 5 o'clock this morning.
That's when they oversaw the last batch of videotapes loaded onto cargo planes at Newark Airport, sending them to colleges that won yesterday's National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I men's basketball regional games.
Kaufman is the fellow who provides opponents' tapes to virtually every college in the tournament.


Ex-Communists Lose in Albania Vote
The opposition Democratic Party declared a landslide victory over the former Communists today after voters turned out in heavy numbers on Sunday to elect a new Parliament.
"We have won 65 to 70 percent of the all the votes, and the Socialists a maximum of 25 percent," the leader of the centrist Democrats, Dr.
Sali Berisha, said in an interview at the party's headquarters, which was surrounded by an ever-growing crowd of cheering supporters.
"It is the end of the Communist night in Albania."


News TV Channel Planned
Time Warner will begin its first 24-hour, all-news cable channel serving New York City on Sept. 1, the company announced yesterday.
The channel will be the first solely devoted to an urban community, said Paul Sagan, the vice president of news and programming for the channel.
It will be available in about 800,000 households in the city, on the five cable systems owned by Time Warner.
The service, called "New York 1 News," will be seen on Channel 1 on all the cable systems.
Time Warner said that it had signed a 10-year lease for a studio on West 42d Street in Manhattan, to use as the channel's main operating center.


When 'Fairness' Isn't Fair
Class warfare, discredited throughout the former Communist world, seems to have found new life in American political circles.
A front-page article in the March 5 New York Times described one example: an allegation that the recovery of the 1980's -- and hence the conservative philosophy of the Bush Administration -- helped the rich and hurt the poor.
This analysis, a reprise of the so-called fairness argument, rests on a Congressional Budget Office study and an analysis by a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, Paul Krugman.
The C.B.O. and Mr.
Krugman have played prominent roles in shaping the liberal version of the fairness debate, and their allegations have become a staple in the speeches of Democratic politicians.
But the analysis suffers from grievous flaws.
I will cite just a few.


Observer; The Shoe Suspense
At the Political Press Club it's so quiet you could hear a shoe drop if somebody would only drop one.
"Unless somebody drops one pretty soon, preferably on Clinton," Buck Ballots told this veteran political analyst, "we'll all end up back in the newsroom grinding out weather stories and rewriting press releases about Moose meetings."
"Buck," I said, "that prospect makes this veteran political analyst's hair stand on end."


Polish Austerity Budget Threatens Medical Care
As Poland's leaders unveiled the Government's austerity budget, Dr.
Piotr Zielinski was worrying today about matters less sweeping: how many doctors to dismiss and where he might finance next week's purchases of medicine.
Dr.
Zielinski, director of the Bielinski Hospital on the outskirts of Warsaw, runs one of the thousands of agencies in Poland that are already hard up for resources and will have to make do this year with even less.
He is planning to lay off 30 percent of his employees this year, close down most specialized wards, and continue asking patients for voluntary contributions, even though the Polish Constitution guarantees everyone free health care.


Review/Fashion; From Paris Designers, Somber-Toned Mastery
Showing pretty clothes is not enough.
Many of the designers presenting their fall and winter collections here in tents in the courtyard of the Louvre are trying to suggest other things: the end of the world, for instance, or simply the end of fashion.
This premature fin-de-siecle blues is expressed in somber colors -- black is in first, second and third place, followed distantly by wine and brown -- and the unfinished look, usually called deconstruction and marked by torn edges.
Still, the most successful collection so far was the one Karl Lagerfeld showed under his own name.
Its only message was fashion, and it expressed it brilliantly.
Everyone, designers and retailers alike, is concerned with making long skirts palatable.
Lagerfeld made them work.
Narrow, but Comfortable
He made his narrow ankle-length skirts out of stretch wool voile, so light it is transparent.
No problem walking -- the skirt simply stretches to accommodate a stride.
The fabric is so thin the legs can be seen right through it.
No need for awkward slits.


For Cone, It's Better To Feel Good
David Cone, in the running for the Mets' opening day assignment along with new teammate Bret Saberhagen, admits that his line scores have been ugly this spring.
And, he said today, that includes a five-inning, four-run effort against the Montreal Expos this afternoon.
Still, the right-hander says, he believes he's on schedule.
"Over all, I'm pleased," said Cone, the losing pitcher in the 8-5 exhibition game.
"In terms of getting ready to start the season, I'm right where I want to be."


Arts Chief Bids Bush A Frank Farewell
John E. Frohnmayer, the departing chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, lashed out contemptuously today at the conservative Republican Presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan.
It was Mr.
Buchanan who cost Mr.
Frohnmayer his job by indicating last month that he would make an issue of President Bush's support for the arts endowment as he campaigned in the South.
In an unusually tough and emotional speech at the National Press Club here, Mr.
Frohnmayer also lambasted other critics of the arts endowment, solemnly recited the First Amendment and concluded by singing a verse from the Shaker hymn "Simple Gifts." His audience, journalists and academicians attending an international conference on free expression sponsored by American University, gave him a standing ovation.


Police Talk to 3 Mets' Lawyers
Members of the Port St.
Lucie Police Department met today for the first time with lawyers representing the three New York Mets players who were named here in a rape complaint earlier this month.
David Morgan, an assistant Florida state attorney, also attended the meeting, which was held in his office in Fort Pierce.
In the meeting, which lasted about an hour, members of the police department outlined what they might need from the suspects to complete their investigation by the end of this week.
Among those needs, said Lieut.
Scott Bartal, might be blood samples and statements from the players.
"We just told them there's a possibility that they may be needed," Lieutenant Bartal said.
He added that Morgan asked that the players "be ready to answer to those needs by Wednesday."


Of Windows Computers, Crosswords and Cornflakes
IN the rush to computerize everything, nothing is sacred, not even the crossword puzzle.
New York Times crossword puzzles, 200 daily and 50 Sunday ones, are now on disk for Windows users.
There are advantages to doing the puzzles on a computer.
For one, you can set the difficulty level to novice, intermediate or expert.
A given puzzle is the same at all three levels, but novices are told which letters are correct even in an otherwise wrong answer, intermediate players are told whether the answer as a whole is correct, and experts get no help.


Jails Chief Is Selected By Dinkins
After a three-month search, Mayor David N. Dinkins has selected his Commissioner of Probation, Catherine M. Abate, to run New York City's jail system.
Aides to the Mayor said yesterday that Ms.
Abate's appointment as Correction Commissioner is expected to be announced today.
Ms.
Abate became a candidate for the job only two weeks ago, after the Dinkins administration ruled out five other candidates who had been in the running for the $110,000 post, the aides said.


CUNY OUSTS CHIEF OF BLACK STUDIES
After months of anger, tension and political maneuvering stemming from his racially charged remarks about Jews and whites, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. was replaced as head of City College's black studies department, effective July 1.
The move, in a vote last night by trustees at the City University of New York, represents an attempt by the board to restore calm to a troubled department wracked by the controversy over Dr.
Jeffries's teachings, which include the difference between African "sun people" and European "ice people."  Potential for More Strife
The City College of New York will appoint Dr.
Edmund W. Gordon, a former chairman of the Department of African-American Studies at Yale University and a longtime adviser to City College's president, to a two-year position with a mandate to recruit new faculty and reorganize the black studies department.


Connecticut's Turn To Judge Democrats
The Presidential primary today in Connecticut will be the first to feature what is now essentially a two-man Democratic race.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California both want and need a strong showing there before the larger New York primary on April 7.
Mr.
Brown clearly hopes to capitalize on his status as the remaining challenger to Mr.
Clinton, the acknowledged party front-runner.
Article, page A16.


With Work Undone, and Homes Unreached, and Families Left Behind
Most of the men and women who died in the crash of USAir Flight 405 were from Ohio, tourists and business travelers eager to get home.
There was an Akron surgeon returning from a medical conference in Florida who was scheduled to perform surgery at 8 A.M. yesterday; a Cleveland autoworker and his wife who were returning to work after a cruise in the Bahamas; a physical therapist who spent the weekend at a New York country club to compete in a paddle-tennis tournament.


Sports of The Times; Can Soccer Grow Grass Under Foot?
THIS is such a pathetic thought that I hate even typing it, but the ultimate legacy of the 1994 World Cup of soccer could turn out to be demonstrating that grass can be grown indoors.
This gloomy possibility struck me yesterday when the organizers announced their sites for the 1994 World Cup.
The world soccer body, known as FIFA, is the strongest and most conservative sports body in the world.
To insure that its World Cup remains the grandest tournament in the world, FIFA dictates that no soccer player over 22 may be caught dead at the Summer Games.
Now, for reasons of money and desperation, FIFA has gone radical on us, and put the hallowed game of soccer, ugh, indoors.


Nunn Is Optimistic On Big Aid Package For Ex-Soviet Lands
After a meeting with President Bush, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, said today that he was "cautiously optimistic" that the President would soon push for a major aid package to help Russia and other republics of the former Soviet Union.
Senator Nunn, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and three other Senators who recently traveled with him to Moscow and Kiev, met with Mr.
Bush to urge him to press ahead with aid for the republics and to tell him that he would have bipartisan support in the Senate for such a package.


New Xerox Software Set For Offices
The Xerox Corporation announced software yesterday that could be a first step in bridging the gap between paper and computers in the office.
The software permits a standard office facsimile machine to store and retrieve information from a personal computer that could be reached by telephone anywhere in the world.
Analysts said the announcement was the first example of a more fundamental technology linking paper- and computer-based offices developed by researchers at the company's Palo Alto Research Center in California.


People
*
Michael Morley was named to the new position of deputy chairman at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York.
He had been vice chairman.
Scott Tagliarino was named to the new position of executive vice president and deputy general manager at Edelman's New York office.
He had been executive vice president at Dewe Rogerson Inc., New York.


Different Cup of Soccer, Even Indoors, in 1994
Narrow field? A mere technicality.
Artificial grass? Call the gardener.


Tsongas Supporters Push for Strong Showing in Connecticut Primary


Does Art Have to Be Popular? Barcelona Debates a Huge Sock
Widely acclaimed as Catalonia's greatest living artist, Antoni Tapies was the unchallenged choice to design a sculpture for the central hall of the new National Museum of Catalan Art.
Unchallenged, that is, until he proposed building a 60-foot-high sock.
And now Barcelona is deeply -- indeed, passionately -- divided between those who consider his design an absurd example of contemporary Catalan art and those who say artistic freedom should be defended even if the public is, well, ignorant.


Chess
After three tournaments without a first prize, Gary Kasparov of Russia reminded everyone why he is world champion by running away with the Linares International, which ended in Spain on March 14.
In this elite event, he scored a hot 10-3 with high quality attacking and positional play that the opposition could not match.
Nevertheless, one player -- Jan Timman of the Netherlands -- made a ferocious effort to catch him.
In Rounds 6 through 12, Timman, pressing hard and helped by some opponents' errors, tallied 6-1.
But when Kasparov put away Ljubomir Ljubojevic of Yugoslavia in the last round, it was all over.
When Timman lost to Valery Salov of Spain, he fell into a tie for second place with Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W.
L.
D.
Pts.
Kasparov
7
0
6
10
Timman
7
4
2
8
Ivanchuk
4
1
8
8
Karpov
5
3
5
7 1/2
Salov
4
3
6
7
Anand
3
2
8
7
Gelfand
4
3
6
7
Bareyev
3
3
7
6 1/2
Yusupov
4
5
4
6
Belyavsky
3
4
6
6
Illescas
4
6
3
5 1/2
Ljubojevic
2
6
5
4 1/2
Short
2
7
4
4
Speelman
0
5
8
4
Kasparov's victory over Nigel Short of Britain in Round 8 furnishes a nice illustration of his skill in attack.
It was Kasparov himself who singlehandedly brought the Scotch Game to the fore in the 14th encounter of his fifth world championship match with Anatoly Karpov in Lyons, France, in 1990.
For many years, it had been thought that for White to advance d4 as early as the third move was too primitive, that this was an invitation to premature simplification.
But Kasparov has refashioned the opening into a serious weapon.
Karpov preferred 4 . . .
Nf6 and Kasparov put new life into Jacques Mieses's old 5 Nc6 bc 6 e5 Qe7 7 Qe2 Nd5 8 c4.
Lately the alternative system of defense with 4 . . .
Bc5, which Short uses here, has also become popular.
In an Ehlvest-Belyavsky game, Reykjavik 1991, 7 . . .
Ne5 8 Be2 Qg6 9 O-O d5 10 Bh5!?
Qe4 11 Nd2 Qd3 12 N4f3 Bd6 13 Ne5 Be5 14 Bc5 yielded White a dangerous attack.
Short was being more careful with 7 . . .
O-O.
Kasparov's solution of the problem of how to gain the advantage was 9 Nc2 d6 10 Bb6 ab 11 f4.
But why didn't Short try 11 . . .
Be6, aiming either to break up the white center after 12 Nba3 Bc4 13 Nc4 Qe6 14 Qd3 d5 or to boldly accept a pawn after 12 Bd3 Ba2?
The Englishman instead played 11 . . . g5, practically forcing Kasparov to advance 12 f5 and allow a black blockade on the dark squares with 12 . . .
Ne5.
Short surely thought that he could permit himself the luxury of a slightly loosened king position, but after 18 Ne3 he had worries.
Perhaps the best defense would have been 18 . . .
Kh7, yet on 19 Ned5 Bd5 20 ed Qh6 21 Qe4, defending would remain unpleasant.
On the other hand, his preparation for regrouping his minor pieces with 18 . . .
Nd7 met with Kasparov's sharp bishop sacrifice, 19 Bg4! hg 20 Ng4.
With 21 . . .
Ng6, Short was hoping to offer tough resistance after 22 fg fg 23 Qg3 Qg3 24 Rg3 Rae8, but Kasparov was not done attacking, as he showed with 22 Qe3!
Qg4 23 Qh6 Kg8 24 Rh3, which threatened 25 Qh7 mate as well as 25 fg fg 26 Rg3.
After the forced 24 . . .
Qh3 25 gh Nge5 26 f6 Nf6 27 Qf6, Short had only a rook and bishop for Kasparov's queen plus pawn, but he was determined to fight on.
On 30 Qg5, it would have been useless to play passively with 30 . . .
Kh7 31 Nd5.
So, Short played 30 . . .
Rfe8 31 h5 Re5 32 Qh6 Re4 33 Ne4 Re4.
Kasparov did not give him a tactical chance, and with 42 h5!, he forced the decisive liquidation, 42 . . .
Rg4 43 Qg4 Ng4 44 hg fg (44 . . . Kg6 45 h7 Kh7 46 Rf7 is just as bleak) 45 Rf7 Kh6 46 Rc7.
After a few more cheerless moves, Short gave up.
SCOTCH GAME
White
Black
Kasp'ov
Short
1
e4
e5
2
Nf3
Nc6
3
d4
ed
4
Nd4
Bc5
5
Be3
Qf6
6
c3
Nge7
7
Bc4
O-O
8
O-O
Bb6
9
Nc2
d6
10
Bb6
ab
11
f4
g5
12
f5
Ne5
13
Be2
Bd7
14
c4
g4
15
Nc3
h5
16
Qd2
Kh8
17
Qf4
Bc6
18
Ne3
Nd7
19
Bg4
hg
20
Ng4
Qh4
21
Rf3
Ng6
22
Qe3
Qg4
23
Qh6
Kg8
24
Rh3
Qh3
25
gh
Nge5
26
f6
Nf6
27
Qf6
Rae8
28
Kh1
Ng6
29
h4
Re6
30
Qg5
Rfe8
31
h5
Re5
32
Qh6
Re4
33
Ne4
Re4
34
Kg1
Ne5
35
Qg5
Kh7
36
Qf5
Kh6
37
Rf1
Re2
38
Qf6
Kh7
39
Qg5
Be4
40
h6
Bg6
41
h4
Re4
42
h5
Rg4
43
Qg4
Ng4
44
hg6
fg
45
Rf7
Kh6
46
Rc7
Ne5
47
Rb7
Nc4
48
b3
Resigns


Cosby's Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Further on your March 7 front-page report that "The Cosby Show" is leaving television after almost eight years: Although the family comedy series rightfully extolled the virtues of Brooklyn, "the exterior shots of the tree-lined street in Brooklyn where the Huxtables' brownstone stood," to which you refer, were in fact filmed on one of the prettiest blocks in Manhattan's Greenwich Village -- St.
Luke's Place.
MICHAEL WINSHIP New York, March 7, 1992


Chrysler Stake In Mitsubishi
The Chrysler Corporation may be close to selling all or part of its 11 percent stake in the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, analysts said today.
The cash would help the company support its new models.
Shares of Mitsubishi Motors tumbled 13 percent in Tokyo today, to 612 yen ($4.60), on rumors that Chrysler was planning to sell 7 million to 10 million of its 93 million shares of the third-ranked Japanese auto maker, brokers in Tokyo said.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Receives Top Honor
Ore., has been named national agency of the year for 1991 by Adweek magazine.
In a special report in this week's issue, the advertising trade weekly saluted Wieden &amp; Kennedy for "its emphasis on The Work rather than The Industry" and praised the agency's "steadfast belief in risk at a time when most agencies (and most clients) are retrenching."


Business Scene; Capital Spending Unlikely to Surge
THE incipient recovery, now evident in higher retail sales, should -- if it continues -- show up in another form by late summer: a rebound in capital spending as Corporate America re-equips to meet the growing demand for its wares.
That was the pattern after other recessions.
The problem is that capital spending lately has failed to perform according to script.
During the recession, it declined only mildly, avoiding the steep plunges of previous recessions.
The concern is that the mild decline in capital spending will be followed, in the recovery, by an equally mild rebound in capital spending.
But even if capital spending rebounds sharply, will it create thousands of new jobs, as it has in the past?
The answer appears to be no, which means the recovery will be harder to sustain.


Genetic Engineering Needs Strict Regulation; Is Anybody in Charge?
To the Editor:
"Bush to Ease Rules on Products Made by Altering Genes" (front page, Feb. 25) discusses a new White House policy on regulation of biotechnology products.
In "From Monsters to Mainstream" (editorial, March 1), you endorse the policy's premise: a biotechnology product's characteristics, rather than that it is genetically engineered, should determine the Government scrutiny it receives.
We too agree with this guiding premise.
But the rah-rah rhetoric in the President's announcement of the policy leaves us deeply troubled.


Stocks Slip in Quiet Trading; Dow Off 4.25
Stocks closed slightly lower in quiet trading yesterday, giving back some of the gains made on Friday in the "triple witching" expiration of index futures, index options and equity options contracts.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 4.25 points, to 3,272.14.
Other indexes also fell a bit.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; With Choices Now Clearer, Stakes Rise in Connecticut
A Democratic Presidential primary that was not supposed to count for much has become a fought-over prize in the last few days, with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California both wanting and needing a strong showing before the larger New York primary on April 7.
The Connecticut primary on Tuesday will be the first to feature what is now essentially a two-man race, a situation that Mr.
Brown clearly hopes to capitalize on as the remaining challenger to Mr.
Clinton, the acknowledged party front-runner.


UMass Hysteria
The hoop heads of Worcester, an hour to the east, had been proud to support the state university last Friday night in the first round of the national collegiate basketball tournament.
John Calipari, the 32-year-old coach of the University of Massachusetts team, was grateful for their support and appreciative of their noise.
He just had a better idea.
He wanted people to sweat.
Not just the basketball players with UMass on their jerseys.
Not just the tightly wrapped teen-age crazies imported from the Curry Hicks Cage in Amherst, but the people who consider themselves respectable.


CHRONICLE
The killings of scores of Timorese by Indonesian troops in November might have gone unreported if two American journalists and a British photographer hadn't been there.
The journalists, ALLAN NAIRN of The New Yorker and AMY GOODMAN of WBAI Radio, who were both beaten by the Indonesians, are to tell their story today at a round-table discussion from noon to 2 P.M. in the International Affairs Building at Columbia University.
A video documentary on the killings, taken by MAX STAHL, the photographer who was there that day, will also be shown.


Shamir Is Accusing the U.S. of Trying to Rearrange Israel's Borders
Signaling that he may run for re-election with a campaign against the Bush Administration, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir accused the United States today of trying to rearrange Israel's borders even before the Middle East peace talks have had a chance to get going.
Mr.
Shamir said he could never accept President Bush's insistence on a freeze on Jewish settlements in the occupied territories as the price Israel must pay for $10 billion in American loan guarantees to resettle new immigrants from the former Soviet Union.


In Spring, Nature's Cycle Brings a Dead Tree to Life
IF you don't believe there's life after death, look closer some spring day at a dead tree lying on the forest floor.
Chances are, if it has been there for a while, it is teeming with more life now, after death, than when it was standing erect lifting its leafy arms to pray.
Though it lacks the spring finery that inspires poets and lovers, a leafless tree is often more valuable to its forest dead than alive, say ecologists working in the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest.
This fact, they say, has been largely ignored by wood-hungry forest managers in most of the United States and Europe, where overzealous harvesting of "dead wood" has depleted forests and rendered them highly susceptible to environmental stresses like acid rain.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Nestle appears to have won control of Perrier, ending a three-month battle with the Agnelli family for control of the world's leading mineral water company.
Trading in both Perrier shares and those of its main holding company, Exor, was suspended in Paris pending a formal announcement.  [ Page D1. ]
Olympia &amp; York has turned to its banks to ease a cash crisis and has begun negotiating to reorganize billions of dollars of debt in an attempt to retain its vast holdings.  [ D1. ]


Accountants Report On Venture by Clinton
An accounting firm retained by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and his wife, Hillary, has determined that the couple lost nearly $70,000 in a 1978 real-estate investment they entered into with an Arkansas developer and his wife.
The Clintons initially invested $23,200 less than the other couple did.
James Lyons, a lawyer in Denver and a friend of the Clintons, said in documents released late last night that the developer, James B. McDougal and his wife, Susan, "exercised total control" over the investment, a plan to develop 200 acres in the Ozarks as vacation properties.


BRIEFS
*
Advanced Polymer Systems Inc., Redwood City, Calif., and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer completed the restructuring of a 1989 joint venture. *
BASF Corp., Parsipanny, N.J., a unit of Basfin Corp., said it would discontinue production of automotive parts, containers and industrial coatings at its Anaheim, Calif., site by the fourth quarter of this year.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Portuguese Boy's View Of War and Separation
The title character and narrator of Teresa Villaverde Cabral's first feature film, "Alex," is a morose young man (Ricardo Colares) who recounts events from his childhood in a deadened monotone.
Asked in the film's opening sequence whether he remembers his parents, he answers no, even though the film turns out to be a cinematic memory play.
Set in the early 1970's, during Portugal's final years under the Salazar dictatorship, the film tells the story of how Alex's father, Pedro (Joaquim de Almeida), is reluctantly drafted to fight in the country's African colonies.
At first his letters home to his adoring wife, Manuela (Teresa Roby), and son are loving.
But as the months pass, they become less frequent and turn increasingly bitter and despairing.
Eventually they stop coming altogether, and Pedro is presumed lost.


CHRONICLE
What do NATALIE COLE, MICKEY MANTLE, Secretary of State JAMES BAKER, Gen.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF and CONNIE CHUNG have in common?
They are all nominees for the 1992 Ellis Island Medals of Honor, announced yesterday by WILLIAM FUGAZY, chairman of the National Ethnic Coalition of Organizations.


Delay Sought For Limits On Pollution
On the same day that a state board gave final approval to a regulation placing strict new limits on motor vehicle emissions, the State Senate passed legislation that would delay putting the rules into effect.
The debate on the legislation, which has pitted the protection of the state's environment against concern for its faltering economy, now moves from the Senate, which has a Republican majority, to the Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats.
Supporters of the bill believe it faces an uphill fight there, but environmental groups are not taking the vote for granted.


Rep. Engel, Bronx Democrat, Acknowledges 21 Overdrafts
In the face of certain disclosure, Representative Eliot L. Engel, a Bronx Democrat, reversed himself yesterday and acknowledged that he had overdrawn his account at the House bank.
He apologized to his constituents and paid a self-imposed penalty.
Mr.
Engel, who was elected in 1988 after the bribery conviction of the popular incumbent, Mario Biaggi, was the 19th of the 54 representatives from the New York metropolitan area to acknowledge that he wrote checks for more than was in his account.


Corrections
A report on Friday in the "On Stage, and Off" column of Weekend misidentified a fund-raising show for the New York Shakespeare Festival, to be held on May 13.
It is called "Wednesday in the Park for Joe."


Prosecutors Rest Case In Gotti Trial
Federal prosecutors rested their case in John Gotti's racketeering-murder trial yesterday after presenting 37 witnesses and about eight hours of taped conversations.
A brief defense case, perhaps two or three days, is scheduled to begin today, followed by summations and Judge I. Leo Glasser's final instructions to the jury.
The jury's deliberations could begin late this week or early next week as the trial moves toward toward a conclusion in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Brown Flails as Clinton Rolls With the Punches
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California is flailing about, spewing out charges like sparks from a Fourth of July pinwheel, in a last-ditch effort to establish himself in this week's Connecticut primary as a credible alternative to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
The rest of them -- the Wilders and Kerreys, Harkins and Tsongases -- are gone now.
Just Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown are left, locked in a wildly unequal struggle for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Clinton has the delegates, the endorsements, the money and the television commercials.
He even has the support of the desperate workers at Groton, Conn., who build the Seawolf submarine, soon to be suspended under President Bush's military cutbacks.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about new forecasts of the Federal budget deficit referred incorrectly to a deficit-reduction proposal by Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan.
In the recent Congressional tax debate, he proposed a bill that would have scrapped the $300 tax credit per child proposed by Senate leaders and instead used most, not all, of the $28 billion cost of the credits to reduce the deficit.


New Operation At Wasserstein
Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company has established an equity capital markets arm to beef up its underwriting capability in stocks, apparently expecting Wall Street's flood of initial public offerings to continue.
The new division, called Wasserstein Perella Securities, will work alongside the firm's high-yield sales and trading operation, Grantchester Securities, allowing the firm to underwrite straight equity issues more easily.


Does Art Have to Be Popular? Barcelona Debates a Huge Sock
Widely acclaimed as Catalonia's greatest living artist, Antoni Tapies was the unchallenged choice to design a sculpture for the central hall of the new National Museum of Catalan Art.
Unchallenged, that is, until he proposed building a 60-foot-high sock.
And now Barcelona is deeply -- indeed, passionately -- divided between those who consider his design an absurd example of contemporary Catalan art and those who say artistic freedom should be defended even if the public is, well, ignorant.


An Arrival Date Is Set For Volvo's New Chief
Volvo A.B. said yesterday that Soren Gyll would become its president and chief executive on May 13.
Mr.
Gyll, the president of Sweden's largest food and drug conglomerate, Procordia A.B., will replace Christer Zetterberg, who will become Volvo's deputy chief executive.
The Swedish car and truck maker first announced Mr.
Gyll's appointment in late January, at the time of its proposed merger with Procordia.
Yesterday's announcement sets the timing for Mr.
Gyll's move, which will occur despite the Swedish Government's rejection of the merger.


INSIDE
Uncertainty in France
France's election results are more than just a setback for the ruling Socialists.
They pose a serious challenge to the highly centralized political system.
News analysis, page A8.
Pretoria Toughens Stand
Emboldened by its mandate of support from white voters last week, the South African Government is seeking greater power over a transitional multiracial administration.
Page A3.
Justices Take Sacrifice Case
The Supreme Court agreed to decide the validity of a ban on animal sacrifice and could use the case to redefine the limits of government interference with religious practice.
Page A13.
Sales Tax Cut a Step Closer
The Republican-dominated New Jersey Assembly voted to roll back the 1-cent increase in the state sales tax enacted two years ago.
Page B1.
Ignoring the Scooper Law
Many New York City dog owners seem to view the so-called pooper-scooper law as an amusing anachronism, readily flouted.
Page B1.


Bridge
The prestigious Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship continued today at the American Contract Bridge League Spring Nationals, with 64 teams surviving from an original entry of 92.
The champions will be crowned on Saturday, and will become candidates for the 1993 American world championship team.
There were no major upsets in the preliminary round.
The top-seeded teams by captain are: 1.
Malcolm Brachman of Dallas; 2.
Bart Bramley of Chicago; 3.
Jim Cayne of Manhattan; 4.
Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va.; 5.
Dick Freeman of Atlanta; 6.
Zia Mahmood of Manhattan; 7.
Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I.; 8.
Cliff Russell of Miami Beach, Fla.


Why New York State's Independent Colleges Also Deserve Aid
To the Editor:
You report that 250 professors and students at the City University of New York have sued the state, "contending that the way it finances public higher education is racially discriminatory" (news article, Feb. 27).
While I take no position on the merits of the legal challenge, I believe you leave out a critical part of the story: the contribution of independent colleges and universities.
No matter whose statistics we accept, it is clear that New York State subsidizes each student in four-year, public colleges somewhere between $8,650 and $9,700 a year (these figures do not fully include capital expenditures).
By contrast, direct state subsidies to the 398,000 students enrolled in independent colleges amount to only $1,025 a year per student.


In Old Images, a New Side of Mars
A GEOLOGIST recently studying pictures taken of Mars in 1978 was astonished to find what appears to be a landslide crashing down the face of a cliff -- evidence, she says, that suggests the planet's surface is still changing.
The two images taken by the Viking 1 orbiter, an American spacecraft that surveyed Mars from 1976 to 1980, seem to show the edge of a plateau that underwent a geological change in the 2 minutes, 23 seconds between pictures, said Dr.
Baerbel Lucchitta of the United States Geological Survey in Flagstaff, Ariz.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; On Reflection, Bush and Clinton Have Likenesses
Moving from the hermetically sealed, high-security bubble of President Bush's entourage to Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign is a journey through the political looking glass.
It is not hard to imagine the two candidates standing on opposite sides of the mirror, looking at reflections distorted by politics and circumstances but in many ways the same.
Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Clinton are both graduates of the school of compromise, trying to get along with as many people as possible and building up networks of friends and allies through endless note-writing and constant telephoning.
But the public perception could not differ more.


Roberta Grossman, 46, Head of Zebra Books
Roberta Bender Grossman, the president and publisher of Zebra Books, died on March 13 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said Walter Zacharius, the chairman of Kensington Publishing Corporation, which owns Zebra Books.


Proof of Genetic Redundancy: Mice Normal Without Vital Gene
OF all the genes that cancer researchers have studied over the past several years, none has provoked as much impassioned excitement as one called p53.
Scientists have detected crippled copies of the gene in tumors of the lung, breast, colon, brain, liver, bladder and other organs, suggesting that a blow to the molecule could be an almost indispensable step in the evolution of most human cancers.
Other experiments strongly indicated that the normal, healthy version of the p53 gene is a prime player in the growth and welfare of the body, instructing cells when to divide and when to rest quietly.


Chrysler's Star May Flare Again
If Robert J. Eaton had joined the Chrysler Corporation just a year ago, he would have been signing up to rescue a sinking ship.
But in just the last two months Chrysler's prospects suddenly seem brighter.
With $861 million of new equity raised in February, a slew of new models about to roll into showrooms and layers of corporate fat sliced away, the nation's No. 3 auto maker appears poised for yet another of its comebacks.
In other words, the task of Mr.
Eaton, formerly the head of General Motors' European operations, is to keep several good things going at Chrysler.


Prominent Lawyer Defends Himself
Harvey Myerson, a flamboyant trial lawyer known for his lavish style of living, with Rolls-Royces, foot-long Cuban cigars and raccoon coats, opened his own defense yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn by denying charges that he stole more than $3.5 million from his clients and his firm.
He said he was a victim of a setup.
At times cajoling the jury with whispers or pacing the courtroom, Mr.
Myerson dismissed a 15-count indictment against him and shifted the blame to four former partners who are witnesses for the prosecution.
Mr.
Myerson's opening statement followed that of an assistant United States attorney, Sean O'Shea, who described Mr.
Myerson's life as one of flagrant spending that included chartered flights to resorts, luxury hotels and an $86,000 Cartier diamond ring for a friend.


Henderson Talks Kindly of His Good Side, and His Great Side
Unlike his attitude a year ago, Rickey Henderson has not made an issue of his contract this spring.
But, he said, he still can't win.
"I'm not a bad person," Henderson said before the Oakland Athletics traveled to Tucson for an exhibition game with Cleveland today.


Former Chase Manhattan Official Named Deputy Mayor by Dinkins
In a move to bolster his standing in the business community, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed Barry F. Sullivan, a well-known banker and former chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, as New York City's Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development.
Mr.
Sullivan, who is 61 years old and who became known in New York City's banking industry as an innovative executive at the Chase Manhattan Bank, will remain a consultant to First Chicago at a salary of $780,000 a year, which was negotiated as part of his retirement package in December before he discussed the city job.
He said his consulting work with First Chicago would be minimal and would not interfere with his duties as a deputy mayor.


By Design; Leather Luxe
Leather is riding high here.
It seems as if no designer's fall collection is complete without a few pairs of skintight leather jeans.
They have even replaced tights as the sexy leg covering of choice of the models darting in and out of the fashion tents in the courtyard of the Louvre, where the shows are held.
Chanel's, designed by Karl Lagerfeld, fit like a second skin, even though they have side panels of quilting similar to the detail in the famous Chanel bag.
At Christian Lacroix, they come burnished in a bronze-gold tone.
But overall, slick black is the favorite shade.


Q&amp;A
Crossed Legs
Q. Why do people cross their legs when sitting?


Good, and Too Young to Know Better
IT had seemed like a routine telephone call home from a college senior to her parents.
You know, the chatty, bonding exchange of life's daily minutiae that used to occur around the dinner table but now must be done long-distance because, despite the child's earnest promise 18 years ago, she has grown up.
In person, many parents get very good at reading their child's mood, health and intentions by posture, pallor, tone of voice, even by the day's hairstyle or wardrobe.
On the phone it's much harder, even during evening rates.
So Cheryl Zelanakas's father didn't pick up the danger signals until she too casually said, "By the way." Young adults learn many things away at college, but one of them is not how to use the phrase, "By the way."


Kurdish Rebels Renew Attacks in Turkey


Nets Prevail As Morris Blocks Johnson
One day after succumbing to the Heat in Miami, the Nets were almost beaten by the Charlotte Hornets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
But they managed a 123-120 victory thanks to another high-scoring game by Derrick Coleman and a brilliant defensive play by Chris Morris.
Coleman had a game-high 37 points and 12 rebounds one night after his game-high 32 points and 9 rebounds in the 107-100 loss in Miami.
But it took Morris's play with 4.8 seconds left, when he swatted away a shot by Larry Johnson, to seal the victory.


A Bit of Bluegrass History
George Steinbrenner, the exiled owner of the New York Yankees, expressed interest.
Jack Kent Cooke, the resident owner of the Washington Redskins, expressed interest.
Rock stars, oil tycoons and Japanese investors expressed interest.
The royal family of Britain made inquiries.
Arabian royalty, too.
And the Sultan of Brunei not only made inquiries but also toured the property to see for himself.


On My Mind; Who Lost Mr. Bush?
The way American politics is working out, a Governor of Arkansas has the opportunity to take up a task of transcending importance that a President of the United States has left undone.
The job is to tell the people of this country and of the world exactly what the United States should do and plans to do with the influence it still commands, before it is completely frittered away.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about the New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art misidentified the director of the French film "Le Ciel de Paris." He was Michel Bena, not Danniel Danniel.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
ABC Television Network, New York, named Pete Barrett senior vice president for public relations and affiliate marketing services. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Group, Princeton, N.J., a unit of Britol-Myers Squibb Co., appointed James J. Mauzey to the new position of senior vice president for industry and public affairs.


Classical Music in Review
Michael Roll  The Frick Collection
Michael Roll, an English pianist, has taken an unusually leisurely approach to his concert career, at least from a New Yorker's perspective.
He won the first Leeds competition in 1963, when he was 17 years old.
He made his first American appearance with the Boston Symphony Orchestra in 1974.
And he waited until Sunday afternoon to make his New York recital debut, which he presented in the intimate surroundings of the music room at the Frick.
But Mr.
Roll showed that there was something to be said for making a debut in one's mid-40's.
His performances of works by Mozart, Schubert and Schumann suggested that he might have been a more impetuous player in his younger years, and that he has considered and internalized readings that might once have been impulsive.
His account of Mozart's Sonata No. 11 (K. 331), for example, was couched in assertive phrasing and dark coloration that was often more Beethovenian than Mozartean.
When Mozart's spirit was invoked, it was often the operatic rather than the pianistic Mozart.
In some contexts, such stylistic blurring can be objectionable.
But Mr.
Roll seemed to be presenting a case for the continuity of Mozart's rhetorical language into the 19th century, and the results were compelling.
He offered variants of that argument in Schubert's three Klavierstucke (D. 946), which fleetingly anticipate Chopin, and in Schumann's Fantasy (Op. 17), which holds Beethoven up as an ideal while pushing forward toward a steamier Romantic vision.
Mr.
Roll comes to this music with a strong but not showy technique.
There were moments when chord voicings might have been smoother or better judged.
But Mr.
Roll's attention seemed focused on broader concepts, not microscopic details.
Most crucially, the directness of his style exposed the sometimes conflicting passions that drive these works.


Corrections
A report in the Music Notes column yesterday about a brochure distributed by the Brooklyn Academy of Music referred incorrectly to ticket sales.
Doug Allan, an academy official, said the organization had sold $300,000 worth of tickets, not 300,000 tickets.


Fokker's Wing Design Called a Problem in Previous Crash
The type of plane that crashed on Sunday at La Guardia Airport has had many accidents, with the destruction of one in every nine planes ever manufactured, according to figures compiled by a group of British insurance companies.
Most of the F28 accidents have taken place in tropical third world countries, with no immediately apparent pattern to the crashes.
But the preliminary results of a Canadian investigation into an F28 crash three years ago in Dryden, Ontario, indicate that the design of the Fokker F28's wings requires extra caution during cold, wet weather, so that the wings are kept clear of ice.
The Dryden accident, like the crash at La Guardia Sunday, occurred shortly after takeoff in a snowstorm.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Will Hear Appeal of Animal Sacrifice Ban
Accepting a case it could use to redefine the constitutional limits of government interference with religious practice, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide the validity of a Florida city's ban on animal sacrifice.
The case is an appeal by followers of Santeria, an ancient African religion practiced by thousands of Caribbean immigrants to the United States, in which animal sacrifice plays a central ceremonial role.


The Tides of Flushing Bay Dictated the Pace of Rescue Efforts
In the thick mud and snow along Runway 13-31, USAir Flight 405 was twisted to junk metal, its body upside down and flaming in Flushing Bay.
Voices screamed from inside the wreckage.
Burned corpses and detached limbs floated in the shallow water.
The living burst through the surface of the water, crying for help.
Other survivors roamed the runway in a daze.
"I saw people floating in the water," said Officer Joseph Toscano, a police diver who arrived at La Guardia Airport minutes after the crash, which occurred Sunday shortly after 9:30 P.M.
"Several were scattered in the fuselage. Some were attached to their seats. They were all dead. I found two still strapped to their seats. They were all burned, really badly burned. It really couldn't get much worse."


Closing Arguments in Child-Abuse Trial
Calling the operator of a day-care center who is the defendant in a child sex-abuse case an "evil, evil man," the prosecution in the eight-month-long case began closing arguments today, painstakingly recalling children's testimony that jurors had not heard since September.
"I want to reintroduce you to some people that he hopes you have forgotten about," said Nancy Lamb, an assistant district attorney, as she pointed to the defendant, Robert F. Kelly Jr., who sat imperturbable at the defense table.
"I want to recall for you all the horrible things they said he did to them. He's an evil, evil man."


Yugoslav Cease-Fire Shaky as U.N. Forces Deploy
Less than two weeks before United Nations peacekeeping troops are to begin deployment in force in contested areas of Croatia, the 11-week-old cease-fire in the republic has come under increasing strain with a surge in fighting between Serbs and Croats.
The tense situation in the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the 14,400-member force will have its headquarters, also appears to have worsened, with outbreaks of heavy fighting in two towns, Neum on the Adriatic coast and Gorazde, about 30 miles southeast of Sarajevo, the capital.


Reviews/Film Festival; Documentary of Mother-Daughter Reconciliation
In 1962 Camille Billops gave up her 4-year-old daughter, Christa Victoria, for adoption.
Eighteen years later, Ms.
Billops, who had since married and become a painter and sculptor, was reunited with Christa.
"Finding Christa," written, produced and directed by Ms.
Billops and James Hatch, is a 55-minute documentary about that reconciliation, and what a mass of fascinating contradictions it is!
"Finding Christa" is forgiving but sometimes thin-skinned.
Everybody talks a lot, yet certain important information is not revealed or is passed over so quickly that it seems not to matter.


Action in Lotus's Lawsuit
A Federal judge, ruling in the Lotus Development Corporation's copyright-infringement lawsuit against Borland International Inc., yesterday denied motions by both sides that would have resulted in a quick resolution of the case.
The ruling by Federal District Judge Robert E. Keeton in Boston makes it more likely that the case will go to trial.
In a suit filed in 1990, Lotus contended that Borland's Quattro Pro spreadsheet program infringes copyrights on Lotus's 1-2-3 program.
In its motion for summary judgment, Lotus argued that the judge should declare it the victor because the case is similar to another one, decided by Judge Keeton in 1990, in which Paperback Software International was found to have infringed the 1-2-3 copyrights.
But in his ruling yesterday, Judge Keeton said that Lotus had not proved that the cases were the same.
In the Paperback Software case, he said, he had ruled that the entire screen display of 1-2-3 was copyrightable.
But in the current case, he said, there is a dispute as to whether Borland copied the entire interface.


A Year More for White
The National League confirmed yesterday that BILL WHITE would not seek re-election as league president once his term expires.
"His term is up on March 31, 1993, and he doesn't want another," said KATY FEENEY, vice president of media and public affairs for the league.
White was traveling yesterday and not available for comment.


Ellen H. Johnson, Art Teacher, Historian and Curator, Dies at 81
Ellen H. Johnson, an influential art historian and curator who taught at Oberlin College in Ohio for 38 years, died yesterday at her home in Oberlin.
She was 81 years old.
She died of cancer, said Elizabeth A. Brown, the curator of modern art at the museum.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Undertones Of Distress Hit Bastion Of G.O.P.
When George Bush's popularity ratings dropped, the President's aunt grew alarmed.
"I was so worried about him," said Mary Herbert Walker.
"In this economy, people want change."
Mrs.
Walker, who is 89 years old, lives with her dog and two servants in a large white frame house in Greenwich, Conn., the town where Mr.
Bush grew up.
While Mrs.
Walker conceded that "our friends have not been affected at all" by the recession, she said she began to worry about her nephew after talking to the man who cleans her carpets.


Software Coding For Export
An organization representing the nation's largest publishers of software for desktop computers is close to completing a confidential agreement with the National Security Agency to permit the sale abroad of programs that contain special data security functions.
Sales of software with the ability to encode information are now tightly controlled by the agency, a Defense Department unit that licenses the export of weapons.
But United States software publishers have been putting pressure on the Government to loosen controls on programs that contain such cryptographic features because they are hampering the ability of American companies to compete internationally.
Privacy Issue Raised


Olajuwon Suspended For His Failure to Play
HAKEEM OLAJUWON, the Rockets' six-time All-Star, was suspended indefinitely yesterday by Houston because he failed to play in a game last Saturday against Sacramento after a doctor cleared him for action.
Olajuwon, who said he sustained a hamstring injury last Tuesday, will not be paid during the suspension.
The ban will cost Olajuwon $46,900 per game, based on his $3.8 million annual salary.
LEONARD ARMATO, Olajuwon's agent, said he planned to file a grievance against the Rockets after further talks with the Players Association.


Genetic Engineering Needs Strict Regulation
To the Editor:
"Bush to Ease Rules on Products Made by Altering Genes" (front page, Feb. 25) and "From Monsters to Mainstream" (editorial, March 1) both emphasize the economic benefits of the Administration's new biotechnology policy.
The National Audubon Society remains concerned about the environmental risks posed by genetically engineered organisms, such as plants, fish and microbes.
We are not afraid of monsters, but Vice President Quayle and the Competitiveness Council are.
Their monster is regulations designed to protect the environment.
Undoubtedly, Competitiveness Council members will sleep better at night under their new policy.


Careers; Skills Urged For Teachers Of Business
PROGRAMS for M.B.A. candidates have been changing to meet new managerial needs, but training of their teachers -- those who get doctoral degrees in business -- has remained too narrow for today's needs, some educators say.
All over the country graduate schools of business administration have been updating M.B.A. programs by adding pertinent new courses, or integrating components into courses, on subjects like manufacturing principles, ethics, crisis planning, career planning, communications skills and, more recently, environmental issues.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Brown's Campaign Finds Strength In Spirited but Inexperienced Staff
It may be the first modern Presidential campaign headquarters to rely on a single telephone line.
But at least it has call waiting.
"Oops, that's our other line," said Saundra April, a volunteer working this weekend in the newly established Manhattan office of Edmund G. Brown Jr.
"Hang on for a minute and I promise I'll get right back to you."


Books of The Times; The Lessons of Loss Learned in Childhood
At Weddings and Wakes By Alice McDermott 213 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.
Alice McDermott's last novel, the critically acclaimed "That Night," used the story of a doomed teen-age romance to create a resonant portrait of suburban life in the early 1960's: a lyrical and haunting portrait that left the reader with an indelible sense of life's precariousness, the ephemerality of youth and passion and hope.
The same sense of lost innocence and betrayed dreams lingers in the wake of her latest book, "At Weddings and Wakes," a beautifully wrought novel that depicts three generations of an Irish Catholic family in New York through the eyes of three young children.
Though the child's point of view and the time frame -- the early 60's, again -- are reminiscent of "That Night," the world portrayed in this volume feels light years removed from that earlier novel's leafy suburbs.
It is a world where everyone goes to Mass on Sunday, the women wearing fur collars and hats, the men in dark, somber coats; a world where children dream of growing up to become nuns and priests; a world defined by holiday rituals and dozens of tiny domestic routines.


Court Takes Home-Office Tax Case
The Supreme Court agreed today to resolve an escalating legal dispute over what requirements taxpayers who do some of their work at home must meet to qualify for a home-office deduction.
The question, which the Justices will not decide until next year, pits the Tax Court against the Internal Revenue Service.
The I.R.S. has long regarded home-office deductions with suspicion as an area of abuse.


A New Campaign For New Jersey
To help tourists consider New Jersey as a vacation destination rather than one long turnpike, the state's Division of Travel and Tourism is introducing an advertising campaign carrying the theme "New Jersey. You should see us now."
The television and print campaign, created by Poppe Tyson/New Jersey in Morris Plains, N.J., will coincide with the peak vacation season, beginning just before Memorial Day and ending on Labor Day.
The budget is estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


Market Place; Europe Is Costly So Far for Delta
FLY Delta Air Lines from Munich or Frankfurt to New York?
It is not the first airline that Germans think of, for Delta has not been a household word in Europe.
Since taking over most of Pan American World Airway's routes to Europe last summer, however, the carrier has spent heavily to become a competitor there, and industry experts are optimistic the investment will pay off over the long term.
"There's more to be done in terms of identity," said Harold Achtziger, the vice president of international operations at Delta.
"Once we get the message out on how big our route structure is, then people will become enthused."


Classical Music in Review
New York City Gay Men's Chorus  Carnegie Hall
Stravinsky once described Leonard Bernstein as a department store of music.
In its long but never tedious concert on Sunday, the New York City Gay Men's Chorus, conducted by Gary Miller, lingered momentarily in the liturgical department but spent the rest of the evening shopping in the world of show business.
In this Bernstein tribute, songs, choruses and ensembles, from the well-known to the obscure, were given cheerful and precise performance.
Mr.
Miller's 150-man choir sang everything from memory and with the kind of confidence that leaps at entrances and difficult rhythms rather than waiting for them to happen.
The items from "West Side Story," "Candide," "Trouble in Tahiti," "On the Town" and "Wonderful Town" were old friends greeted once again.
The numbers from "1600 Pennsylvania Avenue," "Songfest"and "Madwoman of Central Park West" visited territory a lot of people may have forgotten.
Music for "The Lark" and "Peter Pan" and three unattached songs, were new ground for most; "Mr. and Mrs. Webb Say Good Night" and the bouncy "Mass" settings described Bernstein's desegregation of opera, concert and pop-music stages with considerable precision.


Bailout Agency for S.&amp; L.'s Plans to Begin Dismantling
The Resolution Trust Corporation, formed in 1989 to clean up the savings and loan industry, announced a plan today to begin winding down its operations.
Albert Casey, the chairman of Resolution Trust, made the announcement on the eve of a Congressional panel's vote on more money for the agency, which has often been the target of lawmakers' criticism.


Family Gives Up Effort to Block Autopsy of Executed Killer
The family of an executed killer gave up efforts to keep the state from performing an autopsy on his body last week because of the turmoil it was causing family members.
The killer, Olan Randle Robison, had initiated the effort because he wanted to spare his family further pain.


Classical Music in Review
Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Though always avid to hear the great orchestras of Eastern Europe, to savor again their exotic tang, this listener cannot escape a dread of impending loss whenever such an occasion arises.
For the distinguishing traits of these ensembles are fast disappearing, as the smooth, blended sonority of the great Western ensembles becomes the standard worldwide.


Dinkins Picks 3 for Police Review Panel
Moving to meet demands that he fill four civilian vacancies on the 12-member board that investigates complaints of police brutality, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday nominated three new members and pledged to name a fourth as soon as a background check is done.
The Mayor also renominated the current chairwoman of the Civilian Complaint Review Board, Mary Burke Nicholas, and another member, the Rev.
Lee McCallum of Staten Island.
The board comprises six members nominated by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City Council, and six civilian employees of the Police Department, chosen by the Police Commissioner.


Detroit Journal; Two Trials Reflect City's Two Worlds
In one of America's most racially segregated urban areas, 8 Mile Road is a chasm dividing blacks and whites into separate worlds.
The road is Detroit's northern boundary.
Beyond it lie predominantly white suburbs.
To the south is the nation's seventh-largest city, and 76 percent of its one million people are black.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stocks posted sharp losses today, and the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed back below 20,000.
At the end of afternoon trading, the index was down 348.03 points, or 1.72 percent, at 19,891.57.
Selling by arbitragers and institutions before the end of the fiscal year kept pressure on prices, brokers said.
On Monday, the index gained 54.51 points.


Nomadic Group of Anti-Abortionists Uses New Tactics to Make Its Mark
Two years ago, Ramona Masotti was 26 years old and working as a clerk for the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
Now she has no home, no job and no money, but she has a vocation: She has joined the Lambs of Christ, a group of devout Roman Catholics who travel from town to town, staying with local supporters and doing anything short of violence to keep women from having abortions.
Ronald Maxson, a 56-year-old retired military employee from San Francisco, left his wife, six children and 10 grandchildren behind a year and a half ago to travel with the Lambs.
He said he and his family "all agreed that this is what I should be doing."


Quotation of the Day
"Everything was just a shambles. I couldn't believe it was a plane. It was a junkyard." -- ROBERT SPEAR, a passenger on USAir Flight 405.  [ B2:4. ]


'Country Boy' Fights Overdraft Ranking
When Tommy Robinson was the Sheriff of Pulaski County in 1981, he chained 14 county jail inmates to a guard tower after the state prison refused to house them because of overcrowding.
"Let's have a standoff," Mr. Robinson told state prison officials at the time.


Round 2: Spring Is Still Staggering


Critic's Notebook; Downfall of the American Family
Television has no problem these days casting a friendly snicker at the depictions of family life in old series like "Ozzie and Harriet" or "Leave It to Beaver." The traditional nuclear family in America has long been an endangered species.
Adults have been known to recall growing up neurotic because life at home did not measure up to the warm togetherness shown on "Father Knows Best." Upbeat programming has its downside.
The patronizing air toward old series, however, carries an implicit message: television today is so much more gritty and attuned to reality.
Is it?
While headlines tell almost daily horror stories of families in crisis, of neglect and violence, of more and more children slipping beneath the poverty line, prime-time entertainment continues to provide bromides.
What happens when a youngster gets into a bit of trouble on tough urban streets?
Why, Mom simply sends him off to live with wealthy relatives in California and, presto, you have "Fresh Prince of Bel Air." Slick, squeaky clean and pure fantasy.


New Foe for Seoul Party in Vote Today
South Korea's stormy politics have long been shaped by the simple rule that the conservative forces of the military, the Government and big business are always united for the often violent struggle against their common foe, the left.
But as this young democracy prepares for its most important elections in four years on Tuesday, a new challenger is shaking the governing party more than street demonstrations ever did -- a powerful opponent on the right.


U.S. Issues Guidelines On Bladder Problems
Federal health officials today issued new guidelines for detecting and treating urinary incontinence, saying that 80 percent of those afflicted with the embarrassing and undertreated condition could be cured or greatly improved with proper therapy.
The guidelines, issued by an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services, call for doctors and other health workers to inquire more aggressively about possible problems of bladder control and to test to determine the underlying cause.


Brazil and Argentina Loan Talks Progress
Talks by American and foreign bankers with officials of Brazil and Argentina about $78 billion of past-due loans and interest are progressing faster than expected and may result in an agreement that allows banks to recover more than they had expected, bankers said yesterday.
After Argentine officials presented a proposal to bankers at a meeting in New York yesterday, William Rhodes, vice chairman of Citicorp, issued a statement saying that he was "optimistic that we can have an agreement in principle with either one or both of those countries" within two weeks.


Flutie Shifts to Calgary
He's changing teams, but quarterback DOUG FLUTIE has decided to remain in the Canadian Football League.
Flutie, who was voted the league's outstanding player with the British Columbia Lions last season, signed a four-year contract with the Calgary Stampeders yesterday.
No terms were disclosed, but the pact was believed to be worth $1 million a year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S. ASSAILED ON ENVIRONMENT
Rich and poor countries attending a U.N. planning conference said the United States is endangering prospects for success at the international environmental meeting in Rio de Janeiro this June.
They said Washington is refusing to promise more environmental aid to the third world or to set gas-emission limits.
A1
Europe curbs sulfur emissions from diesel and heating fuel.
A6  LIBYA OFFERS CONCESSIONS
Libya said at the United Nations that two officials accused of roles in blowing up Pan Am 103 would be handed over to the Arab League.
A1  A LONG PATH IN SOUTH AFRICA
President de Klerk's Government announced proposals that would give it significant power over a transitional administration.
The plans call for appointment of multiracial advisory councils on constitutional change.
The African National Congress denounced the proposals.
A3  FRANCE LOOKS TO THE RIGHT
News Analysis: By rebuffing mainstream political parties and giving new support to the far-right National Front of Jean-Marie Le Pen and to small environmental parties, French voters have deepened the political uncertainty of the last year.
A8  A SHAMIR-VS.-BUSH CAMPAIGN?
Signaling that he may seek re-election by campaigning against the Bush Administration, Prime Minister Shamir accused the United States of trying to rearrange Israel's borders without negotiations.
A10  YUGOSLAV CEASE-FIRE SHAKY
With a U.N.
Yugoslav peace force nearing deployment time, the military situation in two republics, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, was further strained by heavy weekend fighting.
A10  ORTEGA'S LEADERSHIP CRITICIZED
The Sandinista Front is racked by a dispute that pits former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra against party members who consider his leadership radical and dictatorial.
A11  A new conservative party competes in South Korean voting today.
A3  Cabinda Journal: Oil wealth is little help; so is the Government.
A4  Polish austerity budget threatens further social damage.
A10  National A12-18, A22  DISPLACING THE REGULATORY LOAD
The Federal Government continues to create or expand domestic spending programs with little or no review of the financial burdens they place on state and local governments, public policy analysts say.
A1  JUSTICES WEIGH RELIGIOUS ISSUE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide the validity of a Florida city's ban on animal sacrifice, a case the Justices could use to redefine the constitutional limits of government interference with religious practice.A13  DEMOCRATS DUEL IN CONNECTICUT
The Democratic Presidential primary in Connecticut was expected to be a minor contest but instead has become a prize vigorously sought by Governor Clinton and former Governor Brown.
A16  REFLECTIONS ON BUSH AND CLINTON
President Bush and Governor Clinton can be seen as reflections in a mirror, similar in ambition and method, but oddly opposite in social values and public image.
A17
The hometown Bush ignores seems unlikely to forget him.  A16
Brown's noisy, nasty tilting at the Clinton windmill.
A17  GIVING ALL TO FIGHT ABORTION
From the crucible of the abortion debate has sprung the Lambs of Christ, a group of devout Roman Catholics who travel from town to town, staying with local supporters and doing anything short of violence to prevent abortions.
A12  996 OVERDRAFTS, 996 DENIALS
Former Representative Tommy Robinson of Arkansas, accused of being the chief offender in the House bank scandal, pugnaciously denied he wrote a single overdraft at the House bank and demanded a chance to clear his name.
A18  Detroit journal: 8 Mile Road divides the white world from the black.
A12  Closing arguments in an 8-month child abuse trial began.
A15  Poor children grew poorer in the 1980's, a report found.
A22  Metropolitan Digest, B1 LOOKING FOR CRASH CLUES
Federal investigators began sifting through the jagged, charred wreckage of USAir Flight 405, looking into why it veered off a snowy runway as it tried to take off from La Guardia Airport on Sunday night.
A1  THE SURVIVORS' ACCOUNTS
As Flight 405 taxied down the runway in the blustery snow, some sixth sense told Robert Spear to cinch his seat belt a little tighter, that this would be no ordinary flight.
A1  A NEW DEPUTY MAYOR
Barry F. Sullivan, a prominent banker and ex-chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, was named New York's Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development.
A1  CITY COLLEGE CHAIRMAN OUSTED
After racially charged remarks about Jews and whites, City University's trustees voted to replace Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as head of City College's black studies department when his term expires in June.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Endowment chairman details his dismissal.
C11  Barcelona's sock sculpture.
C11  Barbara Kopple, film maker.
C11  Film: "Finding Christa." C15  Music: American Symphony.
C11  Classical reviews.
C12  Dance: From Bella Lewitzky.
C16  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Two sides of Rickey Henderson.
B7  Yankee prospect may be demoted.
B11  Basketball: Nets prevail as Morris blocks Johnson.
B7  Fans included in UMass game plan.
B9  Few surprises in Sweet 16.
B8  Football: Jets sign two free agents.
B10  Horse Racing: Calumet Farm on block.
B10  Soccer: Nine venues for 1994 World Cup.
B7  Fashion A19  Paris: Somber mastery  Obituaries D21-22  Friedrich von Hayek, free-market economist D22  Ellen H. Johnson, art historian D21  John C. Sheehan, developed synthetic penicillins D22  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Mr.
Clinton's tough choice.
Troops for the Americas.
Another day wrong-footed.
Callousness at Colt's.
Letters A21  Russell Baker: The shoe suspense.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: Who lost Mr.
Bush?
A21  Clayton Yeutter: When "fairness" isn't fair.
A21  Ellen Ladowsky: Bill Clinton is no victim of the press.
A21  Lawrence J. White: How to worsen the banking debacle.


America West Route's Sale
The Transportation Department yesterday gave final approval to the transfer of a route from Honolulu to Nagoya, Japan, to Northwest Airlines from America West Airlines, along with several other route decisions.
The move clears the way for America West to sell the route for $15 million to Northwest, enabling it to get badly needed money to help it reorganize under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Investigators Look for Clues in La Guardia Crash
Federal investigators began going through the jagged, charred wreckage of USAir Flight 405 yesterday, looking into why it veered off a snowy runway as it tried to take off from La Guardia Airport on Sunday night.
Twenty-seven people died and 24 were injured, the police said, when the twin-engine jetliner skipped down the runway, slammed into an embankment and rolled into Flushing Bay.
It was too soon to say why the plane went down.
But Federal safety investigators were taking a close look at whether the wings had iced up while the plane waited on a snowy runway to take off.
They called Canadian aviation authorities and asked for a newly completed report on the crash of a similar plane in a snowstorm three years ago.
The Canadians concluded that the plane, a Dutch-made Fokker F28, was vulnerable to ice forming on the wings.


Nestle Seen As Winner Of Perrier
The Swiss food giant Nestle appears to have won control of Perrier, ending a three-month battle with the Agnelli family of Italy for control of the world's leading mineral water company.
"I can confirm that there is an agreement between the various parties, and that its details will be revealed imminently," said Sylvie Simphal, a spokeswoman for the French food group BSN, which allied with Nestle in the tortuous struggle for control of Source Perrier S.A.


U.S. ADDS PROGRAMS WITH LITTLE REVIEW OF LOCAL BURDENS
Against the background of a stubborn recession and mounting financial distress in the country, the Federal Government continues to create or expand domestic spending programs with little or no review of the financial burdens they will place on state and local governments, public policy analysts say.
In 1990 alone, the year the recession began, President Bush signed 20 bills into law, ordering programs that the National Conference of State Legislatures says will cost state and local governments billions of extra dollars, primarily for health care, the environment and Social Security payments for public employees.


Correction
Because of an editing error, Adlai E. Stevenson's Senate tenure was misstated in an article on Saturday.
He represented Illinois from 1970 to 1981.


Another Texas Bank for Banc One
Taking advantage of its high stock price, the Banc One Corporation announced an agreement yesterday to buy Team Bancshares of Dallas, the successor of a failed Texas bank, for $782 million of Banc One stock.
The acquisition of Team, which was created in 1988 by a private investor group to buy failed and weak Texas banks, will strengthen Banc One's grip as the second-largest banking company in the state and make it the leading bank in terms of branch offices in the Austin and Dallas/Fort Worth markets.
Team has about $5.5 billion in assets.
Tripled Their Money


Trenton G.O.P. Accepts Minimum-Wage Phase-In
In a vote that may set up the first true test of the Republicans' power in the Legislature, the State Senate joined the Assembly today in approving a bill that would defer until next year half of an 80-cent increase in the minimum wage.
Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, has indicated that he opposes the Republican-sponsored minimum-wage bills and wants the full 80-cent increase to take effect on April 1, as originally planned.
Republican defections in the vote today indicate that an overriding of Mr.
Florio's anticipated veto is far from certain.


Accounts
*
Amoco Fabrics and Fibers Co., Atlanta, to Fitzgerald &amp; Co., Atlanta, to handle its fiber and yarns division.
The participants in a review, and the billings, were not disclosed.


Cabinda Journal; Oil Rich Yet So Poor: Angolan Outpost Is Restless
Cabinda, an outpost of Angola north of the Congo River, has little agriculture and virtually no manufacturing.
What it does have is lots of oil, producing about 330,000 barrels a day, roughly 60 percent of Angola's export earnings.
But by any accounting the oil industry, which is dominated by American subsidiaries like the Cabinda Gulf Oil Company, has done little to improve the lives of most people in the territory, who are desperately poor.
And the widespread sense here that the region has been ruthlessly exploited by both foreign oil producers and the Government in Luanda has spawned an increasingly violent separatist movement among its 100,000 people.


Supermarket Experiments With Ozone-Saving Coolant
Almost everyone agrees that chlorofluorocarbons, the chemicals destroying the earth's protective ozone layer, will have to be replaced, and President Bush recently moved to ban their manufacture after the end of 1995.
But CFC's, as they are known, run nearly every refrigerator in the nation's 35,000 supermarkets, which account for about 20 percent of refrigeration in this country.
What will be used next to keep the milk from spoiling and the ice cream from melting?


New Campaigns
*
In an effort to recast its Le Menu frozen dinners for the 1990's, Campbell Soup Co. has introduced a campaign for the brand's New American Cuisine line.
A jingle, calling the line "le new way of eating with savoir-faire," ends with the tagline "Le Menu, Le Best." The work is BBDO New York's first on the account since winning it from Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Sales Tax Cut A Step Closer In Trenton
In a highly charged political atmosphere unusual even in tempestuous Trenton, the Republican-dominated Assembly voted to roll back the one-cent increase the Democrats added to the sales tax two years ago, but did not specify spending cuts to offset the $608 million in lost revenues.
The vote was 59 to 5, with Joseph V. Doria Jr., the Democratic minority leader, among the 15 Democrats who abstained on the ground that they could not vote on the rollback without knowing which programs or services would be cut.
Those who voted against the rollback also said they were being asked to vote in the dark, saying that the loss of $608 million in revenues could necessitate cuts in property tax rebates, school aid, aid to mass transit or other popular programs, and could force property tax increases to make up the gap at the local level.


Floating Polar Station Turns and Breaks Up
A PERIPATETIC island of 3,000-year-old freshwater ice about the size of Larchmont, N.Y., has taken an unexpected turn in the Arctic Ocean and started breaking up.
This is bad news here at the base of the Polar Continental Shelf Project, Canada's 33-year-old logistics support operation for scientific research in the far north.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Bucks County, Pa., has priced $58.3 million in general-obligation bonds through First American Municipals at par to yield 6.20 percent for the 2004 maturity.
Other maturities range from 5.30 percent for 1997 to 6.10 percent in 2003.
The noncallable issue has been rated double-A by both Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.
Common


New MSG President
DOUG MOSS has been named president of the Madison Square Garden Network, an appointment anticipated since December when his predecessor, BOB GUTKOWSKI, was elevated to the presidency of Madison Square Garden.
Moss, who is 38 years old, had been the MSG Network's senior vice president of advertising sales since 1990.
In Gutkowski's six years at MSG, its subscription rolls swelled from 1.7 million to 4.6 million households, a performance achieved mainly through the acquisition of the rights to Yankees games.


Survivors of Mangled Plane Recall Fire, Water, Terror
Robert Spear found himself boarding the plane unexpectedly when the intensifying snowstorm ruled out his original flight.
As the jetliner taxied down the runway in the blustery snow, some sixth sense told him to cinch his seat belt a little tighter, that this would be no ordinary flight.
At the last moment, a ticket attendant who recognized an actor, Richard Lawson, cheerfully promoted him to first class, one of those little courtesies that always tickled him.
This time the gesture may have saved his life.


Shiite Group Reasserts Link To Argentine Embassy Attack
A radical Lebanese Shiite Muslim faction, Islamic Holy War, today revived its assertion of responsibility for the explosion that destroyed the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires last week, killing at least 32 people.
It sent a statement and a videotape to a Western television bureau here.
The videotape showed the 19th-century embassy building in the Argentine capital before it was blown up.


Letters to a Supporter Record Einstin's Search for Proof
ASKED how he would have felt had there been no experimental confirmation of his general theory of relativity, Albert Einstein is supposed to have remarked, "Then I would have felt sorry for the dear Lord -- the theory is correct."
Yet Einstein, knowing that the theory and his reputation could stand or fall on the results of certain rigorous tests, was keenly interested in the work of one young ally, Erwin Findlay Freundlich.
Years before the theory was perfected and published in 1916, Einstein was advising and encouraging Dr.
Freundlich, an astronomer at the Royal Observatory in Berlin, to conduct two astronomical observations that could prove or disprove his revolutionary concept of space, time and gravitation.


East River Tunnel Fire Stops No. 7 Subway
A smoky electrical fire broke out yesterday morning in a subway tunnel under the East River, knocking out service on the No. 7 line, injuring 41 people and forcing thousands of people to scramble for other ways home through the evening rush hour, the Transit Authority said.
Workers rushing last evening for their usual No. 7 trains to Queens and Long Island were greeted at Grand Central Terminal with the faint odor of smoke and transit workers in orange-mesh vests suggesting alternative routes.


De Klerk Hardens Line in Negotiations
Emboldened by the overwhelming mandate of support from white voters last week, the white minority Government announced proposals today that would reserve for it greater power over a transitional government.
The proposals call for the appointment of multiracial "transitional councils" to advise the Government on the passage to constitutional change.


Patterns
Realms of Fancy
A new Paris fashion season is like a new scene in a play.
The curtain opens on a new realm of fancy, but with certain plot threads intact.
Nearly all the designers showed long skirts, in a much more committed way than last season, and lots of pants.
The predominant color was black.
At the Comme des Garcons show, models in torn black dresses, bird's-nest magenta hair and satin-trimmed frock coats looked like elegant vampires just roused from sleep.


2 Free Agents Are Signed By the Jets
The Jets, who had previously signed four Plan B free agents, added a fifth yesterday in Pat Chaffey, a fullback from the Atlanta Falcons.
The Jets also signed Troy Sadowski, an unrestricted free-agent tight end who played last year for the Kansas City Chiefs.
Chaffey, at 6 feet 1 1/4 inches and 220 pounds, played in 14 regular-season games last year and started in two regular-season and two playoff games.
The Falcons used him mostly in their shotgun offense as a blocker and also a receiver out of the backfield.
He carried 29 times for 127 yards and a touchdown and made 13 special-teams tackles.


Manhattan Defeats Rutgers at the Buzzer
The final curtain was 7 seconds away from closing on the longest running show in the history of Manhattan College basketball.
But Chris Williams of the Jaspers raced the length of the floor for a driving layup that beat both the buzzer and Rutgers, 62-61, tonight in the second round of the National Invitation Tournament.
For Manhattan (25-8), which has set a school record for victories, the show goes on.


More Memory for Your Money
THE hard disk on my vintage- 1987 computer used to be a lot bigger.
When it was new, it had an enormous 33 megabytes of open space.
Today the same hard disk is cramped and claustrophobic, with a capacity of a measly 33 megabytes.
It's funny how things are almost always larger in memory, except memory itself.
A few million bytes here, a few million bytes there, and pretty soon you're talking about real storage problems.
Transferring files to diskettes for storage is one option.
Buying a new, larger-capacity hard disk or removable cartridge drive is another.
But the easiest and most convenient option, and one of the least expensive, is to get Stacker version 2.0.


In Film, a Career Of Trying to Balance The Inequities of Life
Barbara Kopple says that she never knows what's in store when she sets out to make a documentary film and that "life has a way of taking you with it and you just have to be flexible enough to go along." After reading about plant closings and wage cuts around the nation, Ms.
Kopple decided in the mid-1980's to explore how the industrial landscape had changed since she directed "Harlan County, U.S.A.," her 1977 Oscar-winning film about a coal miners' strike in eastern Kentucky.
Ms.
Kopple turned to what she said she considered a "very American industry" -- meatpacking -- and traveled to Minnesota in the hope of capturing on film how harsh economic realities were affecting workers in America's heartland.
She happened upon a labor dispute at the George A. Hormel Company meatpacking plant in the town of Austin.


Squawk! Another Day Wrong-Footed
New York City's Transit Authority spent $16 billion in the 1980's to replace or rebuild 6,000 subway cars and repair 700 miles of mainline track.
All this made a huge difference.
Now the Authority plans a new $7.7 billion five-year plan, if Albany can find the funds.
Some money will go to a new automated fare system, and some to rebuilding the most dismal of the city's 459 subway stations.
While they're at it, the authorities might also address one of the system's most annoying features: its inability to deliver timely (and intelligible) information.


A Military Force for the Americas
Right-wingers backed by the military have now thwarted an international peace plan for Haiti, forcing the Organization of American States to contemplate stronger approaches to restoring democratic rule.
In Venezuela, military nationalists challenge democracy.
And Shining Path guerrillas terrorize Peru.
The time has come to create a new inter-American military force that could intervene to protect democratic governments from hijacking by armed terrorists.


13-Year-Old Is Shot to Death in the Bronx
A 13-year-old boy was shot to death last night in the Bronx housing project where he lived, and the police were seeking a 14-year-old for questioning in the killing.
The dead youth, Paul Gardner, of 611 Crotona Park North in East Tremont, was shot once in the chest at the Murphy Consolidated housing project and died at the scene, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a city police department spokeswoman.


U.S. Under Fire In Talks at U.N. On Environment
Rich and poor countries attending a five-week conference here say the United States is endangering prospects for the international environmental meeting planned for Rio de Janeiro next June.
These countries say that by refusing to promise more environmental aid to the third world or to set limits for emissions of gases that contribute to global warming, the United States threatens to sabotage the two most important agreements to be taken up at the Rio meeting.


Good, and Too Young to Know Better
IT had seemed like a routine telephone call home from a college senior to her parents.
You know, the chatty, bonding exchange of life's daily minutiae that used to occur around the dinner table but now must be done long-distance because, despite the child's earnest promise 18 years ago, she has grown up.
In person, many parents get very good at reading their child's mood, health and intentions by posture, pallor, tone of voice, even by the day's hairstyle or wardrobe.
On the phone it's much harder, even during evening rates.
So Cheryl Zelanakas's father didn't pick up the danger signals until she too casually said, "By the way." Young adults learn many things away at college, but one of them is not how to use the phrase, "By the way."


A Senator Urges Other Military Cuts
THE end of the cold war could have a chilling effect on some of the nation's largest advertising agencies if one United States Senator has his way.
Senator David Pryor, an Arkansas Democrat, is seeking to have the armed forces make at least a 50 percent cut in what they spend annually to run military recruitment pitches in prime-time television programming, glossy national magazines and other media.


Right Time to Invest In Eastern Europe
To the Editor:
Articles like "Eastern Europe Foils All but the Hardiest of Western Investors" (front page, March 5) may discourage American business investment in Eastern Europe, which would be a big mistake.
In the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, for example, as of last July, investment by American companies made up only 10 percent of foreign investment.
With such low levels of investment, United States companies are losing out on what is sure to be one of the next economic miracles of this era.
Remember, in the period before World War II, Czechoslovakia was one of the most developed countries in the world.
Present frustrations not withstanding, the Czech and Slovak federation may be ready to take off economically as Germany did in 1950.


A.T.&amp; T. Enters Card Venture
Taking aim at the largely untapped market of small-business customers, American Express and A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that they planned to offer a card combining features of American Express cards and A.T.&amp; T.'s long-distance discount card.
The new program, called Corporate Link, offers teleconferencing and other communications services, language translation services, consolidated and detailed billing, as well as itemized expense-account and other reports.
Customers will also receive 10 percent discounts on long-distance charges totaling $120 or more a year.


Political Doubt in France: Challenges to the Status Quo
By rebuffing France's traditional political parties and giving new support to far-rightist and environmentalist alternatives, voters have deepened the political uncertainty that has slowly taken root here in the last year.
The stunning defeat of President Francois Mitterrand's Socialist Party in regional elections on Sunday confirmed a loss of faith in a Government that has been in office since 1981.
Yet, almost as significant, the conservative Union for France coalition failed to profit from growing disenchantment with the way the country is being run.


New Product a Big Test For Dun &amp; Bradstreet
In making its first big product announcement, Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, the $548 million software division of Dun &amp; Bradstreet, hopes to prove finally that the merger that created the company was a success.
The company, a leader in accounting software, introduced Smartstream, a $99,000 package that will give Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software customers streamlined personal-computer access to information in a variety of data bases, both on a company's private mainframe computers or in such external data bases as Compuserve, MCI News or the Dow Jones News Service.


Riley Delves Into the Psychology of Celtics and Reveals Old Tricks
They are out there, waiting for the chance to pounce, wanting very much for the Knicks to see them as gremlins in green.
Pat Riley, self-made expert on Boston Celtic psychology, says he knows what tricks they have up their sleeveless shirts.
"They'd like to create the illusion that we are desperately hanging on to the division by our fingernails, that they can win it because of their storied past," Riley said today during a light, optional practice.


Bears' Covert Retires
The Chicago Bears' two-time Pro Bowl offensive tackle JIM COVERT said yesterday that he was retiring rather than risk permanent damage from a back injury that kept him out all last season. (AP)


Politics of Accusation Fells Brock Adams
To the Editor:
American politics has reached a low point with the sudden announcement by Senator Brock Adams of Washington that he would not seek re-election in the aftermath of anonymous accusations concerning sexual improprieties and rape (front page, March 2).
Neither our political nor our legal system is supposed to work like this.
Senator Adams did not have his day in court, nor will he stand before the electorate in his home state for its judgment.
He stands accused without much opportunity to rectify his reputation.
It's easy to understand why Brock Adams decided not to run for re-election.
There are many who will say that he must be guilty of something, or he wouldn't have ended his career so abruptly.
Maybe, but perhaps at the age of 65 he doesn't want to spend the rest of a distinguished career in public service under a cloud of suspicion.
Once the Senator has been accused by a newspaper's three-and-a-half year "investigation," his reputation is irreparably damaged.
His only course of action would be to take the newspaper to court on charges of libel.
Even if he were to win, difficult against a newspaper, the cloud of suspicion would never go away.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.75
6.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.08
4.05
5.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.27
4.22
5.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.33
7.35
8.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.03
8.04
8.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.99
9.00
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.79
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dr. Harry Orlinsky, 84, Professor Specializing in Biblical Literature
Dr.
Harry M. Orlinsky, the Effie Wise Ochs Professor of Biblical Literature at Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, died on Saturday at North Oaks Retirement Community in Owings Mills, Md.
He was 84 years old and had lived in Manhattan until several months ago.
He died of cancer, said Dr. Alfred Gottschalk, president of the college-institute.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton's 2-Front Attack Is Slowed by More Defense of His Past
In a curious blend of defensive and offensive posturing on the day before the Connecticut primary, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas lobbed attacks at his two prime political competitors today and fended off new accusations that he used his office to benefit political supporters in his home state.
But one of those two rivals, President Bush, charged Mr.
Clinton today with committing "the oldest, most crass political game in the world" by telling local shipbuilders that their project should be saved while at the same time calling for $100 billion in cuts in the military budget.


Review/Dance; Carefully Chosen Steps Amid Uncertainty
As part of its 50th anniversary celebrations, Fairfield University gave the dance world a present: it commissioned a new work from the Lewitzky Dance Company.
This resulted in "Episode No. 2," which received its world premiere tonight at the Quick Center for the Arts at the university here.
This year, this Jesuit institution is also honoring 50 people who have been important to the university or its affiliated Fairfield College Preparatory School.
Six Jubilee Medals were awarded during tonight's performance.


MTV Rumors Affect Viacom
Shares of Viacom Inc. fluctuated yesterday on reports that the company was considering spinning off an interest in MTV: Music Television, its advertiser-supported cable network.
Viacom stock opened at $34.875, rose as high as $36.75, and closed at $34.875, unchanged from Friday's close on the American Stock Exchange.
Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom, refused to comment yesterday.


Descendants of British Loyalist Lose Bid for Island
Descendants of a British loyalist have lost their bid to reclaim a 445-acre island near the eastern edge of Long Island that was seized by New York State during the American Revolution.
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that the descendants of Parker Wickham waited too long -- more than 200 years -- to make their claim for Robins Island.
They had joined joined together as the Robins Island Preservation Fund in an effort to block development of the island in the Great Peconic Bay and turn it into a nature preserve.


John Clark Sheehan, 76, Chemist Who First Synthesized Penicillin
Dr.
John Clark Sheehan, a chemist who pioneered synthetic penicillin, died Saturday at his home in Key Biscayne, Fla.
He was 76 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Flouting the Scooper Law; Sure Signs That Dog Owners Are Slacking Off
Of the many little things that corrode the quality of life in New York, surely those little things that pets leave behind on sidewalks, in gutters, near trees and underfoot are among the most egregious.
And the worst of it is, they are not always so little, and their numbers are growing.
Fourteen years after the City Council passed the so-called pooper-scooper law, demanding that dog owners either pick up after their pets or risk a fine that is as high as $100, many owners seem to view the law as an amusing anachronism, as readily flouted as the law against excessive honking.


Report Says Poor Children Grew Poorer in 1980's
American children grew poorer during the 1980's, were more likely to become criminals or crime victims and were less likely to live with two parents, a new study shows.
The study, released here today by a children's foundation and a research center, also showed that parents worked more but earned less, allowing them less time and money to help improve their children's lives.
But some conservatives criticized the report as misleading.


CHRONICLE
For YEVGENY YEVTUSHENKO, Russia's leading political troubadour, Stalinism lives on in any intolerance bred by dictatorship.
That is the message of his new film, "Stalin's Funeral," which had its New York premiere last night.
Mr.
Yevtushenko and a crowd of Hollywood and New York celebrities attended the screening, sponsored by the American Jewish Committee, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Filmed in Moscow and produced by Mosfilm, "Stalin's Funeral" stars VANESSA REDGRAVE and depicts Soviet life and emotional turmoil at Stalin's death and beyond.
It was written and directed by Mr.
Yevtushenko, who plays the role of a sculptor.


NASA Ozone Study
A landmark study of ozone depletion over the Northern Hemisphere that found alarmingly high levels of ozone-destroying chemicals is coming to a close.
In the study, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration made 27 high-altitude flights to measure losses in the Earth's protective ozone layer.
It completed the last flight of the series on Sunday.


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's  Alice Tully Hall
In the legend of Persephone, the Greeks explained the passing of the seasons (they recognized three, not four) by showing us the gods in human form acting out their human dramas in supernatural surroundings.
Stravinsky's "Persephone," after texts by Andre Gide, revived this world in a mixture of cantata and spoken melodrama.
It was the centerpiece of Robert Craft's concert with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Saturday night.
Stravinsky's classical world is brightly lighted, clean but hardly simple.
A serene sense of order presides over intricately uneven metric movement.
This, and Stravinsky's open, austere use of instruments, refer to an age in music when dignity ruled over sentiment and the tyranny of the bar line had not yet begun.


Fed Approves Merger Of Big California Banks
The Federal Reserve Board today approved the giant merger of the BankAmerica Corporation and the Security Pacific Corporation, which would create the second-largest bank company in the nation, after Citicorp.
The approval was the last major regulatory hurdle and clears the way for the acquisition to be completed after a 30-day period.
The Fed approval, which came on a 7-to-0 vote after two and a half hours of deliberation, is conditioned on Bank-America's meeting numerous commitments it has made regarding divestitures, financing and investment in low-income communities.


Mr. Clinton's Tough Choice
Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, wants to spend $3.4 billion to build two Seawolf attack submarines that President Bush correctly canceled.
For that Mr.
Clinton has been accused of "pandering" to the voters in Connecticut, whose primary is today.
But whatever his motives, the policy is wrong-headed.
Even Mr.
Clinton concedes that America doesn't need another Seawolf.
He simply wants to keep submarine production capacity afloat until the time comes for a new sub.


A Banker With a Fondness for Public Affairs
Barry F. Sullivan, New York City's newly appointed Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, is a Jesuit-educated native of the Bronx who turned down a chance to play basketball with the New York Knicks before beginning a lifelong career in banking that culminated in the chairmanship of the First Chicago Corporation, one of the nation's largest banking concerns.
For a city that faces deep financial difficulties, a banker of Mr.
Sullivan's stature brings not only a thorough understanding of how capital markets work but also of the fiscal realities of large city governments and the kinds of contacts and friends that go along with being at the helm of an important financial institution.


Review/Music; The American Symphony Takes On a New Role
The American Symphony Orchestra has been going through some difficult times.
When Leopold Stokowski founded it in 1962 he said the orchestra's purpose was to offer "concerts of great music within the means of everyone." Since then, the music scene has witnessed an explosion of orchestral variety that has left the American Symphony behind.
As an ensemble of freelance players it can't hope to compete on technical merits, and it can't afford premiere soloists to lend its subscription series luster.
Nor does it have a clear stylistic profile.
So even if its tickets are offered at relatively modest prices, what purpose can the American Symphony now serve?


Callousness at Colt's
Two years ago Colt Industries' faltering firearms manufacturing unit, based in Hartford, was saved by financing that included state pension funds as well as money from a union and private investors.
But then the new company disappointed supporters of gun control by bringing out a new version of an assault rifle the old Colt had voluntarily withdrawn from the civilian market.
Last week, when the still-troubled firearms company filed for bankruptcy, the state again moved to prop it up, this time with a loan of $2 million from the Connecticut Development Authority.
Yet doubts remain about the propriety of public support for a business with a history of indifference to valid public concern.


Lindsay Quartet Cancels
The Mendelssohn String Quartet will replace the Lindsay String Quartet in a concert at Weill Recital Hall on Friday night at 8 o'clock.
The Lindsay ensemble canceled because one of its players is ill.
The Mendelssohn will play Mozart's Quartet No. 8 in D, Mendelssohn's Quartet in E flat (Op. 44, No. 3) and the New York premiere of "Bleached Thread, Sister Thread," a work by Tina Davidson.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Leaking Fuel Prevents Launching of Shuttle
Fuel leaks and threatening storm clouds today forced at least a one-day postponement of the launching of the space shuttle Atlantis on its planned eight-day mission of atmospheric research.
A second attempt is scheduled for 8 A.M.
Tuesday.
Meteorologists forecast an 80 percent chance of satisfactory weather during the two-and-a-half-hour period in which the launching could occur.


Ortega's Leadership Criticized by Sandinistas
Two years after its shattering defeat at the polls, the Sandinista Front is racked by a rare public dispute that pits former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra against party members who think his leadership is too radical and dictatorial.
Specific points at issue include whether one Sandinista leader should be allowed to study at Harvard, how much freedom should be enjoyed by the Sandinista news outlets, and Mr.
Ortega's impassioned appearances at strikes and takeovers of towns, farms and businesses by Sandinista militants.


Europe Orders Reduction of Pollution From Fuel
Environmental ministers of the European Community ordered a sharp cutback today in the sulfur content of all diesel and heating oil within two and a half years.
The decision will make the fuel used to heat homes and drive the vast fleet of trucks and buses that crowd European roads cleaner but more expensive.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  76ers Beat Spurs to End Five-Game Slide  Johnny Dawkins scored 11 of his 19 points in the fourth quarter as the 76ers snapped a losing streak at five games with a 105-92 victory over the San Antonio Spurs last night in Philadelphia.
The 76ers, who had fallen into 11th place in the Eastern Conference with the losing streak, pulled into a ninth-place tie with Miami with the victory.
The top eight teams in each conference make the playoffs.
The Spurs, who had won six of their seven previous games, fell three games behind first-place Utah in the Midwest Division despite 30 points and 15 rebounds by David Robinson.
Hersey Hawkins led Philadelphia with 21 points, while Armon Gilliam scored 20.
Terry Cummings had 19 for San Antonio, which managed just one field goal and 8 points in the final 8 minutes 28 seconds. (AP) Hawks 126, Warriors 125: In Atlanta, Aleksandr Volkov's layup at the buzzer gave Hawks the victory over Golden State, snapping their losing streak in overtime games this season at five.
Tim Hardaway, who joined with Chris Mullin to score 25 points apiece for the Warriors, gave them a 125-124 lead on a 10-foot bank shot with six seconds left.
With two seconds to go, Rumeal Robinson's 22-foot shot missed everything, but Duane Ferrell tipped the ball to Volkov, who got off the game-winner in time. (AP) Nuggets 100, Timberwolves 95: In Minneapolis, Reggie Williams scored 19 points, including 6 free throws in the final 2:01, as Denver rallied from a 13-point deficit in the fourth quarter to hand the Timberwolves their 13th consecutive defeat.
The victory was just the sixth in 34 road games this season for the Nuggets, who made 17 of their last 18 free throws in the final quarter after beginning the game 6 of 13.
The Timberwolves led, 85-72, with 8:05 remaining after a 16-3 spurt.
But Denver, held to one field goal in the first 5:13 of the fourth period, fought back with a 25-8 run and took a 97-93 lead with 30 seconds left. (AP) N.H.L.
Sweeney Rallies Bruins Past Sharks  Defenseman Don Sweeney scored with 1 minute 3 seconds remaining in the game to climax a four-goal third period and give the Bruins a 7-6 victory over the San Jose Sharks last night in Boston.
Joe Juneau had two goals and an assist for Boston, and Brian Lawton scored two for the Sharks.
San Jose led by 6-3 after Lawton's second goal at 5:55 of the third period, but the Bruins took over for the last 14 minutes of play.
Glen Wesley scored on Jarmo Myllys at 8:38, and Dave Poulin cut the lead to 6-5 at 12:52.
Steve Leach tied the score at 6-6 with his 28th goal of the season on a power play at 16:02. (AP) Maple Leafs 3, Blues 2: In Toronto, Dave McLlwain scored a big goal at 5:56 of the third period as the Maple Leafs kept their playoff hopes alive with a victory over St.
Louis.
The victory moved Toronto 4 points behind the idle Minnesota North Stars in their battle for the last playoff berth in the Norris Division.
Minnesota has seven games left; Toronto has six. (AP)


Bernie Williams Wonders If Next Move Is Forward
Bernie Williams speaks softly when he discusses his tenuous position in the Yankees' crowded outfield.
His voice is so quiet and his mannerisms are so polite that he can easily disguise his disgust with the situation.
Williams does not scream about his plight, but it is obvious he is not happy as a left-out outfielder.
After being dubbed the center fielder of the future and playing 85 games in the big leagues last year, Williams now wonders if his next step will be backward, as in back to the minor leagues.


One Briton Is Still Disgruntled With Thatcher


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE CRASH AT LA GUARDIA
FEW ANSWERS FOUND IN PLANE WRECKAGE
Federal investigators began sifting through the charred shell of USAir Flight 405, looking for clues why it veered off a snowy runway as it tried to take off from La Guardia Airport.
Unanswered yesterday were such questions as whether the plane had been properly de-iced, whether its flaps were in the right position, whether an engine tore off, and whether the victims drowned or suffocated in the fire.
A1.


Walton Screens Out Hard Questions
The biggest cliffhanger of CBS's broadcast of rounds one and two of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's basketball tournament was when the analyst Bill Walton answered a question from his partner, Sean McDonough: Is Dale Brown, the coach of Louisiana State University, any good?
It was a legitimate inquiry, raised after Brown lifted Shaquille O'Neal, the star center, for a breather eight minutes into the first half on Saturday, a respite that allowed Indiana to wrest control of the game from the Tigers.


Unlocking the Secrets Of a Mysterious Plate
OF all the giant plates of the earth's surface whose motions cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, none is more mysterious than the Philippine Sea Plate, the one bounded by southern Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines and the chain of islands from Iwo Jima to Guam.
Now scientists from countries bordering the plates, as well as from Korea and the United States, are beginning an effort to solve the mysteries.
They are setting up survey markers as reference points so satellites can measure relative motions between points on or around the plate to within a fraction of an inch.


Slumping Real Estate Leaves Giant Reeling
The real estate depression has backed another giant against the wall.
In recent days, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., New York's largest commercial landlord and a financial powerhouse in its Canadian homeland and abroad, turned to its banks to ease a cash crisis and began negotiating to reorganize billions of dollars of debt in an attempt to retain its vast holdings.
Now, Paul Reichmann, the highly regarded head of Olympia, will negotiate with scores of bankers to get easier payment terms, forgiveness of debt and a capital structure that will allow the company the latitude to finish its huge Canary Wharf project in London and meet its debt obligations in North America.


Head of Bantam to Start Her Own Line of Books
Linda Grey, the president and publisher of Bantam Books, will be stepping down from those posts to start her own line of adult fiction and nonfiction titles within Bantam.
In announcing the move yesterday, Jack Hoeft, the president and chief executive of the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, said Ms.
Grey's new assignment was part of an effort to scale down the number of adult titles at Bantam and concentrate more on producing best-selling books.


Arrest in Rhode Island
A former Bryant College basketball player was arrested and an active player suspended yesterday for their suspected involvement in a gambling ring at Rhode Island colleges.
CHRISTOPHER SIMMONS, a senior from Wall, N.J., was arrested on campus about 11 A.M. and charged with one count each of bookmaking and organized criminal gambling, Rhode Island State Police Lieut.
THEODORE KIDD said.
Simmons, a former co-captain, was dismissed from the basketball team on Feb. 18 for violations of team regulations.


Martin Robinson, 49, Organizer Of Demonstrations for Gay Rights
Martin Robinson, an organizer for gay-rights causes for 27 years who was known for his provocative protests, died on Thursday at home in Brooklyn.
He was 49 years old.


A President's Success Attracts Time Warner
The acquisition last Friday of Leisure Arts, a publisher of handicrafts magazines in Little Rock, Ark., by Time Warner Inc. culminated a dozen years of rapid growth led by the company's president, Steve M. Patterson.
Under Mr.
Patterson, Leisure Arts broadened its operations in the knitting and crafts publications markets and lifted annual revenues to more than $60 million from $8 million a dozen years ago.


Libya Offers to Yield 2 Suspects In Jet Bombings to Arab League
Libya's United Nations representative said today that two Libyans accused of responsibility for the downing of a Pan Am jet over Scotland in 1988 would be handed over to the Arab League.
The move was apparently an attempt to avert United Nations Security Council sanctions, and it could set off a chain of events leading to a trial of the two Libyans in the United States or Britain.


Tilting From the Left, a Publishing Venture
Between the gift shops and fancy food stores in this affluent suburb's downtown hub, Greg Ruggiero and Stuart Sahulka run an operation that is out to change the world.
Their base is a third-floor apartment above a tailor's shop.
Their main means, a personal computer and laser printer.
With them, along with the drone of Bob Dylan on cassette, the 27-year-old graduates of Rutgers University put in long hours publishing pamphlets with left-of-center views on issues as diverse as the Persian Gulf war and abortion.
Several titles, published under the label Open Magazine Pamphlet Series and sold for $3.50 each, have become best sellers in independent bookstores throughout the country and in Europe.


Late, Great Preposition
To the Editor:
At the same time that "of" is proliferating in one usage ("All About Of," Topics of The Times, March 8), it is disappearing in another.
People used to speak of "a couple of minutes" or "a couple of dollars." More and more frequently now, what I hear spoken and see written is "a couple minutes," "a couple dollars."
Add "of" in some cases and take it away in others.
Perhaps it evens out in the end.
ILENE MONTANA Rochester, March 9, 1992


Friedrich von Hayek Dies at 92; An Early Free-Market Economist
Friedrich von Hayek, a Nobel Prize-winning economist who was an intellectual forebear of libertarians and other advocates of free-market economics from Ronald Reagan to Margaret Thatcher to Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus of post-Communist Czechoslovakia, died yesterday.
He was 92 years old.
Mr.
Hayek's secretary, Charlotte E. Cubitt, confirmed his death in Freiburg, Germany, according to Edward Crane, president of the Cato Institute, a conservative American research and policy institute.


Rudman, Irked by the Senate, Is Retiring
Senator Warren B. Rudman, who attacked and scorned business-as-usual in two terms in the Senate, today announced his retirement, complaining that there was no challenge left in serving in a government that was "not functioning."
While he made it plain that he included the executive branch in his general criticism, Mr.
Rudman, a moderate New Hampshire Republican, said that in the last year or two partisanship and posturing had made the Senate a trying experience.


Cambodia Chief, a Communist Survivor, Is Welcomed in U.S.
In the turbulent recent history of Cambodia, Hun Sen has been a survivor.
He came of age in the ranks of the Khmer Rouge, turned against them to serve the Vietnamese and is now gambling on a peace plan that promises to turn his battered Communist country into a democracy.
Mr.
Hun Sen, the 40-year-old Communist Prime Minister of Cambodia, is on his first visit to Washington this week and the Bush Administration, which does not recognize his Government, is extending a cautious welcome nonetheless.


Broccoli, Hated By a President, Is Capturing Popular Votes
THESE ought to be glory days for broccoli.
With a new study showing that this pedestrian vegetable may stave off cancer, it seems poised to take off, to show up in martinis and chips and cookies and bagels just as oat bran sneaked into everything edible a few years ago.
There's only one problem. Broccoli won't cooperate.


Names and Numbers
The United States Olympic Committee has announced the names of the four Americans who will be receiving Olympia Awards for having made significant contributions to the Olympic movement.
They are BOB BEAMON, DONNA DE VARONA, MIKE ERUZIONE and FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER.
The U.S.O.C. also announced some numbers yesterday: 624, 601, 389 and 235.
They are, in order, the number of United States athletes (a record contingent) who will be going to Barcelona, Spain, to compete in official medal sports at the 1992 Summer Games; the previous American record, at the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea; the number of men on the 1992 Summer Olympic team, and the number of women.


Kohl Girds Europe for Trade-Pact Showdown
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is spending this week preparing other European leaders for what may be a final showdown in the efforts of 108 nations to reach an international trade agreement.
In weekend talks with President Bush at Camp David, Chancellor Kohl presented European positions on issues blocking the talks of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT.
He returned to Germany without any American concessions.


Phone Research
Pacific Bell, the telephone company serving California, will cooperate with I.B.M. and Northern Telecom Inc. on research and field testing of technology that will allow customers to communicate with data, video and images, in addition to voice, over telephone lines.
As envisioned, such services would allow users to dial others on their personal computers, just as they now dial the telephone.
The three companies all have other alliances in this technology.


Food Notes
Greek Delicacies
Karabela's, 630 First Avenue (37th Street) is a new food market with its eye on the Mediterranean.
Evan Karabela, the owner of this sprawling, attractive multilevel new venture, is a food lover who recently abandoned the fur business.
His chef is Takis Petrakos, who for years has been turning out prepared foods, many of them Greek, for the Fairway market on the West Side.


Tsongas, Still Ahead of the Curve
Paul Tsongas's decison not to contest yesterday's Connecticut primary and pull out of the Democratic Presidential race may dishearten those of us who felt 1992 might see a victory of political substance over style.
The lesson, however, is not that the Tsongas campaign failed but that it went as far as it did.
Measured against expectations, the Tsongas saga was a triumph.
Unfortunately for Mr.
Tsongas -- and for the country as well -- exceeding expectations and scoring moral victories are not what counts in politics.
As Churchill growled after the moral triumph of Dunkirk, "Wars are not won by evacuations."


A Top Executive at Macy Is Switching to Loehmann's
Loehmann's Inc. announced yesterday that Robert N. Friedman, a vice chairman of merchandising at R. H. Macy &amp; Company, would join the discount apparel chain as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Friedman will replace Allan R. Bogner, who, the company said, resigned to pursue other opportunities.
Mr.
Bogner, who had been with Loehmann's since 1970, was not available to comment yesterday.


Nothing Is Easy for Devils, Even Against Easy Teams
The Devils, sagging toward the finish of the regular season, could not have gotten a better pick-me-up as an opponent tonight.
They defeated the San Jose Sharks, 4-3, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, ending their streak without a victory at eight (0-6-2).
But it was by no means easy beating the team with the worst record in the league.
The expansion Sharks, who have only won three road games, gave the Devils fits.


Union Workers' Protest Blocks the Tappan Zee Bridge


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a supermarket in Glens Falls, N.Y., that is experimenting with refrigerants to replace chlorofluorocarbons misstated its name.
The store is Shop 'n Save.


The Aviation Industry And De-Icing Procedures
United States airlines are increasingly worried by recent crashes that may have been caused by ice on aircraft wings, but all the possible solutions appear to pose further problems.
The result is a swirl of conflicting financial, environmental and technical concerns that have blocked changes in a decades-old system, even as airports in Canada and Europe have begun revising their procedures.
Federal and airline officials may be forced to reconsider their positions because of Sunday's crash of a USAir jet, in which wing ice may have been a factor, and a Canadian report calling for more elaborate precautions.
The outcome could affect aviation safety for many years and have a slight effect on airline ticket prices.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Seagram Company's recent sale of Soho Beverages omitted the name of a founder of Soho.
She is Connie Best, who started the company along with Sophia Collier in 1977.


For Two (Ex-Soviet) Astronauts, an Alien World Lies Ahead
Rip Van Winkle had it easy.
After a long sleep, he had to contend with a new nation, new fashions and new friends.
But at least his village had the same name.
And there was plenty of food and drink to go around.
And he knew where he stood socially.
Things could be tougher for two astronauts scheduled to return to Earth today.


Metal Detectors Won't Stop School Violence
To the Editor:
As state administrator of an organization that has many years of experience in offering alternatives to violence, especially in New York State's prisons, I was disappointed with Mayor David N. Dinkins's response to the shooting deaths of two students at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn -- a $28 million metal-detector program (news article, March 2).
Providing more security equipment for schools lends a false sense of security to an institution and only ups the ante for those who would like to circumvent it.
It is not difficult to bring weapons into a place with security equipment, unless it is enforced with an iron fist.
What does this say about relations between students and those intending to provide for their welfare?


Theater in Review
Lovers  Alice's Fourth Floor 432 West 42d Street Manhattan Through April 5 By Mario Fratti; directed by Raymond Haigler; set by Edmund A. Lefevre Jr.; lighting by Scott Griffin; costumes by Rodney Munoz; set design associate, Allen Hahn; production stage manager, Janie Schwartz.
Presented by the Miranda Theater Company, in association with the Italian Government Institution for Dramatists (E.N.A.P).
With: Susan Egbert, Alexandra Napier, Gwen Torry-Owens and Brian Poteat.
At the outset of "Lovers," a new play by Mario Fratti, a gullible millionairess meets the ex-wife (or third ex-wife, to be precise) of her new boyfriend, Albert, at a movie theater to get the lowdown on him.
The ex-wife can't say enough bad about him.
The man's failings, in and out of bed, know no bounds.
Learning that Albert will get a $1 million a year allowance if he takes the heiress as wife No. 4, ex-wife No. 3 delivers the coup de grace by lying that Albert is a Communist, sending the capitalist fiancee fleeing.
As it turns out, Albert is the best thing about the play.
He doesn't appear in it at all.


Review/Art; Celebrating the Later Paintings Of a 17th-Century Italian Master
Who is the most widely exhibited artist of the day?
It just might be Giovanni Francesco Barbieri, the 17th-century painter from a little Northern Italian town called Cento who is nicknamed "il Guercino" ("the Squinter").
To commemorate the 400th anniversary of his birth in 1591, exhibitions of his drawings and paintings have been organized recently across Europe and the United States, from Paris to New York, from Haarlem to Cambridge, Mass., from London to Bologna, Italy.
And now the giant Bologna show has arrived here at the National Gallery in a smaller but still substantial form, where it is joined by a display of Guercino's drawings from Windsor Castle.
At the same time, a small group of his paintings and drawings is on view at Richard L. Feigen &amp; Company in Manhattan.


Rushdie Comes to Seek U.S. Support
Salman Rushdie, again breaking the bubble of his guarded life in hiding, said tonight that a meeting he had scheduled for Wednesday in Washington with top legislators had been abruptly canceled because of pressure from the White House.
Mr.
Rushdie, abandoning the speech he had prepared for a conference tonight on freedom of expression, appealed instead to the United States Government to press Iran aggressively to rescind a death threat against him.


Bank Fund And C.D. Yields Mixed
Yields on bank money market accounts and short-term certificates of deposit continued to give mixed signals last week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, which tracks bank rates.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday: "Despite the fact that there are more than $100 billion in certificates of deposit maturing in April, banks are going to have a tough time recapturing all that money because of their low interest rates. In the past year, for example, the average yield on one-year certificates of deposit has plunged from 6.53 percent to 4.15 percent."


METRO DIGEST
THE CONNECTICUT PRIMARY  CLINTON REBUFFED IN CONNECTICUT
Connecticut's Democratic primary voters served notice that they were less than overwhelmed by their party's front-runner, giving Gov.
Bill Clinton an embarrassing second-place finish to former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  BIRTH CENTERS FOR POOR WOMEN
In New York and around the nation, the search is on for cheaper and better health care for poor urban women.
The solution, many health-care experts say, may be found at the Childbearing Center of Morris Heights in the Bronx, where prenatal care, labor, delivery and follow-up care are all given outside the hospital.
A1.
CRIME DROPS IN NEW YORK
Reported crime in New York City fell modestly in every major category last year, the Police Department said.
It was the first such across-the-board decline in 36 years and went against the trends in other cities nationwide.
A1.
OFFICER ACQUITTED IN BRUTALITY CASE
Bringing to a close a case that stirred deep passions over allegations of police brutality, a Queens judge acquitted the last of five New York City police officers who had been charged in the death of a car-theft suspect.
B3.
State to withhold $6 million because of street-repair problems.
B3.
Jews debate admission of homosexuals into the clergy.
B3.
Jeffries successor seeks to bring calm to City College.
B3.
City Hall plans to divert anti-crime funds to general budget.
B4.
REGION  A DEADLOCK ON REDISTRICTING
After missing four self-imposed deadlines in five weeks, legislative officials said today that they were at an impasse over how to draw a consensus redistricting plan for members of Congress from New York.
The legislative officials said they saw no obvious way to break the deadlock, increasing the likelihood that the Legislature will end up abdicating its control over redistricting to the courts.
A1.
AN UNLIKELY CRUSADER
An unlikely champion has emerged to lead a crusade to soften New Jersey's stringent new welfare laws.
He is a freshman Republican Assemblyman named John Hartmann, who has introduced a bill that would remove the most controversial section of the welfare-revision legislation, which denies additional benefits for a child born into a family already on welfare.
B7.
CORRUPTION INQUIRY WIDENS IN PASSAIC
Even as Mayor Joseph Lipari of Passaic was pleading not guilty to 14 charges of extortion, bribery, conspiracy and income-tax evasion, Federal prosecutors said their corruption investigation was focusing on new targets.
B7.
Bridgeport U. may reconsider Unification Church offer.
B7.
In a reversal, appeals court upholds rule barring homeless man from Morristown library.
B8.
A rash of Congressional politicking in New Jersey.
B8.
About New York B3


Car Sales Fell in Mid-March; Trucks Rose
Sales of North American-built vehicles fell 2.7 percent in mid-March, as auto makers continued to feel the decline in fleet sales of cars to rental companies.
Light-truck sales were higher.
Sales of cars fell 6.9 percent in the period to 167,708, from 180,195 a year earlier, while sales of light trucks rose 4.7 percent.
Total vehicle sales fell to 276,889, from 284,482 in the comparable period of last year.


Court Limits Agency On Stock-Fraud Suits
The Supreme Court ruled 9 to 0 today that the agency set up by Congress to reimburse customers of failed securities firms cannot use the Federal racketeering law to sue those who it believes caused a firm's failure by manipulating the price of stocks.
The ruling, with a majority opinion by Justice David H. Souter that four other Justices signed, was based on narrow grounds.
It left unresolved a broader question about the applicability of the rackeetering law, known as RICO, to securities fraud cases.
The failure to address the broader issue apparently prompted a debate within the Court, leading four Justices to sign two separate opinions that took a different approach to the issue while reaching the same outcome.


Review/Television; Puppets in a Dark Tale of Revenge
Bursting with grotesque imagery, primal emotions and nightmarish effects, the theater of Julie Taymor comes to television tonight, at 8 on Channel 13, in an "American Playhouse" presentation called "Fool's Fire." As writer, designer and director, Ms.
Taymor has taken an Edgar Allan Poe story, "Hopfrog," and transformed it into a dark fairy tale of revenge, played out by real actors, all of them dwarfs, and by puppets, controlled by actors within.
The production, which runs for only 55 minutes, was two years in the making.
During that time, Ms.
Taymor (recipient of a 1991 MacArthur Foundation fellowship), the production designer G. W. Mercier, the composer Elliot B. Goldenthal and the editor Alan Miller painstakingly guided a team of some 200 artists, artisans and technical experts on every phase of the production, from the elaborate sculptures and masks to intricately layered special effects.
A combination of 35-millimeter film and high-definition television techniques is used to extraordinary fantastical effect.
The entire process, along with many of the realized creations, is the subject of a current exhibition at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Amoco Foam Products Co., Atlanta, a unit of Amoco Corp. that makes foamed food-service packaging, named Joe C. Strickland president. *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, named Gail Alpern Schneider senior vice president.
She continues as a division executive for trust and estate services at Chase Manhattan Private Bank.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Many Tsongas Backers Went For Brown in the Last 4 Days
Of the thousands of Democratic votes that were thrown into the air last week when Paul E. Tsongas abruptly withdrew from Connecticut's Presidential primary, many came down as manna from heaven for Edmund G. Brown Jr. yesterday.
Mr.
Brown, the former California Governor, campaigned intensely in the state and even briefly outspent his better-financed rival, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, in television advertising.
About 40 percent of the Democratic primary voters said they would have voted for Mr.
Tsongas if he had not left the race.
Of those, Mr.
Brown won over 31 percent, as against 21 percent for Mr.
Clinton.
Forty-four percent of the early Tsongas backers said they voted for him today even though he has suspended his campaign.


Quaker to Sell Chocolate Maker
The Quaker Oats Company said it would sell the chocolate maker Ghirardelli to a Boston-based investment firm, the Thomas H. Lee Company.
Quaker, based in Chicago, put the business up for sale three years ago.
It expects to complete the deal in a month.
Terms were not disclosed, but analysts valued Ghirardelli as high as $20 million.
Ghirardelli has annual sales of $50 million and 200 workers.


INSIDE
Radiation Leak in Russia
A nuclear plant near St.
Petersburg, similar to the one at Chernobyl, released radioactivity, causing widespread alarm.
But the authorities said there was no danger.
Page A12.
Rudman Leaving in Disgust
Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire said he would retire because he was tired of a government that was "not functioning." Page A14.
Rushdie Appeals to U.S.
Facing death threats, Salman Rushdie came to the U.S. to promote free speech but said talks with legislators were abruptly canceled.
Page A8.
Cambodian Visitor to U.S.
The Premier of Cambodia's Vietnamese-installed Government is in the U.S., and the Bush Administration is giving a cautious welcome.
Page A6.


Justices Weigh Limiting U.S. Courts
The Supreme Court heard arguments today in a case that could lead to drastic new limits on the ability of Federal courts to decide whether state prison inmates were convicted or sentenced in accordance with the Constitution.
With a mundane burglary case involving about $3,500 worth of stolen property as their vehicle, the Justices have indicated that they might strip the Federal courts of their traditional power under the habeas corpus statute to make an independent determination of whether a state court has properly applied the Constitution to the facts of a particular case.


Review/Film Festival; Cautionary Love Story About Franco's Spain
The place is Madrid and the time the mid-1950's, when the dictatorship of Francisco Franco has imposed an anesthetizing order on Spanish life.
Life seems good if not exciting.
The rigid moral values of church and state are not to be questioned, certainly not by Paco, a naive young soldier on whom fortune seems to be smiling.
At the beginning of "Lovers," Vicente Aranda's steamily entertaining new Spanish film, Paco is preparing to re-enter civilian life with far more promise than he had when, as a farm boy, he joined the army.
He is engaged to the virginal Trini, who works as a maid for the family of his avuncular superior officer.


Trying a Market Approach to Smog
After laboring for decades under the nation's toughest air-quality rules, companies in Southern California now face a daunting new challenge: proving that they can figure out on their own how best to clean up the nation's worst smog.
Under a plan that regional air-quality regulators approved earlier this month, Southern California will scrap most of its cumbersome rules for oil refineries and other large industrial polluters.
Instead, the regulators are introducing a radical new free-market approach.
Companies will still face strict quotas for reducing emissions.
But they will be free to satisfy these limits in almost any way they see fit -- even by buying the right to pollute from another company that has surpassed its cleanup quota.


Rating City School On Reading Scores


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  UNICEF EXECUTIVE BOARD (Organizational Session) -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Reading Test Results Show Progress at Many Schools
In May 1990, six months after Jeffrey Fisher was named principal of Public School 88 in the Bronx, the third-grade students there took New York City's annual reading test and scored lower as a group than any other class at the school in recent memory.
The previous year had been tumultuous, with the retirement of the school's longtime principal and the quick departure of two successive acting principals.
Mr.
Fisher, who took over the troubled school in December 1989, said he had little time to prepare the school's strategy for the 1990 exam.
But he vowed that 1991 would be different.
It was.


Delays Seen In Testing HDTV Plans
Tests on five competing technologies to provide high-definition television have slipped about five months behind schedule, an advisory group to the Federal Communications Commission said today.
The delay means the Federal Government will not select a new broadcasting standard before late 1993.
Within several weeks, however, the F.C.C. will set rules determining whether viewers with ordinary sets will be able to watch the same programs as viewers with new, high-definition sets.


Bye-Bye Club Met, Hello Camp Torborg
Jeff Torborg, the Mets manager, loves baseball, barbecues and G-rated anecdotes about family and friends.
And he readily admits he may seem to be caught in a time warp of the 1950's, so genteel and polite is he.
But there's another side to Torborg, one that occasionally fights its way to the surface with all the subtlety of a jackhammer.
Jeff Torborg, you see, has a temper, one that awes even him at times.
And that temper can and does flare, not only in the man, but in the manager as well.


Metal Detectors Won't Stop School Violence; Stop and Frisk
To the Editor:
Kids who bring guns to school do so mainly for protection.
Only a small number carry weapons to commit robbery or assault.
During the 20 years I was a high school principal, students told me this over and over again.
Just as they can identify the nature of the problem, kids may also hold the key to the solution.
Wise beyond their years, students say metal detectors have their uses, but can easily be circumvented.
Guns can be smuggled into schools through side entrances and windows, can be brought in and hidden when metal detectors are not in use (for example, during after-school activities).
To end the plague of guns in schools we need more than metal detectors.


Prosecutor in Taped Beating Case Has Twin Aims
For eight days, as prosecutors presented their case against four Los Angeles police officers charged in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King, spectators watched for signs of Mr.
King's arrival at the Ventura County Courthouse here.
Only on March 16, when the lead prosecutor, Terry L. White, told Judge Stanley M. Weisberg that he would rest his case the next day, did it become apparent that Mr.
King would not testify as a witness for the prosecution.
Even Mr.
King's lawyer, Steven A. Lerman, who attended the trial daily, was caught off guard.


BRIEFS
*
Circus Circus Enterprises, Las Vegas, Nev., a casino company, announced a proposal with Hilton Hotels Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif., and Caesars World Inc., Los Angeles, for a $2 billion family entertainment center in Chicago. *
PNC Financial Corp., Pittsburgh, said its Citizens Fidelity Bank had signed a definitive agreement to buy the $1.5 billion mortgage servicing portfolio of Cowger &amp; Miller Mortgage Co., Louisville, Ky., from the seized First Atlantic Federal Savings Association.


Baseball; Torborg Leans To Young
Before Anthony Young's start tonight, Manager Jeff Torborg said he was leaning toward announcing that the right-hander had won the fifth spot in the Mets' starting rotation.


CHRONICLE
Asked about his new album, "Don't Call Me Buckwheat," GARLAND JEFFREYS said, "Look at the kid on the cover." The cover is a snapshot of Mr.
Jeffreys at the age of 5 in a baseball uniform in front of Ebbets Field, looking perplexedly at the world.
"I was this racial mix -- black, Puerto Rican and white -- and I didn't know where I belonged," Mr.
Jeffreys said by telephone from Anguilla in the British West Indies, where he was vacationing.
He noted that Ebbets Field was in Crown Heights in Brooklyn, "the same place where there are all these racial problems today."


Ex-House Bank Chief Testifies in Post Office Case
Jack Russ, the former sergeant-at-arms of the House of Representatives, testified for more than an hour today before a Federal grand jury investigating criminal wrongdoing at the lawmakers' Capitol Hill post office.
Mr.
Russ, who resigned on March 12, was responsible for the House bank and supervised the operations of the United States Capitol Police in the House.
He played no direct role in the House mail service.
Mr.
Russ declined to comment on his appearance, and it was unclear how his testimony related to the post office investigation.


Verities: Taxes and Death of Farms; Southampton Changes Policy, and Farmers Look Vulnerable
Beyond the flat snow-covered potato fields that John Babinski has farmed for more than half a century, starkly modern summer homes stand as silent witnesses to a way of life that farmers here say may soon come to an end.
"We worked like hell to pay for this farm," Mr.
Babinski said as he rapped the steering wheel of his pickup with a callused hand, "and when we finally got to the point where we could breathe a little bit, they are going to take it away from us."


The Daunting Task Of Preventing Theft At Theater Box Offices
The shadowy workings of the theater box office, an institution famous in theater lore and at times a touch point for scandal, have been put under a harsh spotlight after the news last week that the Manhattan District Attorney's office was investigating allegations of theft at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, the home of the comedy "Catskills on Broadway."
On Friday, the District Attorney's office confirmed that the Nederlander Organization, which owns the Lunt-Fontanne, has brought a complaint about theft in that theater's box office.
Several people familiar with details of the inquiry have said that Kenneth D. Greenblatt, the show's producer, has charged that more than $300,000 was stolen over a period of months since the show was in previews, which began on Nov. 19.


At East-West Crossroads, Western Europe Hesitates
While the Berlin wall was still standing, Western Europe enjoyed a pretty good deal: It bowed to American leadership on East-West security issues and quietly got on with turning the European Community into a world economic power that had minimal international political obligations.
In theory, the region lived under constant threat from the East, but by the mid-1980's few Western Europeans believed that a Soviet attack was possible.
They felt secure because the future seemed predictable: Washington would control Moscow, Europe would remain divided and they both would flourish.


The Director Who Started A Revolution
ADVERTISING is an industry impelled by the new, so it is no surprise that it cites active practitioners of the craft in a manner that other fields often reserve for posthumous tributes.
The latest to be so recognized is Joe Sedelmaier, the director of some of television's best-known, most-honored commercials.
Tomorrow evening, Mr.
Sedelmaier will be the subject of a seminar at the Museum of Television and Radio, at 25 West 52d Street in Manhattan.
Through humorous spots like the fast-talking man for Federal Express; "Where's the beef?" for Wendy's, and a series for Alaska Airlines that spoofs the "flights from hell" of rival carriers, he has revolutionized the form and content of commercials.


Arab Team Gets No Libyan Pledge on Agents
A seven-member Arab League team left Tripoli today without receiving any assurances that Libya would hand over two agents who are accused of blowing up an American airliner over Scotland in 1988.
The leader of the delegation, Esmat Abdel-Meguid, Secretary General of the Arab League, declined to say whether he had received any pledge from Libya's leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, that the two men would eventually be handed over.


President of Baxter Will Start a Venture
In one of the more graceful of recent corporate realignments, Baxter International said yesterday that Wilbur H. Gantz was leaving after five years as president and that it would help him to start his own biopharmaceutical and diagnostics company, the Pathogenesis Corporation.
Baxter said that James R. Tobin, 47 years old, an executive vice president, succeeds Mr.
Gantz, 54, immediately.


Personal Health
AS the unemployment rate continues to climb, each month hundreds of thousands of Americans discover that involuntary joblessness is often more of an emotional and physical challenge than any job they have ever held.
It is not, as some may think, unfettered free time to do chores and pursue pleasures, at least not if a paycheck is needed to keep a roof over one's head and food on the table or pay tuition or insurance premiums.


Review/Theater; 'Jake's Women,' a New Chapter in the Sex Wars
It is reassuring to know that Neil Simon, battle-scarred veteran of the sexual wars, is as confused as the rest of us: what he still does not know about men and women could probably fill half a dozen plays.
"Jake's Women" is one of them.
In this new Simon comedy at the Neil Simon Theater, a successful novelist, played by Alan Alda, wrestles with intimacy, guilt, trust, control and several other buzzwords that have been known to saw through modern American marriages, upper-middle-class, upper-middle-age division.
While the effort is painfully sincere and the jargon only slightly out-of-date (the characters seem untouched as yet by "Iron John" and "Backlash"), the insights prove as canned as those in any daytime talk show about men who hate women who love men who hate women.
But since Mr.
Simon does know more about playwriting and comedy than most mortals, and since a uniformly charming cast is on hand to carry out his theatrical schemes, "Jake's Women" is not without its ancillary amusements.


Dinkins Delays Building Incinerator in Brooklyn
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that it would put off construction of a large garbage incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard until 1996, a move that pushes it past next year's election.
Sanitation Commissioner Emily Lloyd said the delay would give the city more time "to focus more clearly" on recycling efforts, a key demand of environmentalists.


Accounts
*
Start Inc., Herndon, Va., to Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York, to introduce a promotional and marketing program in which participating companies offer consumers cash incentives for purchases.
The company said it would spend $30 million with Messner Vetere, which is also the agency for one of the program's participants, MCI.


Amish Farmers Rebuild After Arson Spree


And After Wolf. . . .
BERNIE SMILOVITZ is emerging as the leading candidate to replace WARNER WOLF when Wolf leaves WCBS, Channel 2, for his native Washington on June 9, according to people in the television industry.
Bernie who?
Smilovitz is a popular sportscaster at NBC's Detroit affiliate, WDIV, whose high-octane humor routine -- said to make Wolf's "let's go to the videotape" act look very tame -- greatly interests CBS.
Smilovitz is also host of the Detroit Tigers pre-game television program.
Officially, WCBS is not saying much.
"I've thought about a lot of names," said DEAN DANIELS, news director, "but we don't have a timetable and we don't have a general manager yet." A replacement for ROGER COLOFF, the station's late general manager, has not been appointed.
ALAN FRANK, general manager of WDIV, said there was no way that WCBS could wrest Smilovitz away.
"He's got a long-term contract with more than a year to go and no escape clause," Frank said.


Microsoft to Try New Market By Acquiring Fox Software
Moving into the one big area of the personal computer software business in which it does not participate, the Microsoft Corporation said today that it would buy Fox Software Inc., a provider of data base software, which is used to store and retrieve information.
Microsoft will exchange 1.36 million of its shares, worth more than $170 million, making this by far the largest acquisition the company has ever made.
It will also set up another direct confrontation between Microsoft and Borland International, which dominates the personal computer data base market by virtue of its acquisition last year of Ashton-Tate, maker of the popular dBase package.


Baseball; Steinbrenner Strikes Out As a Designated Pen Pal
Sounding a desperate note in his attempt to return to an active role with the Yankees, George Steinbrenner has written directly to his fellow major league club owners about his plight, but he has left them confused.
Steinbrenner, trying to regain his position as the Yankees' managing partner, wrote a letter to the other owners Feb. 28 in which he appeared to plead for their help, but ultimately seemed to suggest that he planned to sue Commissioner Fay Vincent to break the agreement that ousted him from his position.


Albany Withholds Street Funds
New York State officials said yesterday that they were penalizing New York City by withholding $6 million in Federal highway money from the city's Transportation Department, because the agency failed to properly supervise contractors for three major street repair jobs, including the rebuilding of 14th Street at Union Square.
State transportation officials said the Federal Highway Administration had authorized their decision, the first time such a step has been taken against the city.


Corrections
An article on March 16 about Michael Rubenstein, who has been dismissed as a part-time drug counselor in East Hampton, L.I., misstated his background.
He is a licensed social worker, not a psychologist.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Records Show Clintons Lost Less in Venture Than Partner
The owner of a failing savings and loan who was Gov.
Bill Clinton's partner in an Ozark real estate company lost a third more money than the Clintons, according to a partial reconstruction of the company's finances prepared for the Clintons and made public today by his Presidential campaign.
The reconstruction, which adds another piece to a murky financial relationship, shows that James B. McDougal and his wife, Susan, incurred net losses of $92,200, while Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, who owned the other half of the real estate company, the Whitewater Development Company, lost $68,900.


Bridge
One of the biggest upsets in the recent history of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championships occurred here Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
In second-round play, the top-seeded team -- headed by Malcolm Brachman of Dallas and including Mike Passell and Bob Goldman of Dallas, Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., Ed Wold of Houston and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash. -- crashed to defeat against a little-known young New York City squad.
Lapt Chan of Woodside, Queens, David Feldman, Uday Ivatury and Elizabeth Reich, all of Manhattan, and Arnie Fisher of Clementon, N.J., won by 35 imps after 64 deals of play against Brachman's defending champions, who among them have won bunches of world and national titles.


Baseball; No Links Found In Medical Report
Medical records of the woman who said she was raped by three New York Mets last year were found to contain "nothing that would help us in the investigation," the police said today.


Democrats in Race Have Earned Respect
To the Editor:
"Party Leaders: Take Charge," Stewart L. Udall's rather righteous assertion in your "Who's Presidential?" debate (Op-Ed, March 12), that the strongest Democrats aren't running is a disservice to the American voter, and does very little for Mr.
Udall's beleaguered political party.
As against the staggering defeats suffered by Jimmy Carter, Walter F. Mondale and Michael S. Dukakis in successive general elections, it is also presumptuous to label the current field as the "weakest crop of candidates in memory." Mr.
Udall may disdain the Democrats, but why does he appear to distrust democracy?


Defense Lawyer Blames Town in Sex-Abuse Case
The defense lawyer for a day care center operator who is facing child-abuse charges told jurors today that his client was the victim of a town in the grip of hysteria.
The lawyer, W. Michael Spivey, said there was no physical evidence to support the accusations against his client, Robert F. Kelly Jr., who was the owner of the Little Rascals Day Care Center in Edenton.
Nor were there accounts from adult witnesses or an objective investigation by child psychologists, Mr.
Spivey said.


First-Year Legislator Fights Welfare Curb
An unlikely champion has emerged to lead a coalition of civil libertarians, women's groups and church organizations in a fight to soften New Jersey's stringent new welfare laws.
A 24-year-old freshman Republican Assemblyman, John Hartmann, announced today that he has introduced a bill that would remove the most controversial section of the welfare-revision legislation, a rule that denies additional benefits for a child born into a family already on welfare.


Testing of Food Pyramid Comes Full Circle
ONE million dollars ago, the United States Department of Agriculture put the Eating Right Pyramid graphic on hold because, health professionals and some Federal officials charged, there had been opposition from the meat and dairy industries.
Eleven months later, extensive testing has shown that the pyramid, which divides foods into five groups, remains the strongest choice for conveying one of the Government's most important nutrition messages: eat less fat.


Olajuwon Grievance?
A player says one thing.
A doctor says another.
So how do you decide between them?
Why call in a specialist, of course -- not, to be sure, a medical specialist, but a disinterested arbitrator.
That appears to be the route the dispute between HAKEEM OLAJUWON and the Houston Rockets is taking.
Olajuwon, suspended indefinitely Monday because he had refused to suit up for a game last Saturday after a team physician ruled he was fit to play, is considering filing a grievance against the team, his agent said yesterday.
Olajuwon says that his injured hamstring was still tender.


Baseball; Japanese Investors Progress in Bid for Mariners
A top official of major league baseball said today that there appeared to be "some progress" in the efforts by a Japanese-led group to buy the Seattle Mariners, but denied a published report that the baseball commissioner was openly supporting the bid.
Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, said the progress seemed to stem from the willingness of Nintendo of Kyoto to reconfigure its proposal.


CHRONICLE
With BARBARA WALTERS as one of the speakers, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center is to open a new interventional cardiology center today for outpatient treatment of people with heart disease.
The center, a catheterization laboratory, is in the Milstein Hospital Building overlooking the Hudson River.
In cardiac catheterization, a tube is threaded through the veins to examine the heart or open blocked arteries.
The equipment for the center cost $6 million, a spokeswoman said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Students Give Clinton A Skeptical Reception
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas likes to visit high schools, often handing the microphone around like a talk show host and offering his pet proposals on college financing and educational choice.
But yesterday, he got more than he could have expected from an aggressive audience of government and political science students at Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Bayside, Queens.


Pace of Congressional Politics Picks Up
With a new redistricting map in place, the tempo of Congressional politics quickened today with the announcement of a Republican candidate in the redrawn Sixth District on the Jersey Shore and an acknowledgement by Frank J. Guarini that he will fight to keep his seat in the newly drawn, heavily Hispanic 13th District in Hudson and Union Counties.
In the Sixth District, Grace Applegate, who served in the administrations of Gov.
Thomas H. Kean in Trenton and President Bush in Washington, announced today that she would run for the Republican nomination for the seat vacated by Bernard J. Dwyer.
Mr.
Dwyer, a Democrat, announced on Saturday that he would not seek re-election to the seat he has held since 1980.
Moving to Old Bridge


Stocks Fall, With Dow Down 11.18
Stocks fell slightly in heavy trading yesterday, with some traders attributing the decline partly to the weaker-than-expected 10-day auto sales and declines in overseas markets.
The Dow Jones industrial average was down 11.18 points to close at 3,260.96.
Traders said the auto sales numbers disappointed investors and dampened opinions about a full recovery and seemed to hurt the sensitive cyclical stocks, particularly airlines and autos.
But the bond market firmed up on the same data and limited losses in stocks, as yields on 30-year issues dipped below 8 percent to make stocks a little more attractive.
Analysts said a successful two-year note auction by the Treasury also helped bonds to maintain gains.


Metal Detectors Won't Stop School Violence; Expectations of Failure
To the Editor:
Your excerpt from Dr.
Johnny Ray Youngblood's eulogy for Ian Moore, one of two students shot to death by another student in a Brooklyn high school Feb. 26 ("What Will Ian Tell God About Us?" Op-Ed, March 8), leaves a great deal unspoken in its plea to all, especially black youth, to reflect on violence's implications.
There seems to me to be essential facets of the black experience in America that crave, but seldom find expression.
That is because the dynamics of oppression rely upon the victim blaming himself for his own victimization.


PROGRESS IS SEEN IN GUATEMALA CASE
Relatives of an American freelance journalist who disappeared here in 1985 have recovered what they believe to be his remains and those of a photographer traveling with him beside a rough mountain trail 90 miles northwest of Guatemala City.
Sam Blake, the brother of the journalist, Nicholas Blake, said he has gathered about 200 pounds of bone fragments and soil samples, which will be delivered to a forensic pathologist at the Smithsonian Institution for further identification.


Trenton Ponders Change In Tough Sewer Controls
Environmentalists and advocates of development clashed today over suggestions for easing New Jersey's stringent moratorium on sewer connections.
The law, which has been in effect since 1973, halted any new hook-ups last year in nearly half of the state's communities because local treatment plants were releasing unclean water or were at maximum capacity.


Cambodia Chief, a Communist Survivor, Is Welcomed in U.S.
In the turbulent recent history of Cambodia, Hun Sen has been a survivor.
He came of age in the ranks of the Khmer Rouge, turned against them to serve the Vietnamese and is now gambling on a peace plan that promises to turn his battered Communist country into a democracy.
Mr.
Hun Sen, the 40-year-old Communist Prime Minister of Cambodia, is on his first visit to Washington this week and the Bush Administration, which does not recognize his Government, is extending a cautious welcome nonetheless.


Not a Laughing Matter: Punch to End Publication
Punch, Britain's oldest and best-known satirical magazine, plans to close after 150 years because of financial problems.
Although a search for a buyer continues, the magazine says it expects to publish its final issue on April 8.


Giants' Walls on the Verge of Signing With Browns
Everson Walls is apparently about to become a former Giant.
The 32-year-old cornerback, one of the leading defensive players of his era, is on the verge of signing with the Cleveland Browns as a Plan B free agent.
Walls, speaking yesterday from his home in Dallas, said the Browns initially offered him $1.1 million over two years.
He said they were now offering more.
He said he was asking for about $1.7 million over two years, but would accept less.
As a Plan B free agent, Walls is free to sign with any other National Football League team between Feb. 1 and April 1 without that team's having to compensate the Giants.
If he does not sign by midnight next Wednesday, he will return to the Giants roster.


In the Shards of Disaster, Seeking Clues to a Cause
The tangle of metal on the floor of a cavernous hangar at La Guardia Airport -- some of it almost unrecognizable -- might seem beyond comprehension.
But it is just the kind of jigsaw that aviation investigators piece together for a living.
A metallurgist can tell almost at a glance whether a piece broke from the sudden impact of the crash, or whether it came apart after repeated strain over the years and helped cause the crash.
An electrical engineer can look at a smashed light bulb from a warning light and tell from the condition of the filament whether the light was on at the moment of impact.
Another investigator can see by looking at the turbine blades of a charred engine whether it was powering the plane or had shut down before the crash.


Rating City School On Reading Scores


U.N. Issues Appeal on Yugoslav Cease-Fire
The commander of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Yugoslavia warned Serbian and Croatian leaders today to halt cease-fire violations in contested areas of Croatia or face a delay in the deployment of the force.
A statement issued by the United Nations force's headquarters in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, said that Belgian officers in Croatia came under artillery fire Monday night at a hotel in Beli Monastir, a Serbian-held town on the Hungarian border.
The statement said a shell blew out windows and damaged a United Nations vehicle parked nearby.
There were no casualties.


Review/Film; Insulting One's Husband In a House That's Bugged
The government reception that plays a central role in "The Ear," a powerful, long-suppressed Czechoslovak film made in 1969 and opening today at the Film Forum, is seen only in hindsight through the eyes of two desperate revelers.
Anna (Jirina Bohdalova) and Ludvik (Radoslav Brzobahaty), a quarrelsome married couple, are first observed as they return home drunkenly, very much the worse for wear.
Sporting a party hat made out of newspaper and a volatile, contentious expression, Anna is first to discover that something is amiss.
The door is unlocked.
The power and telephone lines are out of order.
Abruptly, the evening's strained merriment looks a lot less innocent than it did before.
Ludvik, a Communist Party official during the Stalinist 1950's, has quietly learned during the course of the evening that other bureaucrats, including his own superior, have been mysteriously detained.
This means that Ludovik and Anna, who have been in the midst of sniping at each other over petty domestic matters, must contemplate the possibility of a serious reversal of fortune.
Anna is torn between voicing contempt for her husband and allowing that contempt to be monitored by what she calls "the ear."


New Yorkers Can Vote for Tsongas
Despite his withdrawal from the Presidential race last week, Paul E. Tsongas will appear on the ballot for New York's Democratic primary on April 7.
Mr.
Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts, gathered the required 10,000 signatures.
A challenge to the legality of his petitions by the New Alliance Party was rejected by the State Board of Elections, and a state judge then upheld that decision this month.
Unless an appeals court overturns it, which legal and political experts have said was extremely unlikely, New York voters will have the option of voting for him.


Economic Scene; Women's Work: The Pay Paradox
COMPARED with their European counterparts, American women are more skilled and enjoy greater legal protection against job and pay discrimination.
Why, then, is the gap in pay between men and women roughly the same as in Europe -- and in some cases, far greater?
One possibility is that discrimination is actually more pervasive in the United States than indicators suggest.
But Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn, economists at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign campus, offer a very different explanation in an article to be published in the May issue of the American Economic Review.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  WESTERN EUROPE HESITATES
With the cold war over, West European governments have been confronted with the unknown, and anxiety is setting in.
They face potential turmoil to the East, and their own carefully crafted relationships have been thrown into question.
A1  RUSSIAN NUCLEAR-PLANT FAILURE
A nuclear power plant outside St.
Petersburg released radioactive gases, but initial reports indicated that the incident posed no danger.
Still, it raised alarm because the plant is of the same design as the Chernobyl station.
A12  VISITOR FROM CAMBODIA
Hun Sen, the Communist Prime Minister of Cambodia, is on his first visit to Washington this week.
The Bush Administration, which does not recognize his Vietnamese-installed Government, is extending a cautious welcome.
A6  KOREAN OPPOSITION WINS A VOTE
South Korean voters rebuked President Roh.
A strong showing by a new conservative party stripped his governing party of its majority in the National Assembly.
A3  A SURPRISE IN NIGERIAN CENSUS
Nigeria has released census findingsthat put the national population at 88.5 million, far below the widely held assumptionof at least 110 million.
A12  ALTERNATIVE IN BRITAIN
Britain's third party has an electability problem.
The Liberal Democrats' efforts to position themselves as a moderate alternative in next month's election keep bumping into a nagging skepticism.
A3  PROGRESS IN GUATEMALA CASE
Relatives of one of two Americans who have been missing in Guatemala since 1985 said that believe they have recovered the remains of the two men.
A7  RUSHDIE CALLS FOR U.S.
HELP
Emerging briefly from hiding, Salman Rushdie appealed to the United States Government tonight to aggressively press Iran to rescind a death threat against him.
A8  Beijing Journal: Knives are out for China's hard-line Premier.
A4  Arab League team arrives in Libya to discuss Pan Am 103 case.
A5
At least 60 die in Senegal in peanut processing-plant blast.
A6  National A14-20, A24, D23-24  BROWN AND CLINTON CLOSE
Primary voters in Connecticut gave their party's front-runner about the same amount of support as its back-runner, according to surveys of voters leaving the polling places.
A1  TSONGAS SUPPORTERS HELP BROWN
The thousands of Democratic votes that were thrown up into the air when Paul E. Tsongas abruptly withdrew from Connecticut's Presidential primary came down as manna from heaven for Edmund G. Brown Jr.
A1  NOT JUST A PHOTO OPPORTUNITY
Governor Clinton got a less-than-civil civics lesson from government and political science students at a Queens high school.A19
Brown talked to New York's Mayor and its labor leaders.  A18
The Clintons released information about a failed real-estate deal.
A19  RUDMAN RETIRING IN DISGUST
Senator Warren Rudman, who in two terms put his mark on the budget-balancing act and the Iran-contra hearings, announced he would retire because he was tired of serving in a government that was "getting zero done." A14  COUNSEL SEEKS SENATORS' MUSCLE
The special counsel investigating the disclosures of sexual harassment accusations during the Thomas hearings asked a Senate panel to order two journalists to divulge their sources.
But the committee was on the verge of rejecting the request.
D23  TRADE SCHOOLS' DEFT LOBBYING
Trade schools faced expulsion from the Federal student aid program after widespread abuses became public.
But a vigorous lobbying effort saved the schools' access to Federal money.
A1  RECONSIDERING HABEAS CORPUS
The Supreme Court heard arguments in a case that could lead to drastic limits on the ability of Federal courts to decide whether state prison inmates were constitutionally sentenced.
A16  SURPRISES OF THE BEATING CASE
The prosecutor in the Rodney King beating case appears to be pursuing twin strategies of avoiding risks and keeping the defense guessing.
A17  BAILEY STIRS UP NORIEGA TRIAL
The drug-trafficking trial of General Noriega was thrown into confusion after defense lawyers presented a letter from F. Lee Bailey that appeared to question the credibility of a crucial witness.
A14  MORE FISH FOR FEWER FISHERMEN?
More and more fishing boats are coming back empty from the Georges Bank, New England's prime fishery.
But fishermen say a plan to rebuild stocks would doom their way of life.
A14  The space shuttle Atlantis roared into orbit.
A20  Two astronauts faced return to a vastly different Earth.
A20  Police identified an Alzheimer's patient who was abandoned.
D23  Education Page A21  Adults who cannot read find help from a computer-friendly tutor.
A high school tries to halt drug abuse by hiding a camera in the boys' room.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 A REDISTRICTING IMPASSE
After missing four self-imposed deadlines in five weeks, legislative officials said that they were at an impasse over how to draw a consensus redistricting plan for members of Congress from New York.
A1  SEEKING BETTER HEALTH CARE
Stefen Marc Rice was born at the Childbearing Center of Morris Heights and his birth represents the search for cheaper and better health care for poor urban women.
A1  A MODEST DROP IN CRIME
Reported crime in New York City fell modestly last year in every major category, the Police Department said.
It was the first such across-the-board decline in 36 years.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Touches of Asia in French food C1  Broccoli's popularity rises C1  Arts/Entertainment C16-24  The problems of preventing theft at the box office.
C17  Theater: "Jake's Women." C17  A London stage star on American television.
C17  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Steinbrenner writes to fellow owners.
B9  Basketball: Hurley vs.
Hurley.
B9  Health Page C12  Obituaries D22  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Russia acts, U.S. slumbers.
Frohnmayer's noisy exit.
A business pro at City Hall.
A new voice on city jails.
Letters A22  Robert L. Park: Star warriors on sky patrol.
A23  John B. Anderson: Tsongas, still ahead of the curve.
A23  Sergo Mikoyan: Stop treating Russia like a loser.
A23


Hockey; Rangers Edge the Flyers to Clinch Patrick Title
On a below-average night for the other aspects of their game, the Rangers' penalty killing was perfect and their goaltending bordered on brilliance, which was just enough for a 4-3 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers at the Spectrum.
The triumph tonight, combined with Washington's loss, clinched the Patrick Division title for the Rangers and increased their chance for finishing first over all in the National Hockey League.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 20
Mar. 13
Mar. 22
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.5
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.6
2.9
Gasoline stocks
222.6
225.3
211.9
Distillate stocks
101.8
105.5
97.7
Crude imports, daily
5.7
5.4
5.2
Product imports, daily
1.2
1.9
1.2
Crude stocks
344.2
342.0
334.8
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
84.4
82.0
82.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; DEMOCRATS REBUFF CLINTON IN THE CONNECTICUT PRIMARY AS BROWN WINS A CLOSE VOTE
Democratic primary voters in Connecticut served notice yesterday that they were less than overwhelmed by their party's new front-runner, Gov.
Bill Clinton, handing him an embarrassing second-place finish to former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California.
The voting was a jarring message for a man who was widely predicted to be on a clear path to the nomination after former Senator Paul E. Tsongas left the race last week.
It heightens the importance of New York's primary on April 7, and it signals that Mr.
Clinton still has considerable work to do to build and consolidate his support among Democratic primary voters.


Japanese Prime Minister Wasn't Mistranslated
To the Editor:
Charles Burress (letter, March 11) assails as distorted The Associated Press coverage of remarks on the American work ethic by Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan.
Reviews of what we said at the time on deadline and subsequently at greater leisure leave us certain of the accuracy of our report.
The Prime Minister spoke of declining value put on hard work in the United States and then went on to cite junk bonds and other financial excesses as an example of this lack of a work ethic.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Sent Greg Gohr, Buddy Groom, David Haas, Jeff Kaiser and Mike Wallace, pitchers; Victor Rosario, infielder; Jody Hurst, Riccardo Ingram and Shawn Hare, outfielders; and Marty Pevey, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Sent Wade Taylor, Russ Springer and Ed Martel, pitchers, to Columbus of the International League.
Sent Mark Hutton, pitcher, to Albany of the Eastern League.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Extended the contract of Tommy Lasorda, manager, through the 1993 season.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Activated Carl Herrera, forward, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Kenny Gamble, running back.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Derrick Fenner, running back.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Pete Holohan, tight end, and Anthony Moss, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Carl Zander, linebacker, to a two-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Reggie Langhorne, wide receiver, on a two-year contract.
Canadian Football League
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Signed Joey Jauch, wide receiver.
World League of American Football
BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Activated Demetrius Davis, tight end.
Signed Lionel Manuel, wide receiver, and Jeff Oliver, guard.
FRANKFURT GALAXY -- Signed Jeff Mickel and David Senczyszyn, tackles.
MONTREAL MACHINE -- Released Shawn Wilbourn, free safety.
NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY KNIGHTS -- Released Pat Jackson, wide receiver.


Jeffries's Replacement Hopes to Be Agent of Calm
Edmund W. Gordon says he agreed to replace Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as chairman of City College's black studies department in the hope of bringing calm to the institution through a less confrontational style.
"I became more and more aware of the continuing problem and the lack of progress resolving it, so I decided to intervene," Dr.
Gordon said, explaining his decision to accept the City College job a week ago.
The appointment, made on Monday, is effective July 1.


The Crew of the Atlantis: 7 in the 46th Shuttle Flight
Charles F. Bolden Jr., Mission Commander
Colonel Bolden, 45 years old, is a Marine Corps pilot who is making his third shuttle flight.
He has been an astronaut since 1980.
He was born in Columbia, S.C., and received a bachelor's degree in electrical science from the United States Naval Academy in 1968.
He became a pilot in 1970 and flew more than 100 sorties in Vietnam.
In 1978 he received a master's degree in systems management from the University of Southern California.


Library Wins in Homeless-Man Case
A Federal appeals panel has reversed a lower court decision and upheld the rules that the library here used to evict a homeless man on the ground that his habits annoyed other patrons.
The reversal, issued late Monday in Philadelphia, said the policy at the Joint Free Public Library of Morristown and Morris Township was grounded in "well-established constitutional principle" and did not violate the rights of the homeless man, 42-year-old Richard R. Kreimer.


A Good Referee Could Keep the Peace in Hurley Family
It began when they were young boys and their father would take them to the park in Jersey City, where the three would play one-on-one basketball, the games rotating among them.
Who would win?


Moscow Subways Played Large Defense Role
To the Editor:
"Moscow Subway Defies the Odds" by Louis Uchitelle (Business Scene column, March 10) reflects the efficiency of the Moscow subway system, but exaggerates the contribution that rational decisions favoring investment in public transportation made to the subway system's expansion after World War II.
Like everything else in the former Soviet Union that approached or exceeded Western functional standards, the Moscow subway and its counterparts throughout the country received massive subsidies from the military.
The subways became an integral part of a national system of deep underground defenses that were designed to protect top leaders and key elements of society from the effects of nuclear attack.


N.H.L. Labor Talks Resume in Toronto
Two small bargaining groups -- one representing players, the other representing owners -- sat down together behind closed doors in a Toronto hotel late yesterday and resumed negotiations over a new collective bargaining agreement for the National Hockey League.
If they don't have one by noon next Monday, the beginning of the final week of the regular season, the players will go on strike, they say.
In jeopardy then would be the Stanley Cup playoffs, the four-round event among 16 teams during which large gate receipts are generated for owners and relatively small bonuses are paid to players.


Jews Debate the Issue of Gay Clergy Members
The admission of sexually active homosexuals into the clergy, a subject hotly debated by Christians in recent years, is taking center stage for American Jews with two events today in Manhattan that are being closely watched across the country.
The first involves Beth Simchat Torah, at 57 Bethune Street in Greenwich Village, the largest gay synagogue in the country, which is expected to hire its first rabbi at a congregational meeting tonight.


Nigeria Reveals Census' Total, 88.5 Million, and Little More
After months of weighing the heavy political risks involved, the Nigerian Government has finally released its census findings, publishing figures about the country's overall population, but very little else.
The head count released on Thursday, the most thorough in the nation's history, put the country's population at 88.5 million, which though confirming Nigeria as Africa's most populous country, was far below the widely held belief that there were more than 110 million Nigerians.


When Coaches Take the Credit and Split
The coach of the 90's cannot afford to have us think, even for a second, that he buys his suits off the rack.
He has a suit deal.
Did somebody say deal?
The coach of the 90's has a car deal, a camp deal, a radio and television deal, and don't forget the shoe deal.
He may have a ticket deal.
He could have a restaurant deal.


Carolco in Agreement For a Financing Plan
Carolco Pictures Inc. announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement with its biggest investors that would give the struggling Hollywood production company important new financing.
The plan gives Carolco up to $73.8 million and insures at least the short-term livelihood of the studio, whose films include the newly released "Basic Instinct."


Diversion Plan: 'Safe Streets' As Budget Aid
The Dinkins administration plans to divert about $80 million in special tax revenues earmarked for Mayor David N. Dinkins's anti-crime program to fill gaps in the general budget, city budget officials said at a City Council hearing yesterday.
The budget officials, explaining the move during a hearing before the Finance and Public Safety committees, said state law that authorized the special taxes allowed them to delay some hiring of police officers each year.
They asserted that the $80 million -- part of $290 million to be raised through an anti-crime lottery and a special property tax -- was badly needed to avoid further service cuts in other areas, like the parks and schools.


ALBANY AT IMPASSE IN REDRAWING MAP OF HOUSE DISTRICTS
After missing four self-imposed deadlines in five weeks, legislative officials said today that they were at an impasse over how to draw a consensus redistricting plan for members of Congress from New York.
The legislative officials said they saw no obvious way to break the deadlock, increasing the likelihood that the Legislature would end up abdicating its control over redistricting to the courts.


Camera in School Bathroom Curbs Vandalism but Sets Off Debate
Three years ago, a $3 million renovation project transformed the Mascenic Regional High School here from a dingy, crowded place to a spacious, brightly painted modern structure of a sort rarely seen along the woodsy backroads of southern New Hampshire.
The school had developed a reputation for disciplinary and attendance problems, but Robin Pierce, the energetic new principal who arrived in time to manage the renovation, thought it had turned a corner: Students were boasting about their school and seemed to have settled down to the business of learning.


Linked (at Last) by the Word
At night, when his wife and children sleep, words come to Sonny Carbone.
The words rush through his mind and he has to go to the computer and write them down.
For most of his 60 years, words were things that other people wrote and read.
But now Mr.
Carbone has learned to read by writing to his teacher, in an electronic mail duet of sweetness and power.


Lemon Grass in the Ragout? Asian Spices Enter French Cooking
A TANTALIZING revolution is transforming the formal bastions of French cuisine.
Armed with spice grinders, coconut graters and rice papers, classically trained chefs are giving haute cuisine a decidedly Asian flavor.
Over the last year or so, there has been dramatic evidence of this change in New York's French restaurants.
It is also occurring elsewhere, in cities like Chicago, Washington, Boston, Philadelphia and San Francisco, as a younger generation of open-minded, well-traveled chefs, inspired by masters in France who have spent time in Asia, takes a less reverent approach to French cooking.


Theater in Review
The Wedding Portrait  Kampo Cultural Center  31 Bond Center Manhattan Through Sunday By Gudmundur Steinsson; directed by Rebecca Kreinen; production stage manager, Kathy Shwiff; video by Doug Blum; lighting by Todd Bearden; set by Duane Domutz; costumes by Elly Van Horne; sound by Jim Van Bergen.
Presented by Portrait Productions, in association with Franklin Furnace Archive.
With: Peter Galman, Rod C. Hayes 3d, Atli W. Kendall, Paul Kielar, Stacie Linardos, Tracey Osborne, Brenda Smiley, Martha Thompson and Anne B. Wyma.
There's the germ of an interesting theatrical concept in "The Wedding Portrait," a drama by the Icelandic playwright Gudmundur Steinsson that is unaccountably set in contemporary Pennsylvania.
Sally and Rick Fenton (Brenda Smiley and Peter Galman), a couple celebrating their 19th wedding anniversary, have allowed a video director and sound technician into their home to tape an "American Family"-style documentary about their lives.
Throughout most the play, the director (Stacie Linardos) and technician (Tracey Osborne) creep silently around the stage shooting the drama, which is shown on six video monitors.


Rankings of New York City Public Schools


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.00
6.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.05
4.08
5.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.19
4.27
5.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.23
7.33
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
8.03
8.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.99
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.79
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trade Schools Near Success As They Lobby for Survival
First came newspaper exposes, then a Senate investigation, criminal trials and even a Congressman incognito, carrying a hidden video camera.
Over the past few years, these have produced a mountain of evidence of widespread abuse at truck-driving institutes, beauty colleges and other private, profit-seeking trade schools.
But with the laws that govern these schools scheduled to come to a vote on Wednesday in the House of Representatives, the industry's leaders are celebrating.
Having faced the possibility of expulsion from the Federal student aid programs -- a step toward extinction -- the industry says it has reformed itself and preserved what it calls its rightful access to the aid programs.


Russian Atom Plant Leaks Gases; No Danger Is Seen
A failure in the reactor of a nuclear power plant outside St.
Petersburg early today released some radioactive gases into the atmosphere, but all initial reports indicated the incident posed no danger to the public.
Although there was no suggestion that the leakage at the Sosnovy Bor plant was worse than officially described, the incident raised an immediate alarm in Russia, in Scandinavia and across Europe, all the more so since the plant is of the same design as the Chernobyl power station whose eruption six years ago made it a synonym for the potential horrors of nuclear power.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common *
Hauser Chemical Research Inc. said it was withdrawing a filing covering the proposed sale of 1,364,318 common shares because of current unstable market conditions.
The company is based in Boulder, Colo.


In Every Category, Crime Reports Fell Last Year in New York City
Reported crime in New York City fell modestly last year in every major category, the Police Department said yesterday.
It was the first such across-the-board decline in 36 years.
The total number of crimes reported to the police, based on the crime figures provided to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, dropped for a third year in a row from 710,221 in 1990 to 678,855 in 1991, a decrease of 4.4 percent.
Total crimes fell three-tenths of 1 percent in 1990 and eight-tenths of 1 percent in 1989.
Decreases in total felonies were registered in 54 of 75 precincts, while there was no change in 2 precincts.
A Number of Factors
The rise and fall of crime is a result of a number of factors not readily discernible, including reported versus actual crime, shifts in demographics and personal habits, and police strength, visibility and strategy.


Nestle Wins A Big Battle For Perrier
After Europe's toughest international corporate battle in several years, the Swiss food giant Nestle won control today of Perrier, gaining an important stake in the world's expanding and highly profitable mineral-water business.
The Agnelli family of Italy, which battled Nestle for three months, gave up the fight as part of an accord under which the Swiss corporation, allied with the Indosuez bank, sweetened its offer for Source Perrier S.A. to 15.3 billion French francs ($2.7 billion) from 13.3 billion francs.


The Pop Life
Sort of Rock
They Might Be Giants has just released its fourth album, "Apollo 18" (Elektra), and like its other ones, it has a small, low-tech feel to it.
The band, the guitarists and songwriters John Flansburgh and John Linnell, are a product of bohemian Lower East Side life in New York in the early 1980's, and the music comes without a genre to identify it.
It's pop, in a way, and rock, in a way, and it's loaded with clever wordplay and obvious melodies.
But the songs aren't normal pop but rather the pop incarnation of irony, with such tunes as "The Statue Got Me High," "My Evil Twin" and "She's Actual Size," pretty much explaining their stance.


Former Official at Cray Is Named to Post at Intel
The Intel Corporation yesterday named Edward A. Masi, the former executive vice president of Cray Research Inc., as the president of its supercomputer systems division.
He is also being recommended for election as a corporate vice president.
Mr.
Masi, who is 44 years old, is filling a new position at the Intel operation, which is based in Beaverton, Ore.
Justin R. Rattner, an Intel fellow, continues as director of technology for the supercomputer systems division.


Uncovered Short Sales of Nasdaq Stocks Are Up
The number of shares in over-the-counter stocks sold short and not yet covered rose last month by 2.5 million to 354.8 million, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Figures reflect trades that took place in the month preceding March 6, which were settled by March 13.
"I don't know where it's coming from since the total amount of money devoted to short-selling is down," said Michael Murphy, a prominent short-seller in Half Moon Bay, Calif.
The short-selling fund he runs became the latest casualty of that capital flight earlier this month, when the State of Virginia withdrew its $25 million investment out of political concerns.


A Stage Star Who's Struck London
If you haven't heard of Juliet Stevenson, just spend a week here.
You can't pick up a newspaper or a magazine without finding an article about the actress, or two or three.
In a recent issue of Hello! she was positively crowding Princess Di.
Not that anyone had asked.


Comex Chooses Leader At Time of Big Decisions
Donna Redel was elected chairwoman of the Commodity Exchange of New York yesterday.
She will lead the exchange in making a number of pressing decisions.
"What's at stake is how to increase trading volume and reduce costs," said Ms.
Redel, an executive vice president at the Redel Trading Company, which was founded by her father, Irving Redel, himself a former Comex chairman.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Can't Slam Dunk Golf Balls
FOR all his exploits, Michael Jordan isn't the first to get burned wishing for more.
France wasn't enough for Napoleon, who had to rule Russia.
Building ships wasn't enough for George Steinbrenner, who had to own the Yankees.
Being the heavyweight champ wasn't enough for Mike Tyson, who had to swagger through the streets.
And now, playing basketball on a trampoline isn't enough for Michael Jordan, who thinks he can play golf, too.
But at $1,000 a hole, he is apparently losing more than he's winning.


Jet Airborne Briefly Twice, Officials Say
Providing new details about the sequence of events that led to the crash of USAir Flight 405, Federal investigators said last night that the aircraft was twice briefly airborne before it came to rest in Flushing Bay.
Officials said the twin-engine jetliner caromed off the runway, smashed into attennas and an embankment and hurtled into the bay.


Two Sound Choices; A Business Pro at City Hall
Mayor David Dinkins made a wise move by naming a prominent banker to be New York City's Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development.
The appointment of Barry Sullivan, retired chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, sends a positive message to business leaders in search of a sympathetic ear at City Hall.
Mr.
Dinkins often calls on competent experts from the business world, but just as often fails to act on their counsel.
As a member of Mr.
Dinkins's inner circle, Mr.
Sullivan could have a more direct impact on policy -- if the Mayor is receptive.


Russia Acts, U.S. Slumbers
No blank check.
With that vapid phrase, President Bush sidesteps pressure to organize large-scale Western economic aid for Russia.
Apparently unsure that Russian economic reforms are real, he sits on the sidelines as the Russian economy verges on collapse.
Mr.
President, take another look.
In February the Yeltsin Government and the International Monetary Fund reached agreement on economic measures that will be formalized once Russia becomes a member in April.
Since then Russia has further decontrolled prices, slashed military spending, cut subsidies to state enterprises and opened its borders to trade and investment.
That's an astonishingly quick leap to markets.


Bridgeport U. Reviews Offer From Moon's Church
The University of Bridgeport, on the brink of closing this summer because of financial problems, may reconsider an offer from the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church that could keep it open, university officials say.
Last fall, the university rejected a proposal to affiliate with an institute financed by the church in the face of fierce opposition from students and faculty members.
However, last week Colin Gunn, chairman of the university's board, received a letter from the institute, the Professors World Peace Academy, which he is to present to the board in the next few weeks.


Plenty of Fish in Sea? Not Anymore
Since colonial days, fishermen like Matthew Vitiello have cast their lines in Georges Bank and reaped the harvest of plentiful waters, returning to the wharf with a boat full of fish.
Now, an expanded fleet stays out twice as long to bring back half as much fish.
Overfishing has seriously reduced the stocks of cod, haddock and flounder that have sustained New Englanders for centuries.


A New Assignment
PRESIDENT BUSH will throw out the first ball when the Baltimore Orioles open their Camden Yards ball park on April 6 with a game against the Cleveland Indians. (AP)


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The scene, an R train heading toward Queens.
The time, a recent evening sometime after happy hour.
As we pulled into the Lexington Avenue station, a well-dressed fellow in his 40's rose unsteadily from his seat and staggered toward the car doors.
He grabbed for a pole to steady himself, then swung round to face the other passengers.


Catherine Wolkonsky; Teacher, 96
Catherine Wolkonsky, a French and Russian teacher for 50 years and founding chairman of the Slavic Department at the State University of New York at Albany, died on Thursday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
She was 96 years old and lived in Spring Valley, N.Y.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


For Doubting Britons, a Third Choice
When Paddy Ashdown and his double-decker campaign bus rolled into this redoubt of British Conservatism, he was exploring fertile territory: the recession has cut deeply into the prosperous towns of Essex and eastern England, and a lot of staunch Tories wonder if it might be time for a change, after 12 years of Conservative rule.
But as the leader of the centrist Liberal Democrats, the third force in an election landscape dominated by the larger Conservative and Labor Parties, Mr.
Ashdown's efforts to position himself and his party as the moderate alternative in next month's national election keeps bumping into a nagging skepticism.


Report Says Crew Error Led to Indiana Crash
Pilot error caused the crash of a Kentucky Air National Guard cargo plane into a restaurant-hotel complex here in February that left 16 people dead, news reports say.
The crew of the Lockheed C-130, which was practicing takeoffs and landings at Evansville Regional Airport, had shut down one of the four engines to simulate engine failure moments before the accident on Feb. 6, The Evansville Courier and radio station WIKY reported Sunday, citing unidentified military sources.


Review/Television; Magic Johnson, Taking Questions on AIDS
Last November, shortly after he announced that he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, the basketball superstar Magic Johnson established a foundation to support AIDS education and awareness programs.
One of its first projects is "Nickelodeon Special Edition: A Conversation With Magic," having its premiere on Nickelodeon tonight at 8.
With Linda Ellerbee as moderator, the format is uncomplicated: an unscripted 30-minute program, with no commercial breaks, in which Mr.
Johnson fields questions about AIDS and about himself from a group of youngsters, ages 8 to 14.
The session is riveting.
It's also invaluable.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Olympia &amp; York pulled out all the stops in hiring some of the financial world's star players, including Thomas S. Johnson, former president of Manufacturers Hanover, to help it in restructuring billions of dollars in loans on its vast holdings.  [ Page D1. ]


Pairing Chips and Living Cells to Test Drugs
Combining biology and semiconductors, scientists at the Molecular Devices Corporation here have created a sensing device that uses living cells on a silicon chip.
The instrument is part of a system that could help researchers better understand the mechanisms of disease, discover new drugs and reduce the use of animals in testing of drugs and cosmetics.
The potential uses might include the testing of live cells from a tumor biopsy to fine-tune the combination of chemotherapy drugs that would be most effective for an individual cancer patient.


Inquiry Finds Navy Altered Rules To Buy Troubled Radar Jammer
The Navy has lowered Pentagon standards and approved a $2 billion radar-jamming device designed to protect fighter planes, even after the equipment failed repeated tests, Congressional investigators said today.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said in a report that the jamming devices, which are intended to protect FA-18 and F-14 fighter jets, had 43 computer software failures in tests.
Investigators said the Navy then altered its test standards to allow the jammer to pass.


Wine Talk
WHEN Louis Daniel owned Le Chambertin, the former restaurant on West 46th Street in Manhattan, he would occasionally offer wine dinners.
Nothing fancy and no publicity.
Word would spread among the regulars, or he might put a discreet announcement on the tables.
Something like: "Wednesday, April 15, complete dinner, featuring Chateau Margaux 1953, Clos de Vougeot 1976, Mongeard-Mugneret and Meursault Perrieres 1978. Minimum four people, $45 each."
Mr.
Daniel had an extensive cellar.
He used the wine dinners to move wines that were getting too old to keep.
He controlled his inventory and his customers got great wines at bargain prices.


Rankings of New York City Public Schools


James C. Crumlish Jr. Judge, 72
James C. Crumlish Jr., a former Pennsylvania state judge and district attorney of Philadelphia, died on March 17 at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 72 years old.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Review/Fashion; House of Ungaro At 25: Seductiveness Without Vulgarity
Emanuel Ungaro celebrated his 25th anniversary as the head of his own fashion house today with a razzle-dazzle collection that was a real crowd-pleaser.
He showed the kind of clothes the French seem to appreciate the most: provocative and seductive without being vulgar.
It's a hard line to follow, but the designer managed with a well-tempered wink.
The good news is that he's constantly growing as a designer.
Just a few seasons back he was wrapping and draping his dresses tautly around the torso.
Women loved them because they were blatantly sexy.
But fashion changes, and this time he's far more subtle.
His long torso line, in suit jackets as well as dresses, hangs straight but still manages to suggest curves underneath.


Quotation of the Day
"Here we are, getting zero done, staying up to midnight debating amendments that everyone knows won't become law, because somebody wants to get a press release out." -- SENATOR WARREN B. RUDMAN, announcing he would not seek re-election.  [ A14:1. ]


Shuttle Lifts Off to Study Atmosphere
The space shuttle Atlantis thundered into orbit today, carrying an array of scientific instruments to conduct atmospheric studies that could influence major policy decisions for protecting the global environment.
After a one-day delay caused by fuel leaks, the Atlantis was launched on its planned eight-day mission at 8:14 A.M.
Within hours, the seven astronauts were settled into orbit and busy preparing the 12 instruments for round-the-clock observations of the chemistry and physics of the upper atmosphere.


Market Place; Nippon Phone Looking for Cash
Japan is moving to allow foreigners to buy a stake in its largest company, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation.
It is an offer that foreigners can be grateful was not made earlier.
The shares of N.T.T., once a Government-owned telephone monopoly, have fallen 80 percent from their 1987 peak.
The company, which is still partly owned by the Government, has faced growing competition within Japan.
That, plus the Japanese bear market, has made N.T.T.'s stock a disastrous performer.
It has become a symbol of Japan's financial excesses in the 1980's.


Lions Woo Swilling With a Lofty Offer
The Detroit Lions surveyed the field of linebackers expected to be in the next two National Football League drafts and concluded this: There may be a Pat Swilling-type player among them, but only one Swilling is in the league now, and he is worth an awfully high price.
On Monday, Swilling signed an offer sheet with the Lions that is reportedly worth $5.6 million over three years, which would make him the highest-paid defensive player in the N.F.L.
His current team, the New Orleans Saints, has until next Monday either to match the offer or to allow him to leave.
The Saints' president and general manager, Jim Finks, said his team would not be likely to make its decision until Monday.
Seven Days to Decide


Mexico City Orders Polluters to Clean Up
With the Mexican capital facing perhaps the worst smog crisis in its history, the city's mayor said today that he would give major industries 18 months to cut their emissions sharply or move out of town.
Announcing new guidelines negotiated with the country's largest business federation, Mayor Manuel Camacho Solis said that 220 of the most polluting industries in the city would have to install emission-control devices, modernize outdated equipment and accept far more stringent monitoring.


Manhattan's Next Stop Is at South Bend Station
Steve Lappas was still awake when the telephone rang at his Rockland County home early yesterday morning.
The previous night, the Manhattan coach had worked the sidelines at the Louis Brown Athletic Center in Piscataway, N.J., directing his team to a last-second upset and keeping alive a storied season.
In the first round of the tournament, Manhattan defeated Wisconsin-Green Bay in the final seconds.
"Some guys can't sleep when they lose," said Lappas. "I can't sleep when I win."


CHRONICLE
For the seventh time, MARGARET RAY, the woman from Colorado who appears to be obsessed with DAVID LETTERMAN, even claiming to be his wife, has been intercepted near his home in New Canaan, Conn.
The New Canaan police said they were told by a taxi driver on Sunday morning that a woman was trying to get to the Letterman residence.
They said that when they identified her as Ms.
Ray, she was told not to enter the property but was not arrested.
They said she "accepted the assistance of the department in finding transportation out of New Canaan."


PGA Tour Officials Getting Ready to Strike
What the PGA Tour called its final offer in a labor dispute with its field staff was rejected today, setting the stage for a walkout starting with the first round of the Players Championship this week.
The labor lawyer Richard Phillips, who also represents major league baseball's umpires' union, said the 19 members of the Professional Association of Golf Officials were "bitterly disappointed" with the offer by the Tour's policy board and have set a deadline of Wednesday at midnight to strike.


Police Officer Is Acquitted In the Killing of a Suspect
Bringing to a close a case that stirred deep passions over allegations of police brutality, a Queens judge yesterday acquitted the last of five New York City police officers who had been charged with killing a car-theft suspect.
The four other officers were previously spared prosecution in the Queens case when the murder charges that a grand jury brought against them under one District Attorney, John J. Santucci, were dropped by his successor, Richard A. Brown, who said the evidence did not support the charges.
Mr.
Brown also reduced from murder to manslaughter and negligent homicide the charges against the officer cleared yesterday, Anthony Paparella.


Senators Are Urged to Press Reporters on Thomas Leaks
The special counsel investigating the disclosures of sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas asked the Senate Rules Committee today to order two journalists to divulge their confidential sources and reporting records.
But the committee was on the verge of rejecting the request.
Senator Mitch McConnell, a conservative Republican from Kentucky and a member of the committee, said the panel would reject the request rather than cause a confrontation with journalists and a test case over a reporter's privilege to refuse to disclose sources.
Most members have indicated publicly or privately that they are not in favor of pursuing the matter.


Metal Detectors Won't Stop School Violence; Not Gun Maker's Fault
To the Editor:
I believe that "Where Kids Get Their Guns" (editorial, March 7) needs more thought.
You propose permitting "victims of gun violence to recover damages from producers and dealers without having to prove negligence." In other words, the manufacturer is to guarantee that his product will not be misused by anyone, no matter how far down the stream of commerce.
Shouldn't we also hold liable the mill that sold the steel to the manufacturer?
The mill knew what the steel was to be used for.
Or how about holding an auto manufacturer liable for the damage caused by a drunken driver?
An oil company for making the gasoline used by an arsonist?


Baseball; Yankees' Johnson Improves His Chances
Buck Showalter seemingly found some answers for his ragged starting rotation today.
For one splendid afternoon in a spring that has produced ugly pitching questions for the Yankee manager, Showalter could have sat back and talked about having a starting rotation.
But he did not.
Even though Jeff Johnson seemed to secure a berth with an impressive effort against the Braves, Greg Cadaret, who can start or pitch in relief, looked ready to be moved into the rotation and Wade Taylor was assigned to the minors, Showalter was still cautious about naming the last two starters.
Instead, he took a safer route and made the expected announcement that Scott Sanderson would be the starter against the Boston Red Sox on opening day.


Kindling the Wonders of Childhood
"IT rips your heart out," said Helen Fallon, who teaches kindergarten and first-grade children with learning disabilities at Public School 328 in Brooklyn's tear-stained East New York section.
Many in her current class of 10 were born addicted to drugs, none live with both their own mother and father, and one girl came to school the other day with the imprint of an iron on her arm.
Most live in projects, some live in shelters.
Drugs, guns and gnawing fear are things they know too well.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; As a Thousand Cheer, Brown Pays Dinkins a Visit
Edmund G. Brown Jr. brought his eclectic brand of populist oratory to New York's City Hall yesterday, courting Mayor David N. Dinkins and addressing a crowd of about 1,000 supporters and passers-by outside.
Mr.
Dinkins, who plied Mr.
Brown with papers pressing the cause of urban America, said that as Mayor of the host city for the Democratic National Convention, he was neutral in the contest between Mr.
Brown, the former Governor of California, and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
But he said there was "always a chance" that he might yet endorse one of the contenders for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and that he expected to meet with Mr.
Clinton before the New York primary on April 7.


Guinness Stake Bought By Berkshire Hathaway
Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the company that Warren Buffett has guided to wealth and fame, reported healthy 1991 earnings yesterday and its first important venture into a foreign market, a 31.2 million share stake in Guinness P.L.C., the British brewing giant.
Berkshire's annual report disclosed a $264.8 million investment in Guinness, which was jolted by scandal in the 1980's when its former chairman was found guilty of manipulating stock prices during a takeover.
He was later jailed.
Since the scandal, the company has been rebuilding, and its earnings have improved.
The Berkshire holding, based on yesterday's close of $:5.62 in London is worth $302.3 million.


Daniel J. Moore Dies; Bankruptcy Judge, 63
Daniel J. Moore, a Federal bankruptcy judge in Newark since 1987, died at his home in Short Hills, N.J., on Thursday.
He was 63 years old.
He died of a heart attack, according to the Jacob A. Holle Funeral Home in Maplewood.


Letter on Witness's Veracity Rattles Noriega Trial
The trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was thrown into confusion today after defense lawyers presented a letter that appeared to question the credibility of a witness who had told of seeing the former Panamanian leader accept a bribe from drug traffickers.
Mr.
Noriega's defense team told Judge William M. Hoeveler that F. Lee Bailey, the criminal defense lawyer, had sent them a letter telling of a possible inconsistency between the testimony of the witness, Gabriel Taboada, last October and a statement made to him as Mr.
Taboada's lawyer in another case.


Lasorda Is Signed Up By Dodgers for 1993
Here's a surprise: TOMMY LASORDA, who has managed the Los Angeles Dodgers every year since the 1977 season, was named yesterday as the team's manager for the 1993 season.
This time around, it indeed is a bit of a surprise, for there had been much speculation during the last year that Lasorda might be stepping down (or stepping up to the front office) after this season.


Review/Television; Magic Johnson, Taking Questions on AIDS
Last November, shortly after he announced that he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, the basketball superstar Magic Johnson established a foundation to support AIDS education and awareness programs.
One of its first projects is "Nickelodeon Special Edition: A Conversation With Magic," having its premiere on Nickelodeon tonight at 8.
With Linda Ellerbee as moderator, the format is uncomplicated: an unscripted 30-minute program, with no commercial breaks, in which Mr.
Johnson fields questions about AIDS and about himself from a group of youngsters, ages 8 to 14.
The session is riveting.
It's also invaluable.


New Team Is Hired At Olympia
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the cash-short Canadian property giant, pulled out all the stops yesterday in hiring some of the financial world's star players to help it reorganize billions of dollars in loans on its vast holdings.
Moving quickly to put new management in place to prepare for the complex debt negotiations, the company said it was replacing Paul Reichmann as its president with Thomas S. Johnson, the former president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, for the duration of the reorganization.
The company also retained James D. Wolfensohn and Robert Miller, partners in James D. Wolfensohn Inc., as advisers, along with J. P. Morgan &amp; Company and the Canadian investment firm Burns Fry Ltd.
A Role for Reichmann
Although Mr.
Reichmann is stepping aside as president, a spokesman for the company said he would continue to play an important role behind the scenes in the debt negotiations.


John Frohnmayer's Noisy Exit
John E. Frohnmayer, the departing chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, is not going gently.
In a speech at the National Press Club Monday he lambasted Patrick Buchanan, the Bush Administration and certain members of Congress for undermining the arts agency, and chastised complacent politicians and religious leaders for letting it happen unchallenged.
They all deserved the tongue-lashing.
Take Mr.
Buchanan, who has shamelessly used a few controversial grants by the arts agency as an inflammatory campaign issue against President Bush.
Mr.
Buchanan recently branded the N.E.A. as "the upholstered playpen of the arts and crafts auxiliary of the Eastern liberal arts Establishment."


Passaic Mayor Pleads Not Guilty to Charges of Extortion
Even as Mayor Joseph Lipari of Passaic was pleading not guilty today to 14 charges of extortion, bribery, conspiracy and income-tax evasion, Federal prosecutors said their investigation of corruption in the small industrial city was focusing on new targets.
The United States Attorney for New Jersey, Michael Chertoff, who has called the city of 60,000 "almost a legend in modern annals of corruption in Northern New Jersey," characterized the indictment of Mr.
Lipari as just the latest chapter in a still-unfolding tale of corruption.
In an interview, Mr.
Chertoff compared the investigation to "doing a root canal on a tooth: you have to keep digging deeper and deeper to get out all the infected material." Broader Investigation


Beijing Journal; Who's Wounded Now? It's the Tiger of Tiananmen
In the 15 years since Mao died, no Chinese leader dared move into the Great Helmsman's old homes in Zhongnanhai, the new Forbidden City of lakes and gardens in the center of the capital.
Then last fall, in a gesture of supreme political self-confidence, Prime Minister Li Peng decided to move into part of one of Mao's old houses.
These days a major power struggle is unfolding in China and enveloping Mr.
Li, cheering his enemies with the thought that he may have to look for a new job and a new home.
For many intellectuals and officials, the clearest test of whether the latest talk of reform is serious is whether it puts Mr.
Li out of work.


Dibble Out Indefinitely
Cincinnati Reds reliever ROB DIBBLE will miss the rest of spring training with tendinitis in his right shoulder, and it's uncertain when he'll be able to pitch again.
A magnetic resonance imaging exam yesterday found no serious injury to the shoulder, which has given Dibble problems this spring.
The right-hander will be on a strengthening program for the next 10 days to two weeks, the Reds announced last night.
The regular season begins in less than two weeks.


60-Minute Gourmet
EVERYONE seems to be nostalgic for meatloaf these days.
It is showing up on restaurant menus in all different incarnations: loaded with garlic, a la Tex-Mex, laced with cheese.
Meatloaf does not have to be made with traditional ground beef.
I like to add some pork or veal for a leaner texture.
Recently, I added ground turkey to a meatloaf and the result was excellent.
The ground beef had more than enough fat to keep it moist.


For Pilot, 2 Events Led to Life in Cockpit
The years that Capt.
Wallace J. Majure 2d spent in the cockpit, and the years that he spent out of it, were governed by two events over which he had no control: the Vietnam War and airline deregulation.
Captain Majure, who died when USAir Flight 405 crashed at La Guardia Airport on Sunday night, quit the Navy in the mid-1970's after flying cargo runs in Italy because there were too many Vietnam-era pilots and too few flying jobs.


Two Sound Choices; A New Voice on City Jails
Unlike her immediate predecessors, Mayor David Dinkins's new choice for Correction Commissioner of New York City lacks any hands-on experience running a jail.
But Catherine Abate's background as head of the City Probation Department gives her knowledge and skills essential to the operation of the city's huge correction system.
During the 1980's New York learned a costly lesson: It takes more than physical expansion to cope with a large jail population.
The task also requires innovative management and the tact to deal with state officials, legislators and judges who wield enormous power over the number of prisoners in city jails.


I.B.M. Enters U.S. Notebook PC Market
I.B.M. displayed two new notebook computers today, making its long-awaited debut in the American market for the lightweight machines.
The company also said it would offer its first color laptop computer in April.
I.B.M. is one of the last major personal computer makers to enter the notebook market.
The company's earlier laptop models have met with a lukewarm response, but the notebook market is now considered too significant for the world's largest computer maker to ignore.
Markdowns Expected
The International Business Machines Corporation's new PS Notes computers are black and weigh 6.2 pounds.
I.B.M. said one of the notebook computers, the PS/2 model N51 SX, was based on the Intel Corporation's 386SX 16-megahertz chip.
It will list for $2,250, but industry analysts expect many dealers to mark it down to between $1,700 and $1,800.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a decision by the European Community to require reductions in the sulfur content of fuel misstated a requirement of the United States Clean Air Act.
Under the law, the level of sulfur in fuel must be held to 0.05 percent or less by October 1993, not 0.5 percent or less.


Uncovered Short Sales of Nasdaq Stocks Are Up
The number of shares in over-the-counter stocks sold short and not yet covered rose last month by 2.5 million to 354.8 million, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Figures reflect trades that took place in the month preceding March 6, which were settled by March 13.
"I don't know where it's coming from since the total amount of money devoted to short-selling is down," said Michael Murphy, a prominent short-seller in Half Moon Bay, Calif.
The short-selling fund he runs became the latest casualty of that capital flight earlier this month, when the State of Virginia withdrew its $25 million investment out of political concerns.


Basketball; Knicks Survive But It's No Laugher
Once again, the Knicks made beating the Orlando Magic more difficult than it should have been.
Leading by 23 points in the fourth quarter, New York watched Orlando pull to within 5 points with 1 minute 25 seconds remaining.
But thanks to a 22-foot jumper by Gerald Wilkins, Orlando got no closer and New York struggled to a 126-117 victory last night at Madison Sqaure Garden.


Books of The Times; The Major-League Hopes of Life's Minor Leaguers
Box Socials  By W. P. Kinsella 225 pages. Ballantine Books. $20.
After delivering two fictional fast balls with "The Iowa Baseball Confederacy" and "Shoeless Joe" (the basis for the movie "Field of Dreams"), W. P. Kinsella confounds his fans by throwing a change-up in "Box Socials." His new novel is more about small-town life than big-time baseball.
It's a story filled with nostalgia about a time when the game was played on real grass and was called on account of darkness.
But even more, it's about the everyday hopes of what it must be like for most people to play out their lives in the minors.


New Data Services By Phone Group
The GTE Corporation and three of the giant Bell regional operating companies said they planned to add wireless data services to a fledgling national network they announced in February.
GTE Mobilnet, GTE's Contel Cellular Inc., Ameritech Mobile Communications, Nynex Mobile Communications and Bell Atlantic Mobile Communications plan to test new methods and standards for delivering data as well as voice.


Births Beyond Hospitals Fill an Urban Need
Shortly after midnight on a recent Sunday, in one of New York City's poorest neighborhoods, 20-year-old Yesenia Rice gave birth in a clinic several miles from the nearest hospital.
Her mother-in-law and aunt sat behind her on the thick double bed, one advising her to "yell and scream" and the other urging her to "breathe, breathe, breathe." Her mother stood behind the bathroom door, glad to be near her daughter but unable to watch the unmedicated pain.


Mobil Cutting 950 Positions
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it would reduce its oil and exploration staffs in the United States by 23 percent, or roughly 950 employees.
The move reflects the company's effort to reduce its domestic operations as it copes with several pressures weighing heavily on the industry.
The cuts, which will be completed by May 1, will result in the closing of operations in Oklahoma City and Denver, where 500 office and field workers are based.


South Korea Voters Rebuff Ruling Party
South Korean voters delivered a rebuke to President Roh Tae Woo on Tuesday, as a strong showing by a new conservative party stripped his governing party of its majority in the national legislature, according to results announced by the Government.
The ruling Democratic Liberal Party remains by far the most powerful, but the results were interpreted as a setback at a crucial moment.
The more important race for the presidency is expected later this year.
Although President Roh, a former army general, cannot run after his five-year term expires, the bitterly fought elections on Tuesday had been described as an early referendum on the performance of his party.


Bozell's Penney Ads Have New Theme
In the latest effort by a giant retailer to reshape its advertising for the tastes of the 1990's, the J. C. Penney Company will introduce a series of national television commercials carrying the thought "One thing remains the same . . . our great values. And great values mean a great deal. J. C. Penney."
The campaign is the first new work for Penney from Bozell Southwest in Dallas since the agency took over the account from Ayer Inc. last Oct. 1.
The new theme replaces "Fashion comes to life," which was created by Ayer in 1990.


Co-Pilot Says He Checked Wing for Ice
The co-pilot of the USAir jet that crashed in a snowstorm at La Guardia Airport on Sunday told Federal investigators yesterday that he checked for ice on the plane at least three times, and perhaps as many as 10 times, as it taxied into position for takeoff.
He said he saw no sign of ice.
His statement appeared to contradict one of the leading theories about why the plane crashed but does not disprove the possibility that ice on the plane robbed it of lift and caused it to bank sharply to the left, scraping its wing on the ground as it skipped wildly off the runway and into Flushing Bay.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Cuomo; With Crucial Vote Near, Cuomo Painstakingly Avoids Taking Sides
With New York's Democratic Presidential primary suddenly a critical and competitive contest, the state's favorite son and top-ranking Democrat, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, has adopted a stance of painstaking neutrality.
For Mr.
Cuomo, whose every utterance on Presidential politics is scrutinized for subtle nuance and hidden intent, maintaining the appearance of impartiality can be a daunting task.
But ever since the primary became a two-way race last week, the Governor has dispensed equal praise and criticism of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California in measured doses.


Nancy Walker, 69, of 'Rhoda' And Paper-Towel Commercials
Nancy Walker, who played Rhoda's mother, McMillan and wife's housekeeper and a paper-towel-promoting waitress in television commercials, along with a string of brassy, loudmouthed cutups on Broadway, died yesterday at her home in Studio City, Calif.
She was 69 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said Frank Liberman, a family spokesman.


Listen to the Anger
Jerry Brown, riding a wave of voter protest against the political process, wins a startling upset in Connecticut's Democratic primary.
Warren Rudman, disgusted with a Government that's "not functioning," announces that he's quitting the Senate.
The two events send a jarring message that Congress, especially, needs to heed.
People are angry about political posturing and ineffectiveness, and piecemeal reform won't do.
It's certainly laudable that House Speaker Thomas Foley now promises to replace the sloppy management system that made a scandal of the House bank.
But Congress's problems go far beyond self-indulgent perks and shoddy housekeeping.
Both houses stagger through self-imposed obstacle courses that interrupt and paralyze their capacity to legislate.
The larger task before Congress is to change the way it does business.


The Talk of Hollywood; The Topic Is Oscars; the Chat Is All Guesswork
Has "Bugsy" peaked?
Did Jonathan Demme, the director of "The Silence of the Lambs," commit a serious blunder and insult Hollywood?
Can an animated movie like "Beauty and the Beast" actually defeat some heavyweight films and emerge as best picture?
With the 64th annual awards of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences looming on Monday, the town is seized by Oscar fever.
Forget the Democratic Presidential drama, which, some producers say, would probably make a better movie than most.
What obsesses Hollywood is a highly charged contest in which, for the first time in years, there seems no obvious front-runner, and a blend of luck, talent, sympathy and personal popularity could turn a nominee into a winner.


Spineless on Mr. Rushdie
Most Americans understand the Salman Rushdie affair.
The author himself put it simply to The Washington Post: "You don't kill people for writing books." Yet the Bush Administration has been cowed by an Iranian Government that thirsts for Mr.
Rushdie's blood.
When the British novelist risked his neck by speaking Tuesday at a conference on free speech in Washington, the Administration seemed to wish he weren't there.
Speaking for the White House, Marlin Fitzwater said: "He's doing interviews and book tours and things that authors do. But there's no reason to have any special interest in him." Speaking for the State Department, Margaret Tutwiler said there were no plans for a meeting that "could be misinterpreted by people who want to misinterpret it."


For an Answer to a Roman Riddle, Find Pi
By deciphering a frieze on the ancient Portland vase, one of the world's most famous glass objects, a graduate student at the University of Massachusetts appears to have solved a mystery that has intrigued scholars ever since the vase was discovered in the 16th century.
At first, the work of the student, Randall L. Skalsky, was given anything but a friendly reception by classicists, a group notorious for being slow to accept anything new; indeed, his monograph was savagely rejected by the editors of several scholarly journals.
Then, in the last few weeks, he began to pick up supporters, chief among them Dr.
Richard Brilliant, a professor of art history and archeology at Columbia University and a widely published authority on ancient Roman art.
He is also editor in chief of The Art Bulletin, a leading academic journal in the field.


Market Place; BankAmerica: Time for a Bet?
IS now the time to bet on the biggest banking merger in the nation's history?
The BankAmerica Corporation received permission from the Federal Reserve Board on Monday to buy the Security Pacific Corporation in a deal valued at roughly $5 billion.
Now it's up to BankAmerica to combine the two California banking giants and realize the benefits it projects.
Wall Street seems to like the deal, which will create the dominant bank in the West and the nation's second largest after Citicorp.
BankAmerica's stock traded yesterday at $44.625, off 12.5 cents on the day but up from $37.38 the day before the deal was announced last August.


BRITAIN TELLS ABC TO GIVE UP TAPES
ABC News and its chief European correspondent, Pierre Salinger, were ordered today by the British High Court to give the police tapes and notes of interviews with two Libyans charged in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988.
Mr.
Salinger had interviewed the two men, Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, last November, and on Nov. 27, the ABC News program "World News Tonight" program broadcast brief excerpts from the interviews.
Both denied that they had had anything to do with the bombing, as charged in indictments in Scotland and the United States.


Florida Enacts Law Seeking Insurance for All Employees
Florida this week became the latest state to jump into the national search for improved access to health insurance, enacting a law that calls for affordable coverage for all workers.
The law, signed on Tuesday by Gov.
Lawton Chiles, was far more specific about its goals than about the exact steps it would take to get there.
It creates a new state Agency for Health Care Administration and sets a Dec. 31, 1994, deadline by which insurers and employers should voluntarily provide an "affordable, basic health care benefit package" for workers.


Correction: Nasdaq Listing
A list of over-the-counter stocks with large positions in uncovered short sales omitted 51 stocks in Business Day yesterday because of a computer error.
The listing of those stocks is given below.
The omission also affected the tables showing Nasdaq stocks with especially large short positions or with large changes in their short positions.
The corrected tables also appear below.
Largest Increases
Security Name
3/13/92
2/14/92
Change
Telefonos de Mexico
6,160,702
1,753,738
4,406,964
Highline Inds Inc
2,112,303
0
2,112,303
Noise Cancellation
1,651,828
930,440
721,388
Aura Systems Inc
2,686,683
2,004,232
682,451
T
Dell Computer Cp
3,087,944
2,525,704
562,240
T
Cytrx Cp
1,367,534
810,652
556,882
T
SGI International
727,989
195,909
532,080
Society Cp
2,476,952
1,954,300
522,652
T
Tele Commun Inc A
3,901,640
3,429,253
472,387
T
Digital Prods Cp
539,277
73,117
466,160
T
Autodesk Inc
815,296
371,890
443,406
T
Centocor Inc
6,603,152
6,191,512
411,640
T QCompression Lab Inc
3,841,382
3,441,564
399,818
T
Healthdyne Inc
665,969
273,768
392,201
T
Comp USA Inc
1,129,376
750,514
378,862
T
Price Co the
3,045,217
2,667,957
377,260
T
Triple Threat Enterp
366,087
9,050
357,037
Sequoia Sys Inc
1,192,296
836,079
356,217
T
Immune Response Cp
920,865
566,091
354,774
T
ICOS Cp
888,973
535,321
353,652
T
Adobe Systems Inc
2,872,057
2,522,628
349,429
T
Advanced Enviro A
788,219
447,770
340,449
Borland Intl Inc
1,470,501
1,148,395
322,106
T
T2 Medical Inc
1,559,229
1,242,799
316,430
T
Cellular Inc
720,901
404,587
316,314
T
Largest Decreases
Security Name
3/13/92
2/14/92
Change
Intel Cp
922,076
2,156,735
-1,234,659
T
Diamond Entertain Cp
1,000
1,059,618
-1,058,618
Medicis Pharm Cl A
340,068
1,363,702
-1,023,634
+ Intelligent Elec
2,114,480
3,091,820
-977,340
T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl
3,992,829
4,885,274
-892,445
T
Conquest Airlines
193,815
1,004,469
-810,654
Healthcare Compare
644,318
1,353,530
-709,212
T
Imaging Mgmt Assocs
22,479
613,492
-591,013
Watts Industries A
7,312
590,618
-583,306
T
Pacificare Health
431,432
974,405
-542,973
T
Biomet Inc
1,249,021
1,777,887
-528,866
T
Washington Energy Co
70,836
558,120
-487,284
T
Medco Containmnt
1,315,472
1,795,517
-480,045
T
DSC Commun Cp
632,463
1,093,162
-460,699
T
Food Lion Inc Cl A
821,016
1,255,362
-434,346
T
Amer Bankers Ins Gp
20,485
448,598
-428,113
T
Cirrus Logic Inc
526,380
913,000
-386,620
T
MCI Comm Cp
1,157,128
1,538,645
-381,517
T
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A
1,659,152
2,038,860
-379,708
T
Fleet Call Inc Cl-A
48,779
390,634
-341,855
T
News Commun Inc
252,606
588,043
-335,437
CCC Franchising Cp
119,649
435,183
-315,534
LM Ericsson Tel ADR
2,297,047
2,608,342
-311,295
T
TW Holdings Inc
1,813,990
2,112,445
-298,455
T
Medicis Pharma Wt B
7,955
293,705
-285,750
Largest Cover Rations
Security Name
3/13/92
Avg. Vol.
Days
Mkt
Rouse Co
2,526,883
30,418
83
T
Healthcare Svcs Gp
2,717,166
38,020
71
T
Copytele Inc
1,925,811
51,958
37
T
Cardinal Distr
1,669,779
47,839
35
T
York Research Cp
3,264,550
100,351
33
T
Fastenal Co
1,140,893
37,631
30
T
RPM Inc
751,488
25,187
30
T
Presstek Inc
853,991
30,512
28
T
Staples Inc
2,648,536
97,539
27
T
BBT Finl Cp
768,985
30,081
26
T
CIS Tech Inc
1,004,928
40,424
25
T
Cabot Medical Cp
701,343
29,247
24
T
Research Industries
707,662
29,855
24
T
Videocart Inc
2,709,178
114,581
24
T
Amer Power Convers
2,599,671
114,299
23
T
Pac Rim Hldg Cp
591,632
26,996
22
T
Interface Inc A
682,188
33,000
21
T
Summit Tech Inc
1,631,674
78,940
21
T
Amer West Airline
1,314,411
67,361
20
IHO P Cp
703,447
34,338
20
T
Midlantic Cp
4,221,824
206,297
20
T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp
2,857,778
153,817
19
T
Buffets Inc
1,943,170
108,885
18
T
Circon Cp
909,715
51,372
18
T
Reuters Hldg ADR
2,829,251
156,594
18
T
Largest Positions
Security Name
3/13/92
2/14/92
Change
Centocor Inc
6,603,152
6,191,512
411,640
T
Telefonos de Mexico
6,160,702
1,753,738
4,406,964
Midlantic Cp
4,221,824
4,304,873
-83,049
T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl
3,992,829
4,885,274
-892,445
T
Tele Commun Inc A
3,901,640
3,429,253
472,387
T
Compression Lab Inc
3,841,382
3,441,564
399,818
T
XOM A Cp
3,690,701
3,714,579
-23,878
T
Sun Microsystems Inc
3,328,331
3,418,145
-89,814
T
York Research Cp
3,264,550
3,170,371
94,179
T
Cisco Sys Inc
3,207,423
3,353,645
-146,222
T
Dell Computer Cp
3,087,944
2,525,704
562,240
T
Price Co the
3,045,217
2,667,957
377,260
T
Adobe Systems Inc
2,872,057
2,522,628
349,429
T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp
2,857,778
2,882,276
-24,498
T
Reuters Hldg ADR
2,829,251
2,746,318
82,933
T
Healthcare Svcs Gp
2,717,166
2,729,104
-11,938
T
Videocart Inc
2,709,178
2,574,284
134,894
T
Aura Systems Inc
2,686,683
2,004,232
682,451
T
Staples Inc
2,648,536
2,475,983
172,553
T
Amer Power Convers
2,599,671
2,682,087
-82,416
T
Rouse Co
2,526,883
2,518,350
8,533
T
Society Cp
2,476,952
1,954,300
522,652
T
LM Ericsson Tel ADR
2,297,047
2,608,342
-311,295
T
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg
2,273,713
2,074,061
199,652
T
Synergen Inc
2,130,410
2,363,383
-232,973
T
National Market
Security Name
3/13/92
2/14/92
Advant A Cp
821,250
788,894
AST Research Inc
1,295,341
1,114,798
Aldus Cp
856,071
764,414
Amer Greetings Cp A
120,456
45,804
Amer Power Convers
2,599,671
2,682,087
Apple Computer Inc
995,116
1,184,482
Applied Materials
268,306
278,358
Autodesk Inc
815,296
371,890
BMC Software Inc
227,498
139,226
Biomet Inc
1,249,021
1,777,887
Brunos Inc
1,903,907
1,618,041
Chiron Cp
1,107,855
1,214,939
Cirrus Logic Inc
526,380
913,000
Cisco Sys Inc
3,207,423
3,353,645
Compression Lab Inc
3,841,382
3,441,564
Consul Restaurant Cp
8,038
37,535
Costco Wholesale Cp
714,280
783,473
Cytogen Cp
1,788,909
1,600,136
Gensia Pharm Inc
968,776
825,280
Genzyme Cp
1,119,364
1,380,014
Hechinger Co Cl A
1,343,276
1,283,309
Immune Response Cp
920,865
566,091
Intel Cp
922,076
2,156,735
Intergraph Cp
246,615
266,853
Knowledgeware Inc
171,521
366,328
Lotus Development Cp
883,330
895,471
MCI Comm Cp
1,157,128
1,538,645
Novellus Systems Inc
454,736
164,184
Oracle Systems Cp
1,309,147
1,123,288
Picturetel Cp
388,610
424,766
Ross Stores Inc
34,970
84,399
Safec O Cp
214,849
147,596
Scimed Life Sys Inc
1,561,240
1,266,375
Sequent Computer Sys
397,484
388,584
Society Cp
2,476,952
1,954,300
Structural Dynamics
454,260
296,491
Synergen Inc
2,130,410
2,363,383
Synoptics Commun Inc
912,722
909,497
T2 Medical Inc
1,559,229
1,242,799
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A
1,659,152
2,038,860
Vicor Cp
412,443
430,867
Warehouse Club Inc
83,810
7,508
Wetterau Inc
680,441
666,579
York Research Cp
3,264,550
3,170,371
Other Nasdaq
Security Name
3/13/92
2/14/92
Cortex Pharm Wts A
8,469
50,175
ERC Inds Inc
3,532
24,340
Forum Group Inc
32,687
3,000
Fountain Pharm Wts B
102,210
31,455
Highline Inds Inc
2,112,303
0
Lidak Pharm Wts A
25,825
137,195
Vimrx Pharm Wts A
36,455
5,550
Short Interest Tables Explained
These tables include issues inadvertently omitted from yesterday's short interest tables.
All the stocks were identified by Nasdaq as having a revision in the previous month's position.
These issues have a short interest position in the current month of at least 200,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 18,651 shares.
Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.
T -- National Market System.
N.L. -- Not listed.
+ -- Stock split.
Underlining  [ not shown ]  in the comprehensive table indicates a change of 75 percent of more from the previous month.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M., 3 P.M. and 8 P.M.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Voter Turnout: 18 Primaries So Far


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
In a policy change, the F.D.I.C. is now protecting individual and business depositors only up to the insured maximum of $100,000 per insured account.
Hundreds of bank depositors have been unpleasantly surprised by the change.  [ Page D1. ]


GlenFed Chief Resigns; Loss Is Expected
GlenFed Inc., the parent of the nation's fourth-largest savings and loan, said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Norman M. Coulson, had resigned.
The Glendale, Calif., company, which has been hurt by its troubled real estate investments, also said it expected to post a $110 million loss for its third fiscal quarter, ending this month.
GlenFed said the loss would cause it to fall below Government capital requirements.


Old, Ailing and Finally a Burden Abandoned
Clutching a teddy bear as he stared out from a hospital bed near the dog racing track where he was abandoned, 82-year-old John Kingery looked lost and helpless.
But the face, that of an elderly person who does not even know his name and was left on society's doorstep, could become a face of the future.
Today, still holding the same teddy bear, he was flown back to Oregon.


Council's Spending Plan Rejects a Commuter Tax
The New York City Council released an alternative to Mayor David N. Dinkins's spending plan yesterday that would shift more money to libraries, schools and the police while rejecting the administration's proposals to tax commuters and cars.
The Council's flat rejection of the Mayor's tax package bodes ill for its chances of passing the State Legislature, where it would have faced an uphill battle even with the support of both branches of the city government, aides to state lawmakers said.


Old, Ailing and Finally a Burden Abandoned
Clutching a teddy bear as he stared out from a hospital bed near the dog racing track where he was abandoned, 82-year-old John Kingery looked lost and helpless.
But the face, that of an elderly person who does not even know his name and was left on society's doorstep, could become a face of the future.
Today, still holding the same teddy bear, he was flown back to Oregon.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strategy; NEW YORK BATTLE GAINS IN INTENSITY AS BROWN SURGES
The battle for New York began in earnest yesterday as Gov.
Bill Clinton struggled with a gritty new problem handed him by the voters of Connecticut: how to deal with former Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr., emboldened by victory and ready to roll.
Mr.
Clinton's campaign had hoped to be focused on President Bush by now, but instead found that Mr.
Brown's upset victory in Connecticut on Tuesday had transformed the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination and left the Arkansas Governor with a lot to prove in the April 7 primaries in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas.


Dirty Hands Love Company
WHAT does it take to get your kids to scrub their hands? (Forget about under the fingernails, except if the gendarmes are coming.) If it takes a sink of their own, so be it.
The Derrick Chianti, right, is a 33-inch-high pedestal sink that lists for about $610, and recalls paintings by the late French avant-gardist Yves Klein, whose canvases were imprinted with images of different body parts.
It comes decorated with black or multicolored handprints (both courtesy of a real boy, named Derrick), or plain (but without the handprints, where's the fun?).
A drop-in basin is also available, for about $190.


BRIEFS
*
Astra Sedaya Finance, Jakarta, Indonesia, an automotive financing unit of Astra International, said GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn., a unit of General Electric Co., planned to buy a 47 percent stake in the company for $21 million.


Baseball; A Step for Yanks' Cadaret Toward Starting Spot
Greg Cadaret easily passed his first test today in preparation for a possible berth in the Yankee starting rotation when he tossed six sterling innings for Columbus against the Louisville Cardinals in a Class AAA game at Tampa.
Using all four of his pitches, Cadaret squelched the minor leaguers on three hits, did not allow an earned run, struck out one, walked none and threw just 57 pitches.


Rockwell to Plead Guilty and Pay Large Fine for Dumping Waste
Capping one of the broadest and most far-reaching criminal investigations into an environmental crime, the Justice Department will announce today that the Rockwell International Corporation will plead guilty to criminal charges for its conduct in running a Government-owned nuclear weapons plant near Denver, Federal officials said last night.
The company is expected to enter guilty pleas in Federal District Court in Denver to several charges of violating environmental laws and to agree to pay a fine of $15 million to $20 million, the officials said.
Second-Largest Fine
A lawyer at the Natural Resources Defense Council who specializes in the weapons complex, Dan Reicher, said a fine of that size would be the second-largest ever levied, exceeded only by the $25 million penalty paid by the Exxon Corporation after the oil spill by the Exxon Valdez in Alaska.


Review/Dance; Afternoon of Arm Motions
Eliot Feld loves to explore the variations inherent in certain ways of moving.
That was apparent on Sunday afternoon at the Joyce Theater when Feld Ballets/NY offered three works that Mr.
Feld choreographed in 1990.
Each was totally different in tone.
But all emphasized unusual gestures and positions for the hands and arms.
The previously unreviewed "Charmed Lives" shows three dancers gamboling to Ravel's Introduction and Allegro for Harp, Flute and Strings.
They could be elfin beings or, possibly, small playful animals.
Whatever they may represent, they obviously love to dance.
There are times when they hold their hands as if they were paws.
More often, they let their arms reach joyfully upward.
Occasionally, a member of the cast suddenly raises a pointed finger as if to announce, "I have a bright idea." And the bright idea is always to keep on dancing.


Asking I.R.S. What's Polish for 1040
For the first time, Poland is trying to impose a Western-style personal income tax system on a country where evasion of the Communist-era tax man amounted to a patriotic duty -- and it is turning to the Internal Revenue Service in Washington for help.
Although it is tax time in the United States, two veteran American tax experts took time out earlier this month to provide a round of basic training to 25 of their newly anointed counterparts in Poland.


Critic's Notebook; About Death, Bad Dreams And D. Boone Debunked
Debilitating illness and rituals of death were among the themes dramatized at the 16th annual Humana Festival of New American Plays at the Actors Theater of Louisville this weekend.
In fact, there was so much medical equipment onstage in the marathon of eight plays and three 10-minute one-acts that one could conjecture that the Humana Foundation had not only given financial support to the festival but had also supplied scenery, props and costumes.
In a program note, Jon Jory, the company's artistic director, characterizes our times -- and presumably the plays in the festival -- as "fraught with fear and omens of disaster." Moving out of a hospital environment and responding to current social and economic crises, other plays dealt with violence, both actual and metaphorical.


Sports of The Times; The Man Who Missed Steinbrenner
THE good doctor was surprised to see me.
After all, it had been quite a long time since my last visit.
He led me to his couch.
"A terrible thing has happened to me, Doctor," I said, lying down and propping up my feet on his furniture, "and I need help."


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BY adding new light sources or altering present ones, you can make dramatic changes in a room's appearance and mood in less time and for less money than it takes to redecorate by other means.
The key is knowing the various lighting categories and how to mix them to create different moods.
Task lighting is one such category.
Its purpose is to illuminate activities like cooking, reading and sewing that demand good visibility.
Typically, task lighting is supplied by a fixture like a desk lamp or floor lamp that is close to its point of use.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle yesterday misstated the clue for 11 Down, a reference to Bethlehem.
It should have read, "City in Pennsylvania or town on the West Bank."


Account Manager To Be Honored
For years, the advertising industry's creative people have been honored for their work.
Now, the San Francisco Advertising Club is establishing an award for account people.
At the club's award show on April 22, an account person will receive the first Don Ashley Award for excellence in account management.
The award is named after the late Don Ashley, who spent more than 25 years in account management at agencies including Hal Riney &amp; Partners, Tracy-Locke and Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, which he helped found.


Co-Pilot Saw No Ice
In a statement that appeared to contradict a leading theory on the crash of USAir Flight 405, the jet's co-pilot told investigators that he checked for ice many times and saw none.
He said he was sure of what he saw because the wing was illuminated by a special light for spotting ice.
Article, page B1.


METRO DIGEST
THE NEW YORK PRIMARY  THE CAMPAIGN REDEFINED
In a political world redefined by former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s narrow victory in the Connecticut primary, Mr.
Brown and Gov.
Bill Clinton campaigned for the newly pivotal New York primary, which will decide both who gets the state's rich lode of 244 convention delegates and whether Mr.
Clinton can get back on a glide path to the nomination.
A19.
Gov.
Cuomo remains a study in neutrality.
A18.
NEW YORK CITY  COUNCIL RELEASES ITS BUDGET


Suffolk Executive Loses Vote on His Deficit-Cutting Plan
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert Gaffney, suffered his first major defeat early today when fellow Republicans in the County Legislature failed to approve his $70 million deficit-reduction plan.
The Republican-controlled Legislature fell one vote short of the 10-vote majority needed to pass the measure.
Mr.
Gaffney had described the vote as the "most important" in his political career and a test of whether the Republican majority was prepared to govern.


Khmer Rouge Said to Harass Refugees
Five days before the first of nearly 370,000 Cambodians are scheduled to return home from camps in Thailand, refugee workers warned today that Khmer Rouge guerrillas are attempting to undermine the refugee program sponsored by the United Nations.
The Communist Khmer Rouge, they said, seem to be trying to force refugees into areas of Cambodia under their control.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Was TV Slow to Take Brown Seriously? The Networks Say No
Defending themselves against charges from the campaign of Edmund G. Brown Jr. that the "establishment media" had underplayed his candidacy until his upset victory in Connecticut Tuesday, executives of the four national television news organizations said yesterday that they believed he had received fair television coverage.
But the executives conceded that early in the primary season he might have lagged behind other candidates in television exposure because he did not do well in the early primaries and because he organized his campaign in a way that limited traditional television access.


'Hot Editor' Phenomenon Benefits The New Republic
WHEN The New Republic became the first mainstream national magazine with an openly gay top editor, it was something of a publishing milestone.
It now seems that the appointment might be a kind of advertising milestone as well.
In October, when Andrew Sullivan was named editor of the Washington-based opinion journal, there was widespread talk among advertising, marketing and media executives that some advertisers would prove leery of him, in much the same manner that sponsors withdraw from television programs with plots centering on homosexuality or other controversial issues.
That was intensified by the fact that many of The New Republic's advertisers are military contractors, corporate associations and similarly traditionally minded concerns.


Board for Nassau Fails Again To Agree on Budget Remedies
After months marked by anguished daylong meetings taken up with Nassau County's continuing fiscal crisis, the county's Board of Supervisors convened in an emergency session for two angry minutes today, and then, finding itself still deadlocked, adjourned once more.
In the space of the two minutes, the six members of the board had time to recite the Pledge of Allegiance, hear themselves booed by county correction officers, and consider and reject, by party-line procedural votes, a series of Republican initiatives to reduce the county's deficit.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Byrne and Richard Thompson  Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity Brooklyn Heights
Lone songwriter plus acoustic guitar used to equal sincerity or bluesy authenticity.
Now, there's no guarantee.
On Tuesday night at a benefit for the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, David Byrne and Richard Thompson shared a double bill in which each toyed with multiple personae and ironic strategies.


Shot-Putter Reinstated
JIM DOEHRING, the 1990 United States shot-put champion who was suspended after a positive drug test, was reinstated by an arbitrator because of "procedural improprieties" at a testing laboratory.
The arbitrator's reprieve will allow Doehring a chance to make the United States Olympic team this summer.


Luke Family's Reign Is Extended at Westvaco
The Luke family has run the Westvaco Corporation since the large paper and specialty chemicals company was founded in 1888.
And yesterday the New York-based company continued that tradition by announcing that it had named John A. Luke Jr., executive vice president, to be the company's president and chief executive.
Mr.
Luke, the great-great-grandson of the company's founder, will assume his duties Nov. 1.
The 43-year-old Mr.
Luke will replace his father, John A. Luke, who turned 65 last November.
The board had asked the elder Mr.
Luke to stay through this year; his brother, David L. Luke 3d, will remain as chairman.


Capitol Hill Memo; After Scandals, the Hush of Paranoia
As the banking and post office scandals roar through the House of Representatives, the always lively Capitol Hill rumor mill seems to be spinning out of control.
The scandals, threatening hundreds of careers and reputations, have loosened an inordinate number of tongues and confidential documents, and have exposed fears that sometimes seem to approach paranoia.
Legislative activities in some offices have taken a back seat to intrigue, clandestine meetings and even a widespread concern that offices and telephones have been bugged.


U.S. Has to Do More For Young Physicists
To the Editor:
"Even as leading scientists warn that America's educational system is failing to produce scientists fast enough to fill a glaring projected shortage, many young physicists contend that universities are already turning out more physicists than there are permanent jobs" (Science Times, March 10).
The lone voice of optimism you quote is Leon M. Lederman's.
The Nobel-prize physicist, president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, believes physicists will "star in the quest for alternative energy sources and many other social needs."
I wish I shared his optimism.
I am completing a doctorate in physics from Dr.
Lederman's home institution, the University of Chicago, specializing in solar energy.
I received an alternative-energy fellowship for work your newspaper wrote about in 1990 and that has even found its way into an introductory physics textbook.
Moreover, as a former member of the board of editors of Scientific American magazine and now a contributing editor, I think it's safe to say I have more contacts than most recent physics graduates.


Baseball; Sidewalks of New York Sprout Diamonds
It wasn't a genuine diamond, but it was priceless all the same, that plot of protected green adjacent to the Marlboro Houses projects in Brooklyn.
"There was always evidence of our crimes," John Franco said of the private patch of grass the neighborhood kids would sneak onto to play baseball.
"The spots were worn pretty bare at all the bases."


Review/Music; The Magic of a Pianist Is (Presto!) to Make Debussy Transparent
Listening to Maurizio Pollini's finely etched performances of Book II of Debussy's Etudes in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, I could only feel deep wonder at and appreciation for the pianist's consummate artistry.
These extraordinarily difficult works, inspired by the composer's study of Chopin's classic Etudes, were turned into exquisite explorations of sonority and texture.
The chromatic scales of the first emerged like casual gestures, filigree on the surface of larger objects; the repeated notes of the third were crystalline drops of sound.
In the final etude, the music's play with simultaneity, in which blocks of chords were ornamented with elaborately intricate grace notes, emerged with crisp elegance.
As followers of Mr.
Pollini's pianism can imagine, this was not a Debussy suffused with color or mist, nor was it haunted by languid melody.
Everything was transparent; lines moved independently; there was a cool distance in the playing, as if the compositions were objects contemplated at arms' length.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Brown and Clinton Trade Blows in New York Contest
In a political world redefined by Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s narrow victory in the Connecticut primary, Mr.
Brown and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas campaigned yesterday for the pivotal New York primary, which will decide who gets the bulk of the state's rich lode of 244 convention delegates and whether Mr.
Clinton can get back on a glide path to the nomination.
Mr.
Clinton, trying to rebound from the setback dealt by Mr.
Brown's populist send-them-a-message campaign, demonstrated that he, for one, had got the message.
The Arkansas Governor immediately focused his campaign on Mr.
Brown, the former California Governor, denouncing his proposal to replace existing Federal taxes with a flat 13 percent income tax and a 13 percent value-added tax on goods and services as "a war on New York tax." Mr.
Clinton suggested that the state's April 7 primary be transformed into a referendum on the tax plan, which is a centerpiece of Mr.
Brown's campaign.


Eligibility for College Loan Program Is Expanded
A seven-month-old college loan program intended for the financially strapped middle class in New Jersey was enlarged today and extended to families with annual incomes as high as $95,000.
The new loans will be backed with $50 million in bonds to be sold by the state's Higher Education Assistance Authority, which has lent $16 million to 3,700 families since the program began last September.
The state expects the new round of loans to help as many as 10,000 families.


St. Patrick's Parade Uproar Masked an Anti-Catholic Attack
To the Editor:
"A Sad Day for the Irish" (editorial, March 17) made St.
Patrick's Day 1992 all the more sad by describing the Ancient Order of Hibernians as engaging in "hateful discrimination" for keeping the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization out of the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
Those are strong words that were subscribed to in many quarters and often repeated in those quarters in the weeks leading up to the parade.
The Anciant Order of Hibernians did not have a chance against the fury of a zealous group of sophisticated men and women who played the news media as if they were marionettes.


Baseball; Police Say Request to Question Three Mets Players Is Ignored
Lawyers for the three New York Mets who are accused of raping a woman here last year refused today to comply with a request by the city police to question the players directly.
"We have not received any calls from any of the attorneys involving the three suspects," Lieut.
Scott Bartal said at a news conference this afternoon.
The police had given lawyers for the players until 5 P.M. to respond to their requests for interviews with the players.
Lieutenant Bartal said he was interpreting the lawyers' silence as a refusal to cooperate.
"We are looking at that as they will not be volunteering any statements to us," he said.


Growing
NEVER say thank you for a plant; it won't grow," Aunt Hazel said, biting into a chocolate chip cookie. Actually, she's not supposed to have sugar, but when you're 85, can't you have what you want?
"That's right," Cousin Janice said, passing a plate of sweet pickles (her own).
"Grandmother Alban, who lived to be 96, would take a cutting from you and ask how to grow it, but she'd never say thank you. And if you thanked her, she'd take the plant back. Then she'd sneak it into the back seat of your car before you left."


BRIEFS
*
Astra Sedaya Finance, Jakarta, Indonesia, an automotive financing unit of Astra International, said GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn., a unit of General Electric Co., planned to buy a 47 percent stake in the company for $21 million.


Final Pleas, Then Sentencing for Tyson
A wave of excitement swept through the lobby of a downtown hotel this afternoon as Mike Tyson strode to the elevators on his way to meet with his lawyers.
And in his wake, the questions began, as they have around the nation: Will the former heavyweight champion, convicted of rape and two related crimes last month, go to prison when he is sentenced Thursday morning?


Sunoco Account Put Into Review
The Sun Company has placed its Sunoco gasoline account into review as part of a companywide review of all supplier and vendor contracts.
Billings are estimated at $8 million to $15 million.
Norman Vincoff, Sun's advertising manager, confirmed reports of the review in this week's issues of Advertising Age and Adweek.
"Sunoco is taking a step back to look at other agencies," he said, "to make sure we are getting the best value for advertising."


The Clock Fixers Keep on Ticking
NORMAN Steinkritz's tiny shop, Hennor Jewelers and Clockmakers, is noisy in an oddly comforting way.
Chimes ring on the hour.
And in the background is the constant ticking of old-fashioned mechanical clocks, the kind Mr.
Steinkritz has repaired for more than 40 years.
In an era of quartz clocks and batteries, a few craftsmen, like Mr.
Steinkritz, still prefer working with oldfangled timepieces, the kind that run with wheels, pivots and bearings.
Properly cared for, a good mechanical clock can last for years.
And when an old clock becomes erratic or simply stops, it usually can be fixed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Fairness and a Flat Tax; Citing Justice, Brown Pushes Radical Idea, But Critics Call Proposal Inherently Unjust
Throughout the Presidential campaign, former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California has sought to portray himself as a friend of the powerless against the powerful, but many economists say the centerpiece of his economic proposals, a radical plan for a flat tax, is more friendly to the mighty than the meek.
Calling the present tax system too complicated and corrupt, Mr.
Brown would scrap the progressive income tax, the corporate income tax, Social Security taxes and the gasoline tax and replace them with two basic taxes: a 13 percent flat income tax and a 13 percent value-added tax, similar to a national sales tax.


Far From a Thaw, but Talks Continue
Talks adjourned last night after five more hours of negotiations in Toronto produced guarded optimism on both sides, but not much progress in breaking the impasse over a new collective bargaining agreement for National Hockey League players and owners.
The talks will resume today, four days before a threatened strike by players, which is scheduled for noon Monday.


Quotation of the Day
"Not a day goes by when a hospital emergency room somewhere in America doesn't have a case where some elderly person has been abandoned, usually by the children." -- JOHN MEYERS of the American Association of Retired Persons.  [ A1:2. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Wisconsin; Wisconsin 'Snoozer' Stirring to Life
"Bill Clinton has been doing fine in Wisconsin," said Robert H. Friebert, one of the Arkansas Governor's main fund-raisers in this state, as the news of former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s upset victory in Connecticut lit up television screens on Tuesday.
"But local campaigns always get swamped by the national results, and what Connecticut did is going to encourage the ABC people here -- the Anybody But Clinton gang. It isn't about Jerry Brown in the Oval Office.  It's about stopping Bill Clinton, but it could still be a serious problem."


Old, Ailing and Finally a Burden Abandoned
Clutching a teddy bear as he stared out from a hospital bed near the dog racing track where he was abandoned, 82-year-old John Kingery looked lost and helpless.
But the face, that of an elderly person who does not even know his name and was left on society's doorstep, could become a face of the future.
Today, still holding the same teddy bear, he was flown back to Oregon.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Weaken Impact of U.S. Child Welfare Act
Limiting the impact of a major Federal child welfare program, the Supreme Court today barred civil rights lawsuits that are intended to force states to help keep troubled families together.
A Federal law, the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980, requires states to make "reasonable efforts" to keep troubled families together before removing children from their homes.
The requirement is a condition of the states' obtaining nearly $1.5 billion a year in Federal funds for child welfare services.


Maris Cakars Is Dead; Magazine Editor, 49
Maris Cakars, an editor who was a leader in the movement against the Vietnam War, died on Saturday at Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 49 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of internal hemorrhaging, his family said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.75
6.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
4.05
5.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.19
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.23
8.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.93
7.95
8.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.88
9.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.78
7.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pulecharkhi Journal; Behind the Monstrous Walls, a Legion of Prisoners
Sia S. remembers when the inmates at the immense, octagonal stone central prison here staged their first protest.
"On Tuesday and Thursday, they used to shoot prisoners in the center ring," he said.
"When the prisoners objected, 'Don't shoot them in front of our eyes,' they began to take them away and shoot them in a deserted field north of the Pulecharkhi village."


Voter Turnout: 18 Primaries So Far


Review/Fashion; De la Renta Puts Checks at the Top
Oscar de la Renta, the American who in three seasons has settled comfortably into the French fashion scene, and Yves Saint Laurent, a pillar of the shows here for 30 years, were the last major designers to introduce their fall and winter collections.
It is now clear that women of the world who care about fashion will have a choice of hem lengths.
Trousers are back on center stage and black is the color of the season.
Clothes are more closely fitted than they have been, but never in a torturous way.


Lloyds Bank Has Successor For Its Retiring Chairman
Lloyds Bank P.L.C., the smallest of London's big four money-center banks, yesterday appointed its senior deputy chairman, Sir Robin Ibbs, as chairman.
He will succeed Sir Jeremy Morse, 65, who is to retire early next year.
Sir Jeremy has been chairman of Lloyds since 1977, by far the longest tenure of any of the four money-center chiefs.


Stocks Mixed; Trading Error Hurts Dow
Stocks closed mixed in heavy trading yesterday, with blue chips taking a slide at the end of the session.
Traders said the dip was a result of an error by Salomon Brothers in executing an extremely large customer order.
Until then, the session had been uneventful.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was at about 3,277 just before 4 P.M., suddenly retreated sharply to finish at 3,259.39, down 1.57 points for the day.


Reagan Warms to Idea Of Buying From 'Enemy'
Two cold warriors, Ronald Reagan and Edward Teller, today endorsed the idea of helping the American space program and building international cooperation by buying space technology developed by the former Soviet Union.
Former President Reagan, who once referred to the Soviet Union as the "evil empire," and Dr.
Teller, a physicist who was instrumental in developing the hydrogen bomb and other weapons to check the spread of Communism, said it was time for the United States to help itself by helping its former enemy.


2 Imprisoned Writers To Be Honored by PEN
An Asian poet and founder of a feminist magazine and a Haitian political reporter, both in prison, are winners of this year's Freedom-to-Write Award to be presented by the writers' organization PEN at a literary gala on April 13.
The recipients were chosen because their situations "are the most pressing and dramatic and need immediate attention," said Edmund Keeley, the president of the PEN American Center.


U.S. and Allies to Resume Effort To Get Sanctions Against Libya
The United States, Britain and France indicated today that they would press ahead with demands for Security Council sanctions against Libya because it appeared unready to turn over two suspects in the 1988 downing of an American jetliner.
The United States representative to the United Nations, Thomas R. Pickering, said he would now speed up discussion of the sanctions resolution with other Council members.


Investigation Into Rescue Efforts
The Queens District Attorney said last night he was investigating the "adequacies" of the rescue response to the jetliner crash at La Guardia Airport Sunday night, partly because of a report that the first ambulances to arrive at the airport had to wait 12 minutes before they could move to the accident site.
That report came on Monday from one of the first rescuers to get to the airport, Lieut.
John D. O'Loughlin of the city's Emergency Medical Service.
He said that although the first ambulances arrived at La Guardia seven minutes after the service was called at 9:38 P.M., they had to wait because, airport personnel told them, incoming flights were still landing.


Nikkei Below 20,000
Japanese stock prices fell today and the Nikkei index of 225 issues again dropped below the 20,000 mark.
The Nikkei lost 341.29 points, or 1.69 percent, to close at 19,885.49.
The broader stock market was somewhat steadier, but the Nikkei was depressed by futures-related selling.


Packers Sign Ex-Giant White
Adrian White, a Giants' backup safety for five years, signed a $1 million, two-year contract last night with the Green Bay Packers as a Plan B free agent.
White chose the Packers over the Cleveland Browns and San Francisco 49ers, who also offered two-year contracts.
Tom Murphy, White's lawyer, said the Giants had told White they hoped he would return.


At Home Abroad; A Changing Country
Abortion and other social issues are difficult enough for American politicians.
They are even more awkward in Ireland, with its conservative traditions and the strong influence of the Roman Catholic Church.
So spare a bit of sympathy for Albert Reynolds, Ireland's new Taoiseach (Prime Minister).
From almost the moment he took over the job, on Feb. 11, he has had to grapple with the politics of abortion.
And what he does may affect another issue vital to Ireland, its place in Europe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Despite Denials, Many Hesitate About Clinton
Ask Paul Brensilber about the defeat of Gov.
Bill Clinton in Connecticut's Democratic primary on Tuesday and his face positively glows.
'I've been saying all along it's just a matter of time before he blows apart," said the 33-year-old Manhattan real-estate dealer. "I never understood the fuss about Clinton.
He makes me uncomfortable."


Weprin Calls for Tax Rise For Affluent New Yorkers
The Speaker of the Democratic-led Assembly, looking to raise the cash he said was needed to produce a budget deal, called today for higher taxes on New Yorkers earning more than $250,000.
The proposal by the Speaker, Saul Weprin, received a distinctly hostile reception from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Republican-led Senate.
It also quickly set up Albany's version of a tax fight that in some ways mirrors the debate in Washington, where Democrats in Congress have pressed for higher taxes on more affluent taxpayers to pay for a tax cut for the middle class.


Pop and Jazz in Review
James Carr
Tramps
Like his career, James Carr's first set last Friday night had moments of pure transcendence and moments where everything seemed to be falling apart.
This Memphis soul singer, who had not performed in New York since 1966 and has given only a handful of shows since the 60's, came onstage looking smart and dignified: he wore a gray suit, a navy shirt and dark sunglasses that hid whatever jitters might have shown in his eyes.
He started out strong, opening with "The Word Is Out (You Don't Want Me)," the first single he recorded for the Goldwax label in 1964.
But with his next selection, a version of Otis Redding's "These Arms of Mine," he hit a glitch, coming in on the wrong key so that his backing band, which included the Uptown Horns, had to shift hastily to follow him.
But as the song wore on, Mr.
Carr fell back into stride: his husky, still-robust voice soared through the melody, and he took off his sunglasses, showing eyes that clenched shut and rolled back open with emotion.


Stu Jackson Signs to Coach Wisconsin
Stu Jackson missed coaching too much to stay away from it any longer.
Yesterday, the former Knick coach signed a five-year contract to become the new head coach at the University of Wisconsin.
He replaces Steve Yoder, who resigned after this season when he was told that his contract would not be extended.


Leonard Raver Memorial
A memorial concert in honor of the organist Leonard Raver will take place on Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street, with music by several of his friends and former students from the Juilliard School.
Dr.
Raver, who was the organist of the New York Philharmonic and a member of the Juilliard faculty from 1975 to 1990, died on Jan. 29 at age 65.


Where China Fits in the Missile Trade
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, March 5) notes that China is assisting Syria to obtain a missile production program.
However, Mr.
Safire's characterization of Congressional legislation as "linking China's missile restraint to M.F.N. status" is off the mark.
A report on China's missile trade issued by the international missile proliferation project at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, where I am a research associate, notes that the most important long-term cause for proliferation concern is China's tendency to provide technical and manufacturing assistance to would-be third world missile powers, rather than sell complete systems.
China helps create new and powerful missile-producing states, which are likely to operate outside limitations on the sales of such systems.


Review/Music; A Young Quartet's Progress
The maturing of a string quartet is a long and arduous process.
Four players, close enough in temperament to love string instruments, but different enough to have chosen such different string voices, spend years in confrontation and negotiation before a coherent character is created.
By the standards of quartet playing, the Lark Quartet is just beginning this long journey, though it is already one of the most honored young ensembles.
The quartet, founded six years ago, won the 1990 Naumburg Chamber Music Award, the 1991 Shostakovich International Competition and the 1991 London International String Quartet Competition, along with similar awards in Australia, Italy and Germany.
The Lark is composed of four women -- Eva Grusser, Robin Mayforth, Anna Kruger and Astrid Schween -- all educated at New York conservatories.
They have also been teaching assistants to the Juilliard Quartet at the Juilliard School.


Books of The Times; Fighting Beside the Maoris Against the Colonists
Monday's Warriors  By Maurice Shadbolt 308 pages. David R. Godine. $21.95.
Kimball Bent, the laconic hero of Maurice Shadbolt's stirring new historical novel, "Monday's Warriors," is a Yankee from the state of Maine who in 1859 somehow managed to get himself "borrowed" by the British army, "when I wasn't looking," to aid and abet, as the narrator puts it, "the reddening of the world's maps, sweating and swearing in Cork and Poona, Calcutta and Pondicherry, and now even more remote estuaries of empire."


Free-Market 'Dragon' Gains In the Fight for China's Soul
In the struggle for China's soul, the hard-line leadership in Beijing seems to be losing ground to this southern Chinese region of fish farms, toy factories and private bars whose knack for free-market Communism has made it one of the fastest growing economies in the world.
Guangdong Province is China's greatest success story, and already it is becoming an international manufacturing center that in some ways recalls the early years of the "four dragons": Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.
While Guangdong used to be politically suspect within China for its laissez-faire ways, Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders have recently praised it as a national model and called upon the province to become Asia's fifth "dragon." The Bribes Help
That suggests that Guangdong has defeated Beijing, at least for now, in the competition to chart China's future.
This could have enormous repercussions, for Guangdong represents a fundamentally different vision of China than Beijing.


M. Jean Herman, 69, Brownstone Holdout
M.
Jean Herman, a brownstone holdout around whom a 31-story office tower was built opposite Bloomingdale's, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 69 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


From Princeton to Port Authority Planning; Public Affairs Specialist Will Help Plot Future for Region's 'Third Government'
Richard W. Roper is a soft-spoken but persistent man who says he has spent much of his life chipping away at the margins of seemingly insoluble problems.
Those who have watched his whittling say he has been influential in shaping New Jersey's responses to important public issues for a decade.
The Council on New Jersey Affairs, which Mr.
Roper has led as executive director, has issued 17 working papers over the last eight years, dealing with transportation, land use, farmland preservation, the outlook for the cities, Medicaid, state and local finance and school financing, among other topics.


After 313 Days in Space, It's a Trip to a New World
Sergei Krikalev returned to Earth today five months later than originally planned, and might well wonder whether he landed on the right planet.
The Kazakhstan plains where he came down looked right.
But the Soviet state whose seal still decorated his spacesuit was gone, and his home city of Leningrad was off the maps.


Henry Neufeld, Chemical Importer, 93
Henry Neufeld, a chemical importer and philanthropist, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his lawyer said.


U.S. Shift On Deposit Insurance
After years of protecting large deposits from loss in bank failures, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has changed its policy, and is now frequently protecting individual and business depositors only up to the insured maximum of $100,000 for each insured account.
Hundreds of bank depositors have been unpleasantly surprised by the change.
In theory, uninsured bank depositors have always been at risk when a bank fails, but until this year, the losses were infrequent because the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation usually found another bank to take over all deposits of the failed bank.
But late last year in an effort to minimize losses at the F.D.I.C., Congress passed a law requiring that the Government insurance agency close banks by the least costly method for the insurance fund.


William B. Hoyt, Assemblyman In New York State, Is Dead at 54
William B. Hoyt, the chairman of the New York State Assembly Energy Committee and a former mayoral candidate in Buffalo, died today at Albany Medical Center.
He was 54 years old and lived in Buffalo.
Mr.
Hoyt died after being stricken by an apparent heart attack on the Assembly floor during a roll call vote on this afternoon.
He had suffered a heart attack before and had undergone bypass surgery.


Rushie Meets Senators, but Had Hoped for More
Salman Rushdie met today with a group of Senators in the Capitol, despite a caution from the State Department that such a meeting "might be misinterpreted" and provoke reprisals against Americans, but he did not get the rousing show of support from the Bush Administration that he had hoped for.
Mr.
Rushdie, the author who has lived for three years under a death threat from Iran, said in a speech on Tuesday night that a scheduled meeting between him and members of Congress had been abruptly canceled under pressure from the Bush Administration.
But Senators Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, who organized today's luncheon meeting in the Senate Dining Room, and a spokeswoman for the State Department denied that there had been any attempt to prevent the meeting.


Accounts
*
Frito-Lay Inc., Plano, Tex., to BBDO New York as its first agency of record for "nontraditional media" for all brands.
The assignment includes point-of-purchase advertising and "placed based" advertising in locales like health clubs, sporting arenas and shopping malls.
Billings were not disclosed.


Bank Directors Face Rising Risks
In 1986, Dr.
Franklin Danziger invested $250,000 in the Gateway National Bank, a new bank in Phoenix, and accepted a position as a director.
Now, six years later, the bank has failed, his investment has been wiped out, he has been fined $5,000 and he vows, "I'll never be a bank director again."
The doctor, a cancer specialist with a network of clinics in Phoenix, is one of thousands of business people across the country who are finding that the prestige of being a director for a bank or savings institution brings more responsibility and risk than they had expected.
Regulators accused Gateway's directors of failing to properly oversee the bank's credit card business, where losses led to the bank's failure.


Judge Allows Lone Defense Witness in Gotti Trial
Defense lawyers rested their case yesterday after presenting one witness -- a tax lawyer -- in John Gotti's racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The defense was cut short by Judge I. Leo Glasser, who ruled that the lawyers could not call five other witnesses for a variety of legal reasons.
Among the witnesses were an acoustical engineer, a hypnotist and the purported target of a murder plot.


There's a Providence In the Fall of a Tree
SINCE its founding in 1984, Montrose Nursery has become one of the best small mail-order sources of rare and unusual plants in the country, and a place I regularly visit on pilgrimage.
But Montrose is more than Montrose Nursery.
Its spacious grounds have borne their name since the early 19th century, as home to several generations of the Graham family, going back to William A. Graham, a Governor of North Carolina and Secretary of the Navy under President Millard Fillmore.


Corrections
The table in Business Day yesterday listing over-the-counter stocks in which large numbers of shares have been borrowed and sold short omitted several stocks.
The omission resulted in incorrect summary tables of stocks with the largest short positions or largest changes in short positions.
The list of omitted stocks and the corrected summary tables appear today on page D11.


Jaguar Cars Selects Its Next Chairman
Jaguar Cars Ltd. said yesterday that Nicholas V. Scheele would succeed William Hayden as chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Hayden retires next week.
Mr.
Scheele (pronounced SHAY-la), 48 years old, who joined the British luxury car maker in January as vice chairman, faces several challenges.
The Ford Motor Company, which bought Jaguar in 1989 for $2.7 billion, has said its subsidiary will turn a profit before the end of the decade, but Ford would no doubt like quicker returns.


Events: Helping Trees And Young Gardeners
Leaves and Branches  New York City Street Tree Consortium, 44 Worth Street; (212) 227-1887.
Classes for volunteers wanting to plant and help care for urban trees start next Thursday.
The 12-hour course will be offered in Manhattan, Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island.
Call for schedules.
Registration fee, $45.
Children's Gardens  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The spring season in the gardening program for children ages 7 to 18 starts on Saturday.
There will also be a class for children ages 4 to 7.
The fee for the spring season is $35 ($30, members).
The summer session starts on July 7 ($40; $35, members) and the fall season on Sept. 19 ($30; $25, members).
Advance registration is required for all programs.


A Cowboy Now in the Bluegrass, Sutton Is Returning to Lexington
Eddie Sutton's first departure from Lexington, Ky., was not under ideal circumstances.
His next one could be.
Sutton's Oklahoma State team plays Michigan in one semifinal of the N.C.A.A.
Southeast Regional at Rupp Arena tomorrow night in what could be a triumphant return for the former University of Kentucky coach.
A victory over the Wolverines and another one at Rupp on Sunday would send Sutton's Cowboys to Minneapolis the following weekend for the Final Four.


Indiana Jones He'll Never Be, But Knight Loves That Whip
He seemed to appear from nowhere, as if he had suddenly made himself materialize for this precise moment.
Bob Knight stepped from behind a blue curtain, leered at his assembled audience, and then snapped a bullwhip in the air.
On the eve of the West Regional semifinals, at a news conference featuring the four coaches seeking one Final Four berth, the Indiana coach got everyone's attention.


Computer's Only a Tool, Like Virtuoso's Violin; To Program Is to Learn
To the Editor:
While it is true that learning to use computers will never replace an education, as the headline on Dave Davis's March 8 letter has it, learning to program is an education in itself.
A frequently heard criticism of today's schools is that students are not taught to think.
Thinking is not taught.
It is developed, and there is no better way to develop it than through programming.
To be able to develop a logical order of operations, to plan ahead, to make choices, to avoid obstacles and to attain one's goals are the essence of thinking.


You Can't Sleep? Give Up the Habit
"TURN back the sheets -- I'm headin' for the arms of Morpheus," Mae West, hands on hips, instructs her maid in the 1936 film "Klondike Annie." "Huh?" says Victor McLaglen.
Merry Mae explains, 'I was just sayin' in my quaint way that I was goin' to sleep."
Would that sleep were so easy to get to: In 1992, one out of three adult Americans are far less flip about the certainty of a good night's sleep, Phyllis Rubin among them.
An executive secretary who lives in Manhattan, Ms.
Rubin has insomnia: she is also among those who have given in to the inevitable and come up with their own alternatives to tossing, turning and clock-watching through the night.


Mongolia Adopts a 3-Ring Promotional Strategy
And now, ladies and gentlemen and children of all ages, the newest -- and perhaps the most unusual -- economic strategy yet by a former Communist country: Mongolia has run away with the circus.
When the 122d edition of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus opens today in Madison Square Garden, its centerpiece will be a horde of 42 dancers, musicians, animal riders and acrobats from Mongolia.
Never an enterprise to underplay its stars, the circus has had advance posters in a dozen cities proclaiming, "The Mongolians Are Coming!"


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENTSeton Hall's Head Games Get Priority  BYL&gt;By MALCOLM MORAN
A year ago and a continent away, P. J. Carlesimo and his Seton Hall coaching staff paused at the end of their season and thought about what had gone wrong.
A 3-point halftime lead over the No. 1-ranked Nevada-Las Vegas vanished quickly at the start of the second half of the West Regional final.
After a 12-point defeat, the coaches lingered in the Kingdome in Seattle and concluded they had not dealt enough with the mental aspect of playing against a top-ranked team.


Houston's Olajuwon Submits Grievance
HAKEEM OLAJUWON and his agent filed a grievance yesterday against the Houston Rockets for suspending the six-time All-Star for refusing to play after being given medical clearance.
CHARLES GRANTHAM, executive director of the N.B.A.
Players Association, said he had received the grievance from Olajuwon's agent, LEONARD ARMATO.
"The question now is which subset of grievance procedures that we want to follow," Grantham said.


Lucy M. Lewis Dies; Self-Taught Potter, 93
Lucy M. Lewis, a leading American Indian potter, died on March 12 in the hospital of the pueblo where she lived, in Acoma, N.M.
Her birth date was never recorded, but she was believed to be 93 years old, her family said.
She died after a long illness, said her daughter, Emma Lewis Mitchell.


Cambodian Prime Minister Seeks U.S. Aid


The Other Twin Towers, Guardians of the L.I.E.
A COUPLE of dispatches from the commuter front:
"Jackknifed tractor-trailer at the Elmhurst tanks. Extensive rubber-necking delays."
"Traffic on the L.I.E. is backed up as far as the Elmhurst tanks."


Congressman Contests District Division
Representative Frank J. Pallone, who is running for re-election in the newly formed Sixth Congressional District on the New Jersey Shore, filed suit today to overturn the dismantling of his old Third District.
Mr.
Pallone's suit, which his campaign spokesman, Joel Berg, said was filed today in Superior Court in Monmouth County, is the second to contest the redistricting plan that carved up the Third District, in Ocean and Monmouth Counties, into four pieces in four new districts.


German Suspended
The German swimmer SVEN HACKMANN will miss the Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, because he will be under a six-month suspension for testing positive for anabolic steroids, according to the German Swimming Federation.
Hackmann, a backstroke and freestyle specialist, took the steroids in the United States, where he had gone for altitude training, the federation said.
Hackmann trained at his own cost in Flagstaff, Ariz., between Dec. 16 and Jan. 8.


Ukraine's Parliament Votes to Replace the Ruble
The Ukrainian Parliament has adopted a set of economic goals that include completely replacing the ruble in the Ukraine with the local currency known as the coupon as of April 1.
Critics of the measure said it drew Ukraine closer to an effective withdrawal from the Commonwealth of Independent States and into a deeper rivalry with Russia.
The Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, pressed the program, titled "Fundamentals of National Economic Policy," as vital to the survival of Ukrainian independence.
The program was adopted by 306 of 412 votes.


3 Years of Economic Decline for New Jersey


Dr. Gray Twombly, Cancer Specialist, 86
Dr.
Gray Huntington Twombly, a professor of gynecology at New York University School of Medicine for 20 years until he retired in 1973, died on Tuesday at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 86 years old and lived at the Doncaster life-care community in Bloomfield, Conn.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Canada Lifts Oil Industry Investing Bar
Canada's Energy Minister today announced rule changes that would make it easier for foreign investors to buy into Canada's oil and gas industry -- a move that may be linked to the troubles of Olympia &amp; York, the Toronto-based real estate giant.
Existing oil regulations, which hark back to nationalistic economic policies of the 1970's and early 1980's, prohibit foreigners from acquiring healthy oil and gas companies with assets of $5 million or more.


Teen-Ager Surrenders in Killing
A 15-year-old Bronx youth turned himself in to the police yesterday in the killing of a 13-year-old, leaving friends and family members to mourn once again the deadly combination of children and guns.
The 15-year-old, Oscar Grant of 2029 LaFontaine Avenue, had been sought by police since the Monday night shooting of Paul Gardner, of 611 Crotona Park North, in the vestibule of the Murphy Consolidated housing project in the East Tremont section.


366 Weapons Bought in 5 Days of Plan
In its first five days, a New York City program that offers up to $75 for any gun turned in at police precinct houses has yielded 366 firearms, including 96 semiautomatic handguns and two assault rifles, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.
"I'm pleased with that program and what has transpired so far," he said.
"If we get one gun off the street and it saves a life, it's well worth the effort." So far, he said, the Staten Island precincts had received the most guns, followed by those in Queens and the Bronx.


Defending the Mob: a User's Guide; For Defense Lawyers, a Favored Strategy Is to Attack and Attack Again
How does a smart lawyer defend a client like John Gotti, who draws universal knowing smirks when he describes himself as a plumbing-supply and zipper salesman from Queens, and according to trial testimony, is not a very good one at that?
"The only technique that I know of is to attack the Government," said Bruce Cutler, the longtime lawyer for Mr.
Gotti who was disqualified from his client's current Federal murder-racketeering trial in Brooklyn.


Review/Dance; Fusing Spanish and Latin American Style
The Carlota Santana Spanish Dance Company, which opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, is interested not only in dance in Spain, but also in the way that Spain's dance traditions have spread throughout the Americas.
The group devoted the entire first half of its program to "El Encuentro de Dos Mundos" ("The Encounter of Two Worlds"), a trilogy that attempted to show the fusion of Spanish and Latin American styles.


Bike Wear, Safe and Stylish
FOR kids in the Northeast at least, the hop-on-your-bike, pop-a-few-wheelies season is about to arrive.
With many states passing legislation requiring children to wear helmets when riding a bicycle, the choice of the perfect gear (after quality, of course) could boil down to style.
The sleek and slick Streetrider, below, is a new design from Bell Sports of Norwalk, Calif., that comes in two sizes, two colors -- white or red -- and is certified by the Snell Memorial Foundation (an independent group based in St. James, L.I., which tests and sets safety standards for helmets).
The helmet is designed for 4- to 10-year-olds.
At 9.7 ounces, it's very light, comes with stickers (like alligators), costs about $45 and has air vents to keep youngsters cool.


Vincent Has Dim View Of Steinbrenner Letter
Commissioner Fay Vincent indicated today that George Steinbrenner might have hurt his reinstatement effort by writing a letter to his fellow club owners four weeks ago.
Steinbrenner has been trying for the last three months to set up a meeting with Vincent so they could discuss his possible return as the Yankees' managing partner.
But the commissioner has steadfastly told the owner that there would be no meeting until two lawsuits that Steinbrenner instigated were dropped.


Manhattan College Finally Runs Out of Steam
It was as if the enormity of what they had done and where they suddenly were hit home for the Manhattan College players tonight.
After an early spurt that quieted the roaring Notre Dame fans and confused the Irish, the Jaspers from Upper Broadway could not keep up.


Corrections
An article in the Word and Image pages on Monday about the autobiographies of sports celebrities misidentified the publisher of Darryl Strawberry's book, "Darryl." It is Bantam Books.
The article also referred incorrectly to one of the book's editors.
He is Tom Dyja.


Lawmakers Put Off Plan for Redistricting
Conceding that efforts to redraw New York's Congressional districts were veering toward chaos, not consensus, the chairmen of a joint legislative panel today indefinitely postponed the release of a redistricting plan.


Chronicle
During last Friday's performance by the St.
Petersburg National Opera of Tchaikovsky's opera "Pique Dame" at Lincoln Center, there was a happy chance reunion in the lobby.
FIMA SHAPIRO and VLADIMIR PRUDNIKOV saw each other for the first time since they were choirboys in the Azeliukas Boys Choir in Vilnius, Lithuania, 18 years ago.


Special Toys for Special Children
"WIG Wag Worm" is a soft-bodied cloth worm linked together with Velcro.
Children put Wig Wag back together by matching up the links.
Donna Pettick, an occupational therapist, finds this toy, as well as almost 200 others she distributes, modifies and designs, to be happy therapy for mildly- to severely-disabled children.
All are available through Kapable Kids, her mail-order catalogue company.
Ms.
Pettick is not alone.
Susan White of Cranbury, N.J., got so fed up with looking for the right toys for her 6-year-old son, who has learning problems, that she started Funtastic Therapy, a mail-order company that offers therapeutic toys for children with mild disabilities.
"Mr. Mighty Mind, " for example, is a paper-and-wood puzzle that challenges children's visual and motor skills; it is one of about 200 educational toys in the Funtastic Therapy catalogue.


Four Die in Suspected Arson in Detroit


Chronicle
When a group of political leaders, artists, journalists and others speak out on Saturday, they will speak of a poet, not a candidate.
Those expected to take part in a reading of Walt Whitman's visionary essay "Democratic Vistas" include United States Representatives BILL GREEN and TED WEISS, Manhattan Borough President RUTH MESSINGER, City Council Speaker PETER VALLONE, State Senator DAVID PATERSON and Assemblyman JERROLD NADLER.
This is only one event in New York City's two-month-long "Tribute to Walt Whitman," which marks the 150th anniversary of the poet's death.


A Musical 'Moby' in London
"Moby Dick," a musical comedy inspired by Herman Melville's classic novel and produced by Cameron Mackintosh, opened last week at the Piccadilly Theater to very mixed reviews.
Directed and written by Robert Longden, "Moby Dick" is about students at a girls' academy who decide to stage a musical version of Melville's novel in their school's swimming pool.
The young women -- some of whom are actually men -- bound about on the stage in scanty gym uniforms, supervised by their headmistress, played by the actor Tony Monopoly, who also plays Captain Ahab.


Foley's Wife Testifies in Post Office Case
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said today that his wife, Heather, who is also his top aide, has testified before a Federal grand jury investigating criminal wrongdoing at the lawmakers' Capitol Hill post office.
He said that she appeared voluntarily and that she is not a subject of the inquiry.
But according to people with a detailed knowledge of the testimony, other witnesses who have appeared before the grand jury have been questioned extensively about whether Mrs.
Foley and Steven R. Ross, the House counsel, may have tried to impede an investigation into the post office that was begun last summer by the United States Capitol Police..


For Pilots, When to Ignore Slight Wing Ice?
The rules on when airline pilots can take off in snowstorms are very clear -- at least on the surface.
Federal aviation officials say pilots cannot take off if the plane has snow or ice on the wings.
But many airline pilots say the situation is seldom, if ever, that simple.
Unless a plane is de-iced immediately before takeoff during a snowstorm, there will inevitably be some snow or ice on a wing.
And so pilots who have had delays after having their planes de-iced must decide based on their own experience and intuition whether to ignore a slight buildup and take off.
Neither the Federal Aviation Administration nor the airlines provide them with many guidelines on the delicate decision.
Pilots say they also face a pragmatic problem: It is very difficult to tell when snow on a wing has turned to ice by making the visual inspection required by many airlines.


Home Video
With the Academy Awards scheduled for Monday night, there's Oscar fever in video stores.
Well, sort of.
To be sure, nominated films already on tape are enjoying a surge in business and there are many inquiries about those not yet released, but this year customers often are looking for something else.
"We set up a special Oscar section, but people are more interested in what's new, what's just out," said Cindy Buckallew, the manager of Video Excitement in Kalispell, Mont.
In her store the better-known Oscar-nominated titles like "Thelma and Louise" and "The Silence of the Lambs" rent well, but the customers want the latest releases.
"It's what's up now, what's coming," she said.
" 'Regarding Henry,' 'Point Break,' 'The Doctor' -- that's what they want."


Police Say 20 Are Suspects In Editor Case
The New York City police said yesterday they were focusing on about 20 Colombians and Dominicans in New York in their search for the killer of a Hispanic journalist two weeks ago in a Queens restaurant.
Raymond Abruzzi, the chief of detectives in Queens, said the police are investigating the individuals as suspects in the planning of the killing of the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, not as suspects of having committed it.


O'Rourke Lobbies To Lay Foundations For Housing Plan
Just two weeks after it was proposed, the Westchester County Executive's $50 million plan to build affordable housing appears to be in jeopardy because of opposition from local officials.
The plan calls for building 500 to 600 units of housing on 20 county-owned sites in communities throughout the county.
But to date, only one of the 13 communities, the Town of Harrison, has formally endorsed it.


Syria Reported to Discuss Oil Deal With Iraq
Syria seems to be softening its policy toward its longtime adversary, Iraq, amid newspaper reports that the two countries are engaged in negotiations that could in time allow Saddam Hussein's Government to pump crude oil through a pipeline to the Syrian Mediterranean coast for the first time in 10 years.
Lebanon's leading newspaper, An Nahar, said today that a team of Iraqi technicians was in Syria's capital, Damascus, discussing the possibility of reopening the pipeline, which runs from the oilfield near Kirkuk in northern Iraq to a Syrian port, Baniyas.
The report in the Lebanese daily did not provide details, or say if the talks have made any progress.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Coltec Industries' $200 million of 9 3/4 percent senior notes, due 2000, were priced at par through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Also priced at par were $250 million 10 1/4 percent senior subordinated notes, due 2002.
The company, which makes products for the aerospace, automotive and other industries, also offered 38.5 million common shares at $15 a share.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Brown; Dark Horse or Not, Brown Enjoys Being Able to Strut
He still sells himself as the dark horse, the renegade people's candidate.
But Edmund G. Brown Jr. offered a newly optimistic assessment today of his prospects for the White House.
"It's David versus Goliath," he proclaimed, "but that slingshot is getting pretty big and pretty heavy."


Practical, Not a Gambler, De Klerk Tells His Story
When President F. W. de Klerk chatted with a cluster of journalists recently, the conversation turned to card games.
A Canadian reporter asked if Mr. de Klerk played poker in view of the political risks that he seemed to court.
Mr. de Klerk replied that he was a bridge player, preferring a calculated game of skill to poker's gamble.
The remark offered an insight into the mind of Mr. de Klerk, who forced a dramatic showdown with the right wing with a referendum last week to win a white mandate for change.


Many Money Fund Yields End Week Slightly Higher
The yields on tax-exempt and taxable money funds continued to reflect the recent slight overall rise in market yields, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"What we are seeing is that money fund yields finally are reflecting the unchanged Federal Reserve policy over the course of the first quarter, and they are remaining near their lows," Walter S. Frank, IBC/Donoghue's chief economist, said regarding the yields on taxable money funds.
"This will continue until there is some action by the Federal Reserve, but we don't expect any action in the near term."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton; Clinton Turning His Effort To the Battle for New York
If the outcome of the Connecticut primary was bad news for Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign, at least it was the kind of adversity he likes best -- the political kind.
But some supporters in New York are concerned that the Arkansas Governor's chief problem as he prepares for the April 7 New York primary may not be the man who beat him Tuesday, Edmund G. Brown Jr., but rather mending the organization of his rattled New York ranks.


SPRING TRAINING REPORT
A Scare for Barry Bonds
It's hard to determine who got a bigger scare yesterday: BARRY BONDS or the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Bonds, the Pirates' All-Star left fielder, suffered a cut to the cornea of his right eye when he was struck by a batted ball during batting practice in Bradenton, Fla.
The injury isn't believed to be serious, and Bonds is expected to return to the lineup this week.


Familiar Celtic Cast Hands Nets a Setback
Just when the Nets were beginning to think they had solved the problem of how to beat Boston, the Celtics rose up and solved the problem of beating New Jersey tonight, winning by 118-110 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Celtics solved the Nets despite being unable to stop Derrick Coleman from scoring a game-high 34 points or Chris Dudley from grabbing a game- high 15 rebounds and turning in his best offensive effort, 14 points, in the five games he has played in place of the injured Sam Bowie.


Essay; The Hillary Problem
Lyndon Johnson had "the Bobby problem"; Bill Clinton now has "the Hillary problem."
The problem is not that Hillary Clinton, successful lawyer and feminist, is coming across as a cunning political animal, threatening to insecure male voters.
On the contrary, she is coming across as a political bumbler by appearing to show contempt for women who work at home.


Only A Strike Can Stop Them Now
If hockey at Madison Square Garden is put to rest for a while because of a players' strike, then this was the way to go out: a fantasy goal by Brian Leetch on an end-to-end rush from hockey yore.
"I got some skating room, I faked inside, I froze the defender, I went outside, and the goalie stayed too far in the net," Leetch said, trying to explain his inexplicable talent.
"Usually, I make those moves and don't score. It was nice for once to finish it."


Democracy Wins in South Korea
South Korea's voters made democracy their own this week.
Taking advantage of four years of reform by President Roh Tae Woo, they used their parliamentary election ballots to shake up an obsolete party structure, opening the fall presidential campaign to new entrants.
No specific American interests in Korea were at stake beyond the desire to encourage democracy in a country that has only recently begun to enjoy it.
And while President Roh's ruling Democratic Liberal Party lost an embarrassing number of seats, the overall results resoundingly vindicate his democratic vision.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bell Atlantic Corp., Philadelphia, named Stuart C. Johnson president of regional services for the Network Services group. *
Campbell Soup Co., Camden, N.J., appointed John J. Kelly Jr. business director of the food service division.


Calendar: House Tours, And Quilts Galore
Manhattan House Tours  Grand Tour Design, 141 East 44th Street; (212) 297-0652.
Four tours of apartments in Manhattan, a reception and a brunch will be held to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research and Channel Thirteen/WNET.
Residences belong to designers, architects and their clients.
Different apartments are included on each tour.
Tickets, $50 each.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about dog waste in New York City misstated the history of the city's cleanup law and referred incorrectly to one of its authors.
The law was passed in 1978 by the State Legislature, not by the City Council.
It was written by Edward H. Lehner, then an assemblyman, and by Franz S. Leichter, a state senator (not an assemblyman).


S.&amp; L. Proposals Create Rift Among Republicans
With Congress at an impasse over whether to provide an additional $25 billion to sell or close down insolvent savings and loan institutions, Congressional Republican leaders met with President Bush today at the White House as other members of Congress squared off at a public hearing.
Emboldened by his success in confronting Democrats over the House Bank scandal, Representative Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip from Georgia, tried to force the Bush Administration to change its approach to the bailout, for which Congress has authorized $105 billion so far.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
A Different Euphorbia
Q.
Over the holidays I saw a flowering plant labeled Euphorbia ful
gens.
I cannot find a source of this plant or any information on it. -- Dale K. McArthur, New York City.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the United States visit of Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia misstated the affiliation of Welles Hangen, an American television correspondent missing in Southeast Asia since 1970.
Mr.
Hangen, who was reportedly captured by Communist forces in Cambodia and is believed dead, reported for NBC News, not CBS.


Procter Plans to Sell Wood Pulp Business
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it planned to sell its wood pulp business, which it uses as a source of paper for its paper towels, diapers and other consumer products.
For more than 70 years, the company has owned timberland and mills.
It buys about half the output of its mills and sells the rest on the open market.
But the cyclical pulp business has been depressed in recent years because of excess capacity, and Procter has said it wants to focus on its consumer products.


Prudential Says It Had A Good 1991
The Prudential Insurance Company of America, the nation's largest insurer, yesterday disclosed strong growth in 1991, with its capital base rising 21 percent, to $9.7 billion.
At a luncheon in New York, Prudential's chairman and chief executive, Robert C. Winters, pointed to gains last year in the company's group insurance and reinsurance businesses, as well as a turnaround in the security brokerage subsidiary, Prudential Securities.
The brokerage operations earned $201 million in 1991 after losing $259 million in 1990, Prudential said.


Hey! This Chair Has a Chimney
FREDERIC Schwartz, a New York architect, made the first of his "house" chairs for his neice for years ago.
The original wooden chairs were finished with a plastic laminate until recently, when Mr.
Schwartz decided to finish it with auto paint.
"The paint's really tough and the colors are bright," he said.


Rule on O-T-C Short Sales
The National Association of Securities Dealers said today that its members overwhelmingly approved a new rule that would make it tougher for investors to kick off a big price slide in over-the-counter stocks.
The proposed rule on short sales now goes to the Securities and Exchange Commission, which must give its final approval.


House Gets Cable TV Bill
A bill to restore Federal regulation of the cable television industry was introduced in the House today in response to complaints about poor service and excessive rates.
"This is a pro-consumer, pro-competition bill designed to rein in the renegades in the cable industry who are gouging consumers with repeated rate increases," said Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the House Telecommunications and Finance subcommittee.


Senate Panel Rebuffs Prosecutor in Leak Inquiry
Averting a battle over the First Amendment, the two ranking members of the Senate Rules Committee today rejected a request from a special counsel to force two reporters to reveal who told them about the sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas.
The decision appeared to doom the prospects of the investigation into the disclosures, which nearly scuttled the Thomas nomination to the Supreme Court, since many Senate staff members who might have been sources of the information have already been interviewed.


How Deposit Insurance Works
Individuals and businesses with more than $100,000 in a bank would be well advised to review their accounts to make certain they are fully insured, F.D.I.C. officials say.
"In light of the new law, and new procedures for closing banks, it is a timely subject," said Alan Whitney a spokesman for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Bozell Florida Sold to Employees
Following the painfully dragged-out loss of its $27 million Florida State Lottery account last month, Bozell Inc. announced yesterday that it had sold its offices in Tampa, Miami and Tallahassee, collectively called Bozell Florida, to the employees there.
The new agency, called Ellis &amp; Diaz Inc., will be affiliated with Bozell and have access to Bozell's resources, including the international agency network.
Bill Diaz, who was executive vice president and general manager of Bozell Florida, will be president of Ellis &amp; Diaz.
And Howard Ellis, who was executive vice president and creative director of Bozell Florida, will serve in the same capacities at Ellis &amp; Diaz.


Judge, No Diplomat, Orders Zaire to Pay U.N. Office Rent
While diplomatic immunity may cover crimes from mischief to murder, a Federal District judge in Manhattan has ruled that it does not extend to nonpayment of rent.
Judge Leonard B. Sand, in a ruling issued Tuesday, ordered the Zaire Mission to the United Nations evicted from its midtown offices by United States marshals if it does not pay more than $400,000 in back rent by April 20.


Homeless Man Will Appeal Decision on Library Rules
A homeless man and his lawyers said today that they would appeal a ruling upholding the Morristown library's rules on patron behavior and would attack the regulations in state court if librarians invoke them to evict the man, Richard R. Kreimer.
In a sidewalk news conference outside the Rutgers Law School here, Mr.
Kreimer said the unanimous ruling on Monday by a three-judge Federal appeals panel in Philadelphia gave librarians too much power to monitor the social behavior of patrons.


Arthur Cronquist, 73, a Specialist In Classifying the Plant Kingdom
Dr.
Arthur Cronquist, a senior scientist at the New York Botanical Garden and creator of an important system of plant classification, died on Sunday while doing research at the Brigham Young University Herbarium in Provo, Utah.
He was 73 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Karl F. Lauby, the director of public relations at the botanical garden, in the Fordham section of the Bronx.


Tarkanian Back on TV
You may be able to keep a good team off television, but you can't keep a good coach off the tube may be the way the former Nevada-Las Vegas Coach JERRY TARKANIAN views his new job as an analyst for the Los Angeles Clippers on cable telecasts.
Tarkanian, whose Runnin' Rebels were banned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association from participation in any televised games and post-season play this season, has signed a contract with SportsChannel Los Angeles through the rest of the Clippers season.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Jim Newlin and Kerry Woodson, pitchers, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Roger Salkeld, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Optioned Jose Hernandez and Rob Maurer, infielders, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Optioned Chris Colon, infielder, to Tulsa of the Texas League.
Sent Doug Davis, catcher, to Oklahoma City.
National League


St. Patrick's Parade Uproar Masked an Anti-Catholic Attack; Protestant Irish
To the Editor:
The decision by Judge Rosemarie Maldonado of the New York City Human Rights Commission to allow the St.
Patrick's Day parade to proceed without a contingent of gay and lesbian marchers because "of the parade's 'Irish and Roman Catholic' nature" (news article, March 14) perpetuates a chauvinistic distortion of Irish history and culture.
For several centuries, many of the greatest figures in Irish history, including men and women who gave their lives for Ireland's freedom and independence, were Protestants or people of no particular religious faith.
One thinks of Wolfe Tone, Robert Emmet, Edmund Burke, Charles Stewart Parnell, Sir Roger Casement, Maude Gonne and the Irish Republic's first President, Douglas Hyde.
Moreover, Ireland's two Nobel laureates in literature, William Butler Yeats and Samuel Beckett, were also not Roman Catholics.


Torborg Names Gooden To Start Home Opener
The manager, cognizant of how much he can't predict, has set a target date anyway.
The pitcher, aware of the emotional risks involved, has set his sights accordingly.
And now Mets followers in New York, as they see fit, can set their hearts on this:
Dwight Gooden, six months removed from rotator cuff surgery, will take the mound at Shea Stadium on April 10.
Without a significant physical setback or dramatically cold conditions, Gooden will start the home opener against the Montreal Expos.


Golf; Swift Push Up the Pedestal
Almost against his will, Fred Couples has reached a moment of reckoning.
His talent has finally taken him to the level that his personality has instinctively avoided.
No. 1 in the world.


Chastened Clinton And Brash Brown Court New Yorkers
At the Staten Island ferry terminal and in front of an H &amp; R Block tax preparation office, Gov.
Bill Clinton tried to persuade New York Democrats that he deserved their rich lode of convention delegates, despite the startling victory of former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. in Connecticut on Tuesday.
Turning from his preferred quarry, President Bush, Mr.
Clinton courted local leaders and denounced Mr.
Brown's proposal to replace Federal taxes with a flat 13 percent income tax.


Review/Dance; Merce Cunningham's Last Premiere of the Season
When all is said and done, a dance work is only as good as its choreography.
Merce Cunningham is at his best when he invents or discovers new movement rather than reintroduces familiar steps in unfamiliar contexts.
"Change of Address," his latest piece, is clearly in the first category.
The Merce Cunningham Dance Company, which continues through Sunday afternoon at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), presented this final premiere of the season on Tuesday night.
Visually, the work is a stunner, and it radiates a subtle theatricality that should have wide appeal.


Bridge
Another top-ranked team tumbled to defeat here Tuesday night in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
The second-seeded team in the event -- Bart Bramley, Peter Nagy and Howard Weinstein, all of Chicago, and Hugh Ross of Oakland, Calif. -- lost by the slim margin of 3 imps to four stars from England: Sandra Landy, Nicola Smith and Pat Davies, all of whom have won world women's team titles, and Michele Handley.
The young squad headed by Lapt Chan of Woodside, Queens, defeated another New York team led by Bob Jones of Auburndale, Queens, by 17, retaining the top-seeded position they earned a day earlier by eliminating the defending champions.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Teen-Ager a Surprise  Diann Roffe-Steinrotter, a veteran from Potsdam, N.Y., and an unheralded teen-ager, Erik Schlopy of Stowe, Vt., won super-giant slalom races yesterday in the opening events of the United States Alpine ski Championships at Winter Park, Colo.
In the women's race, Roffe-Steinrotter was nearly a half-second faster than Hilary Lindh in a duel of Olympic silver medalists.
Schlopy, 19 years old, scored a surprising victory, edging another 19-year-old, Casey Puckett, in the men's race. (AP) N.H.L.
The two-time world titlists led a 1-2-3 sweep for the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Maia Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin, Olympic bronze medalists, were second after compulsories, worth 20 percent of the total score.
Oksana Gritschuk and Yevgeny Platov were third. (AP)


Editorial Notebook; Including Them Out: A White Male Panel In Diverse New York
A roomful of New Yorkers found themselves unwitting participants in a curious relic the other day.
The Manhattan Institute and the Citizens Union held a four-hour conference on "Rethinking New York" and all 12 speakers were white males.
No blacks, no women, no Hispanics, no Asians and no apologies.
Only the makeup of the audience hinted at the city's ethnically diverse population.
Listening to the proceedings in the Terrace Room of the Roosevelt Hotel was like listening to an out-of-tune piano.
Everything was a bit off.


Philippine Air Sold by Manila
The Government handed over control of Philippine Airlines to the private sector today and its new owners said they would modernize the airline.
A new board of directors was elected hours after the Government formally turned over a 67 percent stake in the 51-year-old company to a new consortium called PR Holdings.


Fashion Designers in Their Dens: Just What Do the Rooms Wear?
THEIR names are on labels, their faces are on advertisements and, with any luck, their clothes are on women's backs.
Faced with a camera, these young fashion designers smile easily, as if they were in love with the world.
Gordon Henderson, Zang Toi, Randolph Duke and Carmelo Pomodoro are just a few of the young fashion designers -- 35 or younger warrants the adjective "young" in fashion parlance -- who are gearing up for the American fall collections next week.


Redirecting Taxes Away From the Military
To the Editor:
We appreciate your March 9 report about our nonpayment of taxes used for war and the demonstrators who have come to occupy our house since its seizure by the Internal Revenue Service, but you left out an essential element.
We don't just refuse to pay our Federal taxes; we redirect them.
Every year we fill out a form 1040 as accurately as we can and send it to the I.R.S. with a note explaining our conscientious objection to the Government's war-making and weapons-building, and then we give away the exact amount of our tax liability.
Half goes to nonprofit organizations that assist victims of United States military interventions in other countries (last year, Iraq; in previous years, Nicaragua and El Salvador); the other half to such local groups as the homeless shelter, food bank and veterans' outreach center.


Judge Examines Truthfulness of Noriega Witness
The judge in the drug and racketeering trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega privately questioned an important prosecution witness this afternoon to determine whether the witness lied when he testified against the deposed Panamanian leader last fall.
Prosecution and defense lawyers were excluded from the hearing in the chambers of Federal District Judge William M. Hoeveler.
The session was ordered after the witness, Gabriel Taboada, a convicted Colombian drug dealer, refused to allow the truthfulness of his testimony to be discussed in open court.


Nestle-Perrier Link Is Studied
The European Community commission opened a four-month investigation of the proposed takeover of the French mineral water producer Source Perrier S.A. by Nestle S.A. of Switzerland.
The commission said in a statement that the $2.6 billion offer "raises serious doubts" whether it is compatible with its competition law.
It said it had begun a four-month inquiry to see if the takeover would harm competition in the 12-nation trade bloc.


COLD WAR IS CITED IN EASING OF TEST
Congressional investigators said today that cold war-era pressures to develop new weaponry pushed Pentagon officials to alter test standards and approve a $2 billion radar-jamming device intended to protect fighter jets.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, as well as Republican and Democratic senators, said today that the Pentagon broke its own rules on buying new military equipment by allowing the Navy to continue building the jammer, even after the device had 43 computer program failures in repeated laboratory tests.


Computer's Only a Tool, Like Virtuoso's Violin
To the Editor:
"Learning to Use Computers Will Never Replace an Education," Dave Davis's March 8 letter on the use of computers in schools, and the headline for it, give the unfortunate and incorrect impression that education and the use of computers in schools are somehow antithetical.
Without doubt, computers can be misused in schools and, as Mr.
Davis fears, "be used as a fraudulent substitute for education." The plethora of lightweight, "computer literacy" courses argues this case well.
A pox on all these courses!
Students can learn word processing on their own if we teach them keyboarding early and they have ready access to computers.


U.S. Links New Thai Leader to Drugs
A veteran politician with close ties to the military was appointed Prime Minister on Wednesday.
Within hours, the State Department in Washington said he was refused a United States visa last year because of suspicions that he was linked to drug trafficking.
The department said that the politician, Narong Wongwan, was denied a visa last July under terms of an immigration law that allows the United States to bar entry to anyone who "is or has been an illicit trafficker in any controlled substance" or who assists a drug trafficker.
The department released no other details.


Dreyfus Trust Picks President
The Dreyfus Corporation said yesterday that Edward E. Madden, founder and former senior partner of Madden Associates, an institutional investment, pension and benefits consulting firm, had been elected president of the Dreyfus Trust Company.
The company serves as custodian or trustee of all Dreyfus-sponsored retirement plans.
Joining Mr.
Madden at Dreyfus Trust are his partners, Robert W. Stone, who was elected senior vice president, and David M. Feldman, who was elected a vice president.


Senators Press White House on M.I.A.'s
A special Senate committee investigating cases of Americans unaccounted for since the Vietnam War has issued a subpoena to President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, demanding that he turn over documents the White House has withheld since January, Administration officials said today.
The documents being sought by the committee should, among other things, explain why the White House closed the books on most missing-in-action cases in 1973.


Injured Infant Found In a Brooklyn Alley
A newborn baby who had been stabbed three times in the chest was found yesterday in a plastic bag in an alleyway behind a Brooklyn apartment building, the police said.
The baby, who the police would identify only as a black male, underwent extensive surgery at Kings County Hospital.
He was in serious but stable conditionlast night in the hospital's incubation ward, a hospital spokeswoman said, and was expected to survive.


Buffett to Leave Top Post at Salomon Soon
Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman at Salomon Inc., surprised members of his own firm yesterday with an announcement that he would relinquish his position in the near future.
Mr.
Buffett had been expected to step back eventually from daily operations at the firm's investment banking subsidiary, Salomon Brothers, but to stay at the helm of the parent company in a supervisory role.


Auxiliary Officer Is Killed Chasing Bronx Mugger
An unarmed off-duty auxiliary police officer -- one of about 4,000 civilian volunteers who act as the "eyes and ears" of the Police Department -- was shot to death yesterday afternoon after he confronted a mugging suspect outside a Bronx bank and chased him into a nearby churchyard, the police said.
Cornered, the suspect turned and fired at least three shots at the auxiliary officer, killing him, the police said.
The suspect was later arrested after he was found hiding in some bushes when people from the neighborhood, who had followed him from the churchyard, hailed a passing patrol car.


Council Bill Seeks Voice On Waste
A day after Mayor David N. Dinkins said he would delay building a large garbage incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, the City Council moved yesterday to get veto power over such decisions with a bill that would allow it to pass judgment on Mr.
Dinkins's plan for dealing with the city's mounting garbage problem.
The bill, which was approved by a City Council committee yesterday and goes before the full Council for a vote today, would significantly restrict the freedom the Mayor currently has to devise long-term plans for garbage disposal.


Knicks Open Western Trip
The Knicks begin a three-game road trip tonight against the Denver Nuggets, followed by games at Seattle on Saturday and at Portland on Sunday.
It is an important trip for the Knicks (43-25), who are trying to maintain a comfortable lead over the Boston Celtics in the Atlantic Division.
The Knicks' most recent three-game West Coast trip in February was a debacle.
They went 0-3, losing to Phoenix, the Los Angeles Lakers, and the Sacramento Kings.
Should the Knicks have another nonwinning trip, the Atlantic Division race will be much closer than New York wants it to be.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  CHINA'S UPSTART PROVINCE
Beijing's hard-line leadership seems to be losing ground to Guangdong Province, a region of fish farms, toy factories and bars with a knack for free-market Communism.
A1  WARNING ABOUT KHMER ROUGE
Relief workers warn that Khmer Rouge guerrillas are sowing fear at refugee camps in Thailand to undermine a program to bring thousands of Cambodians home.
The Khmer Rouge seem to be trying to pressure refugees to relocate in areas of Cambodia under their control.
A3  COSMONAUT IN AN ALIEN LAND
A cosmonaut returned to Earth five months later than originally planned, and he may well have wondered whether he landed on the right planet.
The Soviet state whose seal still decorated his spacesuit was gone, and his home city of Leningrad was off the maps.
A12
Ronald Reagan urges the purchase of Soviet space technology.  A12
U.S. astronauts test a beam gun in the hope of creating auroras.
A12  UKRAINE TO DROP RUBLE
The Ukrainian Parliament has adopted a set of economic goals that include completely replacing the ruble with the local currency known as the coupon as of April 1.
A12  DOUBTS ON THAI APPOINTEE
A politician with close ties to the military was named Prime Minister in Thailand.
In Washington, the State Department said the politician, Narong Wongwan, was denied a visa last year because of suspicions that he was linked to drug trafficking.
A3  LIBYA WITHHOLDS AGENTS
The United States, Britain and France indicated they would press ahead with demands for sanctions against Libya because it seemed unready to turn over two suspects in the downing of a Pan Am plane.
A1  U.N.
WON'T SPARE IRAQI SITE
The United Nations nuclear agency ordered Iraq to demolish the core of a vast industrial complex southwest of Baghdad that played a major role in President Hussein's program to produce atomic weapons.
A9
Syria is said to negotiate on reopening a pipeline for Iraqi oil.
A11  PAY UP, JUDGE WARNS ZAIRE
A Federal judge has ordered the Zaire Mission to the United Nations evicted from its midtown offices if it does not pay more than $400,000 in back rent by April 20.
A12  RUSHDIE MEETS U.S.
SENATORS
The writer Salman Rushdie met with some senators in Washington despite a caution from the State Department that such a meeting "might be misinterpreted" and provoke reprisals against Americans.
A5  South Africa's President says he's "not a gambling man." A6  The White House faces a Senate subpoena on M.I.A. documents.
A14  In an Afghan prison, a legion of Government opponents.
A4  National A16-21, B12-13  CLINTON'S NEW BALL GAME
Governor Clinton's battle for New York began with a gritty new problem: How to handle former Governor Brown, emboldened by his victory in Connecticut.
A1  ANALYZING BROWN'S TAX PLAN
Many economists say the centerpiece of former Governor Brown's economic proposals, a radical flat tax plan, is more friendly to the mighty than to the meek.
A1
How the Connecticut results redefined the New York contest.  A19
Brown donned the suit and tie of a candidate on the rise.  A20  GUILTY PLEA IN DUMPING
After a far-reaching investigation into an environmental crime, a company will plead guilty to criminal charges for its conduct in running a Government-owned weapons plant near Denver.
A1  SPEAKER'S WIFE QUESTIONED
The wife and top aide of the House Speaker testified to a Federal grand jury investigating criminal wrongdoing at the lawmakers' post office, suggesting that Federal prosecutors were extending their inquiry into the upper echelons at the House.
A16
The rumor mill was set on top speed on the Hill.  A16
The inquiry into the Thomas disclosures appeared doomed.
B12  ABANDONING ELDERLY AS TREND
Staring with bewilderment from a hospital bed near the dog racing track where he was abandoned, an elderly Alzheimer's patient has become a symbol of what health experts say will become a trend: abandoning the elderly.
A1  FLORIDA WIDENS HEALTH COVERAGE
Florida jumped into the national search for improved access to health insurance, enacting a law that calls for affordable coverage for all workers.
B12  CURBING CHILD WELFARE PROGRAM
Limiting the impact of a major Federal child welfare program, the Supreme Court barred civil rights lawsuits that are intended to force states to help keep troubled families together.
B13  Another odd twist occurs in the Noriega trial.
A16  Auditors said the Pentagon broke its procurement rules.
B13  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 The Home Section C1-11  Fashion designers in their dens: Just what do the rooms wear?
C1  De la Renta puts checks at the top.
C1  You can't sleep?
Give up the habit.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-24  A student finds a new answer to a Roman riddle.
C15  "Moby Dick" London musical.
C13  The topic is Oscars.
C15  Theater: Humana festival.
C22  Music: Recital by Maurizio Pollini C15  Pop and Jazz in Review.
C18  Dance: Cunningham's season finale.
C15  Word and Image: "Monday's Warriors." C21  Obituaries B14  Arthur Cronquist, a specialist in classifying plants Nancy Walker, actress  Sports B15-23  Baseball: Gooden to start home opener.
B15  Basketball: Seton Hall, head games and Duke.
B15  Column: Berkow on Steinbrenner.B15  Golf: Is Couples the next dominant player?
B15  Hockey: Rangers beat Flyers.
B20  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Listen to the anger.
Spineless on Mr.
Rushdie.
South Korean democracy.
Joyce Purnick: All white.
Letters A22  William Safire: The Hillary problem.
A23  Anthony Lewis: A changing country.
A23  Stephen M. Meyer: Environmentalism doesn't steal jobs.
A23  Doug Bandow: Why waste aid on Russia?
A23


PARENT &amp; CHILD
TWO weeks before Gerald Koocher and his wife left for a one-week vacation without their 3-year-old daughter a few years ago, he put together a picture book about the trip.
It showed how his daughter would visit her grandparents, where her parents would be, how they would call in the evening and how they would celebrate when they got back together in seven days.
He read it to her every night as a bedtime story.
"It was a script of what her stay with her grandparents would be like," said Dr.
Koocher, the chief psychologist at Children's Hospital in Boston.
"That made it a bedtime story that came true. She knew how it would turn out."


INSIDE
Foley's Wife Testifies
A grand jury investigating the House post office heard from Heather Foley, a top aide to her husband, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley.
Page A16.
More Risk for Depositors
Forced by law to limit U.S. losses when closing banks, the F.D.I.C. now often protects depositors only up to the $100,000 insurance limit.
Page D1.
This Is Earth, Isn't It?
Sergei Krikalev returned from space yesterday.
But the country he left from last May, and his home city, are no longer on the map.
Page A12.
The Riddle of a Vase
By deciphering a frieze on an ancient vase, a graduate student appears to have solved a mystery that has baffled scholars for centuries.
Page C15.


A Video For Young Hard Hats
HOW does an independent video producer in Vermont keep going when times are lean?
Fredric Levine decided to make "Road Construction Ahead," a children's video on earth movers and shakers.
Mr.
Levine is the father of 4-year-old Miles and 6-year-old Ian, who, Mr.
Levine noticed, got dewey-eyed whenever they sighted heavy road equipment.
"I realized I could show these kids what they wanted to watch," Mr.
Levine said.


The Triangle Shirtwaist Fire Is Remembered


Art in Review
David Mach
Barbara Toll Fine Arts  146 Greene Street  SoHo  Through April 4


Code of Ethics Rules Conduct of Lawyers; Minimum Obligation
To the Editor:
Marvin E. Frankel (Op-Ed, March 14) argues that the action taken against Kaye, Scholer by the Office of Thrift Supervision threatens confidentiality of communications between lawyers and their clients.
Mr.
Frankel does not take his analysis far enough.
The next step surely requires that a lawyer who knows or learns of a corporate client's widespread corrupt practices must demand at least that the client discontinue them and also that they be disclosed to the appropriate Government authority.
That was certainly Kaye, Scholer's minimum duty, assuming it had knowledge of illegal practices by Lincoln Savings.


Turkey's Effort to Quell Rebel Kurds Raises Alarm in Ankara and Europe
Halit Gungen had written the kind of scoop that plays well in this southeastern city, which regards itself as the capital of Turkey's large and restive Kurdish minority.
In an anti-Government weekly magazine, he wrote of links between a shadowy Government security unit and an Islamic fundamentalist front whose members, he said, were trained by the authorities and used as death squads to assassinate Kurdish separatists.


Roberta L. Forbes, 67, Ranch Manager, Dies
Roberta Laidlaw Forbes, the former wife of the late Malcolm S. Forbes, the publisher, died on Wednesday at her home in Bedminster, N.J.
She was 67 years old.
An announcement from Forbes Inc. in New York said she died of lung cancer.


4 Exchanges A Step Closer To New Space
With the threat of losing thousands of jobs to New Jersey hanging over its head, the New York City Council yesterday overwhelmingly approved a city-subsidized effort to build a new commodities-exchange headquarters in Manhattan without knowing whether the project would go forward.
The vote removed the last governmental hurdle to a project aimed at keeping four of the city's five exchanges, which traditionally have had their headquarters in the Financial District, from acting on their threat to move to Jersey City, taking nearly 9,000 jobs and $50 million in tax revenues with them.


BRIEFS
*
Ashland Nigeria Exploration Unlimited, a unit of Ashland Oil Co., Ashland, Ky., and the Nigerian National Petroleum Corp. signed a production-sharing contract for the exploration and development of two offshore petroleum licenses in Nigeria. *
Chandler Insurance Co., Cayman Islands, received a proposal from a group consisting primarily of management to consider taking the company private at $6 a share.


Varity Posts Loss
The Varity Corporation yesterday reported a loss of $178 million for the fiscal year that ended on Jan. 31.
In the fiscal year 1990, the company earned $94.4 million, or $3.06 a share.
The Buffalo-based company attributed much of the fiscal year 1991 loss to a fourth-quarter restructuring charge of $108.3 million.
The revamping will cut its staff by 1,300 jobs worldwide to a total of 16,700.
The company expects the moves to cut more than $30 million from its operating costs in fiscal 1992.
Varity's revenues declined by 12 percent, to $3.16 billion, because of drops in all of the primary businesses of the company.
Varity's share price closed yesterday at $13.375, up 37.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL HEADLINE&gt;Blacks on the Court; Why Not on Campus?
IF you believe that white men can't jump, or that black men can't do much else, the media bear your message this weekend, the middle of so-called March Madness, which is spring break for whatever passes for morality these days in higher education.
This is the Sweet 16, the heart of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, and it should be approached with confusion, if not disgust.
This is a major sporting event, fueled by youthful passion and mega-buck hoopla, consuming hours of network time and columns of newsprint.
But does it make sense that 16 colleges whose student bodies are more than 90 percent white will be offering up teams that are 80 percent black?





THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democratic Primary; BROWN IS REBUKED BY PARTY CHAIRMAN FOR HARSH ATTACKS
The chairman of the Democratic Party issued an unusual rebuke yesterday to one of his party's two remaining candidates for President, saying Edmund G. Brown Jr. has "crossed the line in terms of inappropriate attacks" against Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
In an interview, Ronald H. Brown, the party chairman, said he wanted to maintain his neutrality but was compelled to speak out against what he described as the former California Governor's "scorched-earth policy" of verbal assault on Mr.
Clinton's record and character.


Sales of Children's TV Time Are Totally Awesome, Dude
HOLY rating points, Batman!
Propelled by new shows like an animated version of the Caped Crusader's exploits, as well as growing demand from marketers to reach the nation's youngest consumers, advance sales of commercial time on children's television programming for the 1992-93 season have been strikingly robust.
In the advance market, which began earlier this month, advertisers and their agencies have been clamoring for a chance to buy spots on weekday and Saturday-morning fare like "Batman: The Animated Series" on the Fox network, "Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles" on CBS and "The Ren and Stimpy Show" on the Nickelodeon cable network.


Credit Markets; Farm Bonds Yield As High as 7.98%
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation priced six bond issues yesterday, totaling nearly $2.98 billion with yields ranging from 4.23 percent to 7.98 percent.


Pop/Jazz; Post-Punk Angst of Babes in Toyland
When Kat Bjelland sings, she screams her head off.
The vocalist and guitarist for the Minneapolis trio Babes in Toyland rants, raves and spews lyrics that don't always rhyme.
She has the kind of voice that would be more suited to a hoary, stringy-haired death-metal dude than to a cute 28-year-old blonde.
Her voice is loud, brutal and vitriolic.
It's not very ladylike, and it's not at all pretty.
Ms.
Bjelland (pronounced bee-YELL-und) is far from a traditional rock chanteuse, but then Babes in Toyland, who perform tonight at the Ritz, don't fit the stereotype of a girl group.
The music is ugly, crunching post-punk, with Ms.
Bjelland thrashing out rudimentary chords on her guitar, Lori Barbero laying down tempestuous rhythms on the drums, and Maureen Herman thumbing hard and fast on her bass.
Ms.
Bjelland's lyrics have the angry naivete of a teen-ager's diary: on Babes in Toyland's 1990 album, "Spanking Machine," and 1991 EP, "To Mother" (both on the independent label Twin/ Tone), her subjects include rape, drugs, catatonia and the psychological confusion that results from bad relationships.


GlenFed Stock Off 1
The stock of GlenFed Inc. plunged 35 percent today after the company projected a $110 million quarterly loss and said its chairman and chief executive had resigned.
It also said it could no longer meet Federal capital requirements.
On the New York Stock Exchange, GlenFed stock fell $1.875 a share, to $3.50.
The chairman, Norman M. Coulson, whose departure was announced late Wednesday, will be replaced as chief executive by GlenFed's president and vice chairman, Stephen J. Trafton.
There was no appointment to the chairmanship.


A Dealer's Lot Is Not a Happy One
Step into Dwight W. McGuirk's Ford showroom these days, and he will tell you that like lots of auto dealers his mark-up over invoice is $500 at most and sometimes as little as $200.
The number is so small -- and sales have been so slow lately -- that it is a monthly scramble for Mr.
McGuirk to finance the $3 million worth of cars and trucks on his lots, pay his three salesmen and keep the roof over his showroom from leaking.
In fact, he cannot do it all even though what he pays for his cars and trucks is slightly less than the much talked about "invoice price" that many car buyers believe is the dealer's cost.
His profit margin can pay the salesmen, but there has not been enough to fix the roof as well.
When it rains hard, the water trickles onto a patch of plastic draped on the hood of a blue Taurus sedan parked near the American flag.


Art in Review
Mac Adams  John Gibson Gallery  568 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow





Topics of The Times; The Senate Shows Some Sense
Sanity at last.
The Senate Rules Committee has now decided not to enforce subpoenas for reporters' telephone records or seek contempt citations to force the journalists to talk.
Chairman Wendell Ford and Senator Ted Stevens, the ranking Republican, finally concluded that even if Congress could compel such evidence from journalists, it ought not to do so.
The attempt might have a chilling effect on the media "and could close a door where more doors need opening," the chairman said.


Topps to Start Publishing Comic Books
Spider-Man and the Incredible Hulk beware: the creator of Bazooka Joe is getting into the comic book business.
Although gum-wrapping Joe probably won't be thrust into a more feature-length role, the Topps Company of Brooklyn, the top seller of baseball cards, said yesterday that it planned to start publishing comics in October.
Company officials would not disclose the star of its first issues, saying only that they planned to license a character already in the public eye and then bring out new stars in 1993.


Kids Help Devils Clinch Playoff Berth
Despite having seven rookies in uniform, including Martin Brodeur of the junior league in net, the Devils clinched a playoff spot tonight with a 4-2 triumph over the Boston Bruins.
The Devils might have looked like a replacement team for striking regulars, but in reality they were a cohesive unit and outplayed the Bruins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Kohl to Join Waldheim at a Lunch in Munich
Chancellor Helmut Kohl will have lunch today with President Kurt Walheim of Austria, marking a late success in Mr.
Waldheim's efforts to break out of international isolation before he leaves office this year.
Because of his service with a Nazi unit that was accused of atrocities in the Balkans in World War II, Mr.
Waldheim has been an international pariah since his election in 1986.
He was banned from entering the United States in 1987, and since then has not been invited to any Western country.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon:


Senator Rudman Frees Himself
Warren Rudman, having served ably for two Senate terms, wants his freedom.
He won't run again -- out of frustration, he says, with Government ineptitude and the difficulty of getting things done in the Senate.
That's sad for Congress and for a Republican Party short of moderates.
Would that he had decided to stay and fight.
The New Hampshire Republican has battled, and lectured, with a wholesome indignation.
As a member of the Iran-contra committee he was one of a handful who stood up to Oliver North for treating Congress with contempt.
He even stood up to the colonel's secretary, Fawn Hall, when she testified about shredding and smuggling White House documents.
"It wasn't the K.G.B. that was coming, Miss Hall," he protested.
"It was the F.B.I."


TV Weekend; An Ideological Nora In a BBC 'Doll's House'
Husband: "I don't understand you." Wife: "That's just it. You have never understood me. This is the first time you and I have ever talked seriously to one another."
(Later) Husband: "Consider your conscience, some moral sense." Wife: "All I do know is that you and I think quite differently about all that. I must find out who's right, society or me."


AIDS Protester Provokes Clinton's Anger
Gov.
Bill Clinton, impassioned and angry and hoarse, defended his political character and his record on AIDS yesterday in an emotional exchange with an AIDS protester at a midtown supper club.
Mr.
Clinton was just beginning his standard political speech when the protester demanded: "What are you going to do about AIDS? We're dying!"


Code of Ethics Rules Conduct of Lawyers
To the Editor:
"Lawyers Can't be Stool Pigeons" (Op-Ed, March 14) tells only half the story of the $41 million settlement by Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler of the suit by the Office of Thrift Supervision, which charged the law firm with improper conduct in representing Charles Keating and the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
The other half of the story, seldom mentioned, is the limitations placed by the disciplinary rules, the ethical obligations of lawyers to preserve client secrets and defend them "zealously." These rules nowhere even suggest that lawyers are permitted to hire themselves out as hired guns, shooting down the truth whenever it threatens a client's cause by deception, evasion, half-truths, obstruction and similar conduct.


Albert Murray, 85, a Portraitist Of Naval Officers and Citizens
Albert Ketcham Murray, a portraitist who did many official paintings of United States naval officers as well as many prominent civilians, died on Tuesday in Gainesville, Fla., where he had been visiting friends.
He was 85 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of cancer, said Marion Galliland, a friend.


Mr. Brown's Flat Tax: Tilted
Taking Jerry Brown seriously means taking his flat tax proposal seriously.
Needlessly, he's made that hard to do.
By being careless, the former California Governor has bent a good idea out of shape.
He could fix it, but until he does, Bill Clinton is right to attack the plan as a budget-buster and a dagger aimed at poor families.
Mr.
Brown's basic idea -- creating a simplified code that encourages saving -- is exactly right.
But he ignores all-important details.
The tragedy is that his cavalier attitude has armed his critics to denounce the one truly creative and important idea to emerge from this Presidential campaign.


Mary Ann Herman, Dance Teacher, 79
Mary Ann Herman, a leading folk-dance teacher and an authority on folk-dance traditions, died on Monday at her home in North Babylon, L.I.
She was 79 years old.
She died of heart failure, said her husband, Michael Herman.


Lakers Place Perkins on Injured List
What do MAGIC JOHNSON, JAMES WORTHY and SAM PERKINS have in common?
None of the Los Angeles Laker stars are playing for the Los Angeles Lakers these days.


CHRONICLE
During a ceremony at City Hall yesterday, Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS expressed New Yorkers' solidarity with 1,000 survivors of the Holocaust, who, with their descendants, who will board a train in Europe next month for a journey that marks the 50th anniversary of the deportation of 80,000 French Jews to Nazi camps.
Their destination is Auschwitz-Birkenau in Poland.
Mr.
Dinkins presented a letter to RENEE FERSEN-OSTEN of New Rochelle, N.Y., who will head the American delegation, and said, "all New Yorkers stand with you on this important mission of remembrance." Ms.
Fersen-Osten told the Mayor, "You will be traveling with us in spirit to Auschwitz."


Olympic Revisions Are Requested
International track authorities asked the Barcelona Organizing Committee to revise the schedule of events for the Summer Olympic Games, primarily so MICHAEL JOHNSON, who has been dominant in the 200 and 400 meters, can compete for gold medals in both events.
The proposal, first made by the sport's governing body in November, would replace the existing schedule, which lists finals in both events on the same day, with one providing a day of rest between the events by juggling finals of five events -- the men's 200 meters and the women's 200, 400 and 800 meters and 400-meter hurdles.


TIE Replaces President
TIE Communications Inc. replaced its president and chief executive with a top executive from TIE's parent company in Chicago.
George N. Benjamin 3d, 54 years old, will replace Eric V. Carter, who told TIE's board in September that he wanted to reduce his responsibilities.
Mr.
Benjamin, who will take over April 1, is a group vice president with the Marmon Group Inc., controlled by the Pritzker family of Chicago.
Mr.
Benjamin has been a director of TIE and was involved in restructuring the company, which emerged from bankruptcy protection in July.
Mr.
Carter will remain a director and will become a consultant to TIE.


CHRONICLE
This is graduation day for the first class of Public Safety Officers, whose mission is to improve the quality of life around Times Square.
TONY RANDALL, a familiar of Times Square and Broadway for 50 years, is to speak at the graduation.
The public will get a glimpse of the 41 young men and women in blue, led by Mr.
Randall, in a "Salute to Broadway" at 10:30 A.M. in Times Square at 46th Street.
The officers, unarmed with radios, are to begin patrolling the Times Square area on Monday.


Tyson Gets 6-Year Prison Term For Rape Conviction in Indiana
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion who was convicted of rape last month, was sentenced to 10 years in prison today.
But the judge suspended the last four years, meaning he will spend no more than six years behind bars.
In a rape case that has attracted worldwide attention and prompted debate about sexual roles and racial attitudes in the criminal justice system, Mr.
Tyson is likely to be freed in three years with time off for good behavior.


Merrill's New Mortgage Plan
A subsidiary of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said today that it was testing a type of mortgage that would allow qualified borrowers to buy a home without a down payment.
The program, started by the Merrill Lynch Credit Corporation, eliminates the down payment by using the funds of a qualified sponsor -- typically a parent -- to serve as a loan guarantee.


Spurs' Robinson Might Face Surgery
DAVID ROBINSON, the San Antonio Spurs center who missed the first game of his career on Wednesday when he sat out a game against Charlotte because of an injured thumb, is considering surgery that could keep him out for the first round of the playoffs.
Robinson, a left-hander who tore a ligament in the thumb socket of his left hand in a collision with another player last week, has been so disappointed with the progress of daily therapy sessions since then that he has been leaning toward surgery.


New York City Can Set a Sludge Example
To the Editor:
It's not surprising that New York City's sludge management program has its critics, as you report March 15.
However, considering what options for sludge management are available, such as landfilling and incineration, the city's Department of Environmental Protection should be commended for planning a long-term program that takes full advantage of sludge's beneficial qualities and treating sludge like a resource instead of a waste.
In contrast to the city's attitude about managing garbage, in which incineration is still a favored option, the plan for sludge management is environmentally responsible.


Review/Film; Hot Pursuit Of Olympic Success On the Ice
Nasty sparks fly when Doug Dorsey (D. B. Sweeney) meets Kate Moseley (Moira Kelly), his future figure-skating partner in the Winter Olympics.
"Do you soak your hands in battery acid?" sneers Kate the first time he touches her.


5 Found Slain In a House Near L.I. Line
Five people were found shot to death last night in a row house in Queens, a block and a half from the Nassau County line and less than a mile from Belmont Park Race Track, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Ralph St.
Just, said that the police had not identified the victims, three women and two men, and did not know when or why they had been killed.
The bodies were found in the two-story brick house at 225-26 Murdock Avenue in Cambria Heights.


Homeless Man Set Afire On Bronx Subway Train
A 39-year-old homeless man was set on fire and severely burned early yesterday as he slept on a subway train passing through the Bronx, the transit police said.
It was the most serious incident in a series of similar attacks on homeless people on New York City trains this year, the police said.
Although no one witnessed yesterday's incident, which took place about 4:30 A.M. on a northbound No. 2 train, transit investigators concluded that the fire was intentionally set, said Lieut.
Robert J. Valentino, a transit police spokesman.
After the train pulled into the Freeman Street Station, witnesses saw four teen-agers running from the car where the man was burning, he said.


Duke, Kentucky, Indiana and U.C.L.A. Move Ahead
They are supposed to be feeling the heat.
Duke's Blue Devils were threatened tonight by something more powerful than talent or drive.
They were threatened by the familiarity of Seton Hall, by the presence of friends on the court when their minds were supposed to be strictly on business.
At the end of a difficult night of Hurley versus Hurley, not even the mixed emotions mattered.
Three victories from what could seem an overwhelming goal, Duke took one more step toward becoming the first repeat national champion in 19 years.


Sheldon Wasserman, Wine Writer, 51
Sheldon Wasserman, a wine writer and internationally recognized authority on Italian wines, died on Tuesday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Lyons, N.J.
He was 51 years old and lived in Piscataway, N.J.
He died of cancer, said his former wife, Pauline.


Sports of The Times; '10 Years, 10 Years, 10 Years'
WHEN the judge's words hit Mike Tyson, he just sat there.
When he was dethroned as the heavyweight champion by Buster Douglas two years ago in Tokyo, he fumbled his mouthpiece with his gloves before he was counted out.
But now he just sat at a wooden table as Judge Patricia J. Gifford's three phrases hit him harder than any three punches ever had.
"Ten years," the judge said in sentencing him for one count of rape and two counts of criminal deviate conduct.
"Ten years. Ten years."


METRO DIGEST
THE LIFE OF A MALL
It has been five years since opening of the Danbury Fair Mall, one of the climate-controlled selling palaces opened in the New York City area during the 1980's that left the region with, some experts say, the greatest concentration of giant shopping malls anywhere and helped foster a new suburban culture in the nation's most urban area.
And while the recession has battered malls across the region, at top-of-the-line like the Danbury Fair, vacancies are virtually nonexistent; there are still crowds, and life, in a place that is now one of the region's centers, goes on.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  LOOKING BEYOND THE NUMBERS
With reported crime down in every major category in New York City last year for the first time since the early Eisenhower years, police officials are asking themselves: Did we do something right?
Experts agree that it is too soon to say.
But the provisional answer appears to be yes.
News analysis, B3.
TOUGH TIMES FOR THE SHERIFF
New York City's sheriff, Phillip A. Crimaldi, came under fire this week for his aggressive campaign to crack down on parking-ticket scofflaws through such hard-nosed tactics as seizing their cars and leaving them stranded on the street.
B3.
OFF-DUTY POLICEMAN KILLED
An off-duty New York City Health and Hospitals police captain was shot and killed, apparently during a robbery, in the lobby of his Queens apartment building.
The officer died a little more than 30 minutes later at the City Hospital Center at Elmhurst.
B3.
HOMELESS MAN SET AFIRE ON SUBWAY
A 39-year-old homeless man was set on fire and severely burned as he slept on a subway train passing through the Bronx, the transit police said.
It was the most serious in a series of similar attacks on homeless people on New York City trains this year, and advocates for the homeless said the attack reflected growing intolerance of homeless people.
B3.
Officials deny delay in handling of ambulances at plane crash site. B2.
Council approves plan for commodities exchange. B3. REGION  COURT RULES FOR ALLSTATE
In a ruling that raised questions about the state's method of regulating automobile insurance rates, a court has allowed New Jersey's largest insurer, the Allstate Insurance Company, to raise its rates for high-risk drivers by an average of nearly 17 percent.
B5.
A BURGLAR'S BOUNTY
As burglars went, Frank J. Mascari cut a remarkable swath across Long Island.
Made up in a bouffant hairdo and furs, he carefully picked the homes of middle-aged and elderly women, making off with thousands of heirlooms, including oil paintings, Persian rugs and crystal, from 1986 until his arrest in 1989.
Now, some of his bounty will be put up for sale at an auction being held by the Nassau County District Attorney's office.
B5.
Assemblyman to oppose Pallone in New Jersey Congressional race.
B5.
Our Towns B5


Market Place; Salomon's Error Went Right to Floor
The erroneous sale of many millions of dollars in stock by Salomon Brothers, which roiled the stock market just before it ended trading on Wednesday, might have been prevented.
But the sale, which Salomon said was caused by a clerical error, was not halted even after it was questioned by a New York Stock Exchange official, the Big Board said yesterday.
"A senior floor official talked to the Salomon desk and was told that it was accurate," said Richard Grasso, the president of the stock exchange, speaking of some of the huge sell orders that Salomon sent to the floor at 3:56 P.M., just before trading ended at 4 P.M.


Avnet's New President To Remain in California
Roy Vallee was appointed president and chief operating officer of Avnet Inc. yesterday, but he has no plans to move from his home in Southern California to Avnet's headquarters in Great Neck, L.I.
Mr.
Vallee, who is 39, has already been running Avnet's electronic-components distribution operations, which account for more than 80 percent of the company's $1.7 billion in revenues, from offices in Culver City, Calif.


Thai Army Seems to Back Away From Its Nominee
The veteran politician who was poised to become Thailand's next Prime Minister appeared to be losing the support of key military and political leaders today after the disclosure by the United States that he had been linked to drug trafficking.
The politician, Narong Wongwan, gave no immediate signal that he would withdraw his name from consideration as Prime Minister, even as his alarmed supporters met today to discuss their response to the American allegations.
Mr.
Narong has denied any involvement with narcotics trafficking.


Belgrade Journal; Amid Serbia's Battle Cries, Old Voice of Dissent
At the age of 80, Milovan Djilas has reached the point in life when most men feel that they have earned the right to peace.
But after nearly 40 years of being reviled by Communists for apostasy, he now finds himself the target of the Serbian nationalists who have succeeded them in Belgrade's seats of power.
In the 1950's and 1960's, Mr.
Djilas was one of the Communist world's most renowned dissenters.
He served nine years in prison for writings and interviews that criticized the Government of Marshal Tito, whom he fought alongside as a partisan in World War II and to whom he was considered a possible successor until his abrupt dismissal from the Communist leadership in 1954.


A Designer In Paris Seeks A Shake-Up
Thierry Mugler, who helped make the introduction of new fashions an extravagant theatrical event, did not stage a show this week.
He presented his fall and winter styles to small groups of store buyers in his headquarters on the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honore.
The styles emphasize his superfeminine curved silhouettes, with new attention to construction and detail.
There is the usual emphasis on taut midriffs, arched hiplines and different kinds of revealing necklines; sometimes the neckline is lowered in back only.
In keeping with current concern for lengths, there is a new skirt length covering the knees in front and curving up to show the backs of the knees.
Some trousers have overtly sexy or tailored tops.


Report Says Old and Cheap Drug For Heart Attacks Is Also Safest
Final results of the largest study directly comparing the drugs used to dissolve blot clots when a patient is having a heart attack confirm that all three are equally effective in saving lives but that the oldest and cheapest is the safest.
The cheapest drug, streptokinase, was linked to fewer strokes than the newer and more expensive drugs, T.P.A. and Eminase, authors of the study from the University of Oxford are reporting in tomorrow's issue of The Lancet, a medical journal published in London.


The Art Market
New Home for a Museum
The list of small American museums that have hired foreign architects to build glamorous, attention-grabbing buildings continues to grow.There was the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, whose jewel-like structure, designed by the Japanese architect Arata Isozaki, has helped raise the institution's profile.
On April 8, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art is breaking ground for its new building, designed by the Swiss architect Mario Botta.
And this week, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago unveiled its $55 million scheme for a classically modern, 125,000-square-foot building of glass, limestone and aluminum panels and a one-acre sculpture garden on a dramatic two-acre site overlooking Lake Michigan.
It is the first American commission awarded to the Berlin architect Josef Paul Kleihues.


Art in Review
John L. Moore  M-13 Gallery  72 Greene Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow


New York Is Singing A Song of Whitman
DANIEL BARSHAY has a deceptive walk.
With no evidence of strain, he glides along in the passing lane of million-footed Manhattan's high-speed sidewalks.
It is the walk of a man who believes that his feet, wherever they are pointed, are taking him toward a delightful surprise.
It is the walk of Walt Whitman.
For 13 years, Mr.
Barshay has been absorbing the poet's persona as his full-time job.
The transformation is more or less complete.
Its public dimension is the one-man show that Mr.
Barshay performs before diverse audiences across the country.
In May he will bring it to New York City as part of the two-and-a-half-month celebration, organized by the Museum of the City of New York, that began yesterday on the 100th anniversary of Whitman's death.


What We're Not Doing In Welfare Programs
To the Editor:
"Arkansas Pushes Plan to Break Welfare Cycle" (March 14) describes the too-common plight of a woman on welfare placed in a high school equivalency program from which she has no hope of graduating.
Federal law requires states to enroll a percentage of welfare recipients in work or education programs, but fails to stipulate that the programs be geared to the interests and qualifications of the applicants.
The high school equivalency classes have become a dumping ground for women whom the states want to use as statistics to show compliance, regardless of potential to complete the course.


The Spoken Word
CONFERENCE ON THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, Center for American Culture Studies, Columbia University, Broadway and 116th Street.
Participants include Derrick Bell, law professor at New York University; David Garrow, author of "Bearing the Cross"; Diane Nash, former director of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee; Howard Zinn, author of "A People's History of the United States"; Barbara Ehrenreich, author of "The Worst Years of Our Lives," and Cornel West, director of the black studies department at Princeton University.
Today, 9 A.M to 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 854-8253.
READING, Universalist Church, 160 Central Park West, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Bobbie Ann Mason, author of "Love Life," "In Country" and "Spence and Lila," will read from her writings.
Sponsored by the Writer's Voice.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $8.
Information: (212) 875-4128.
POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Readers include Bernadette Mayer, Claire McMahon, Steve Roth, Lisa Janssen and Herschel Silverman.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: 674-0910.
STAGED READING, Church of the Holy Trinity, Parish Hall, 332 East 88th Street, Manhattan.
A staged reading of "George Orwell This Evening," a play by Mark Weston, featuring the actor Dudley Stone.
Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 289-8369.
"ISAAC BASHEVIS SINGER IN NARRATION AND SONG," Metropolitan Synagogue, 40 East 35th Street, Manhattan.
A presentation in English and Yiddish by the Golden Peacock, an ensemble led by Leonard Wolf.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 679-8580.


Bigotry, Punished
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries has finally been ousted as chairman of the black studies department at New York's City College.
His suitability to run the department had been compromised by his penchant for bigoted remarks and behavior.
He can stay on as a tenured professor.
But the decision to strip him of his chairmanship will help restore credibility to the department and the college.
Dr.
Jeffries came to the college to head the new black studies department in 1972.
He has remained in the post ever since and was unanimously elected to another three-year term last June.
In July, however, he gave a speech that, among other things, blamed "rich Jews" for financing the slave trade and blamed Jews and the Mafia for negative portrayals of blacks in movies.


Review/Photography; People in Their Cars, Driving Along
As if hot-rodders and the highway patrol weren't enough, now drivers in Southern California (and elsewhere) have to contend with Andrew Bush.
Mr.
Bush, driving a small Japanese car with a 4-by-5-inch camera in the passenger seat and a small photographic strobe in the back, pulls up beside other cars and photographs their drivers as they cruise along.
Not surprisingly, some people feel threatened by this invasion of the semipublic-semiprivate space of their cars.
One driver was so incensed that he chased Mr.
Bush for miles and, when he caught up with him at a stoplight, grabbed the keys of his car and demanded that he hand over the film.
However questionable Mr.
Bush's method may seem from the point of view of traffic safety, the pictures that he brings back, a selection of which are presented in "Andrew Bush: Vector Portraits" at the Lieberman &amp; Saul Gallery in SoHo, are both funny and fascinating.
With his unorthodox approach, Mr.
Bush has found an effective way of recording an important aspect of contemporary culture.
Frequently he catches people in the strange trance state that freeway driving induces or glancing idly at the cars around them.
At the same time, his large color prints reveal the visual connections between the way people and their cars look, lending support to the idea that you are what you drive.


Topics of The Times; Funny Woman
Nancy Walker was a funny woman.
Millions remember her as Rhoda's mother on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and its spinoff "Rhoda," and as that waitress in the commercial who was forever scrubbing counters with the "quicker picker-upper." And when they do, they smile.
But those who were lucky enough to have seen her on Broadway know she was something more.
She was, like Bert Lahr, a great clown.
Both had a memorable way with dialogue; even so, it was something in the way they moved that made them hilarious.


Suit Takes Redistricting To U.S. Court for Ruling
A Republican official from western New York filed a lawsuit in Federal court in Rochester today asking the court to take control of New York's Congressional redistricting process.
The lawsuit, for the first time, places the fates of New York's 34 members of Congress in the hands of the courts, raising the prospect that a Republican-dominated Federal judiciary and not the State Legislature will draw new district lines.


RESULTS PLUS
SWIMMING  Stanford Sets Medley-Relay Record  Jeff Rouse of Stanford set an American record in the backstroke portion of the 400-yard medley relay and helped the Cardinal win the event in American-record time at the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's swimming and diving championships yesterday in Indianapolis.
Rouse swam the 100 backstroke in 46.22 seconds, bettering the old mark of 46.50 set last year by his teammate Brian Retterer.
Rouse, Tyler Mayfield, Trip Zedlitz and Retterer won the relay in an American-record 3 minutes 8.39 seconds, breaking the old mark of 3:09.70 set by Texas in 1990. (AP) GOLF Eggeling Takes One-Shot Lead  Dale Eggeling, who has won only once in 16 years on tour, shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday in Rancho Mirage, Calif., to take the first-round lead in the Nabisco Dinah Shore tournament, one of the Ladies Professional Golf Association's four majors.
Eggeling was one shot ahead of Michelle McGann and Liselotte Neumann of Sweden after the opening 18 holes at Mission Hills Country Club. (AP) SKIING Different Day, Same Result  Erik Schlopy, a teen-ager from Stowe, Vt., and veteran Diann Roffe-Steinrotter of Potsdam, N.Y., made it two for two yesterday in Winter Park, Colo., claiming the men's giant slalom and women's slalom titles, respectively, in the United States Alpine championships.
Schlopy and Roffe-Steinrotter had won the super giant slalom races that opened the nationals on Wednesday. (AP)


Bob Evans Farms Dismisses Campbell
Bob Evans Farms Inc., a restaurant and food-products company in Columbus, Ohio, said yesterday that it had dismissed Campbell-Mithun-Esty Advertising in Chicago after seven years over what the company called "irreconcilable differences."


A Showboat Takes a Dignified Tack
SETH WEINSTEIN is probably the only respectable businessman in this very respectable community willing to admit he has ever spent time inside a guest room at the old Showboat Hotel here.
The Showboat opened in 1961 and became the waterfront hot spot for revelers, notably boaters who grew thirsty during the arduous coastal journey from Westchester County or across the Sound from Long Island.
Just steps from the moorings stood the bar, with an ersatz New Orleans ambiance that pleased the owner, if not all the properly proper people in this very affluent Fairfield County community of notables.


Art in Review
Lari Pittman
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow


New AIDS Education Plan Is Called Inadequate


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  SHAKY VICTORY IN SEOUL
South Korea's ruling party, split by disagreements and reeling from a poor showing in national elections, faces an uncertain future as presidential elections near.
A3  AN AIR OF UNEASE IN RIO
Ten weeks before an immense environmental summit meeting, a cloud of corruption and governmental confusion menaces Rio de Janeiro.
A6  A REBIRTH OF RELIGION
Places of worship that were gutted in officially atheist Albania are being reconsecrated as religion emerges from the shadow of the state.
A3  OLD WARRIOR, NEW BATTLE
Belgrade Journal: The old enemies have lost their power, but not their bitterness toward one of Yugoslav Communism's most renowned dissenters.
At 80, this author is being attacked on a new front.
A4  TERRORIST EXTRADITION ORDERED
A Palestinian official of the terrorist Abu Nidal organization is ordered extradited from Libya.
A5  SUNBLOCK, SOUTH AMERICAN STYLE
Despite warnings about ozone depletion, a little sunscreen is all that comes between some South American sunbathers and the object of their worship.
A7  ISRAEL CONFIDENT ON ARMS
Israeli officials said today that they were certain they would be cleared of suspicions that Israel had illegally supplied China with technology from Patriot missiles.
A8  ANOTHER TEST FOR SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa has intensified its insistence that an interim government cannot be achieved until the African National Congress renounces armed struggle altogether.
A9  GERMANY TURNS OFF AID TO TURKEY
Germany, Turkey's biggest trading partner, said that it would halt deliveries of military goods until it cleared up accusations that the Turkish Army is using the equipment in a drive against Kurdish separatists.
A10  VICTIMS OF POLITICS
Political attacks that have taken 62 lives have raised new and troubling questions about Turkey's handling of a crisis that pits a Marxist Kurdish separatist group against the authorities.
A10  SUPPORT SLIPS FOR THAI LEADER
The man poised to become Thailand's next Prime Minister is losing support after the disclosure by the U.S. that he has been linked to drug trafficking.
A11  A little girl has become a big issue in British campaign.
A11 Austrian President Walheim, isolated, will dine with Chancellor Kohl A11 National A12-21  DEMOCRATS CRITICIZE BROWN
As leading Democrats declared support for Governor Clinton, the chairman of the Democratic Party rebuked former Governor Brown for his "scorched-earth policy" of verbal assaults on the front-runner.
A1  WEAKENING AN ETHICS PROPOSAL
In 1988 Governor Clinton and his advisers altered an ethics law for public officials so it exempted the Governor from the requirements imposed on legislators to disclose potential conflicts of interest.
A1  BUSH IS CALLED FINE BUT. . .
President Bush was declared to be in perfect health after his annual medical check-up.
But in an unusual postscript, his doctor said that three years of the Presidency had put Mr.
Bush under great stress and that he needed to lighten his schedule.
A1
Bush is looking to foreign affairs to revive his political strength.  A21
With Tsongas's blessing, his New York backers fought on.
A20  MRS.
FOLEY UNDER THE LIGHTS
For 23 years Heather Foley has worked as a mysterious but powerful aide to the man who became the House Speaker.
But the spotlight has turned to Mrs.
Foley, now a central figure in the investigations of the House.
A12  KENNEDY FILES MAY BE OPENED
Trying to refute suspicions fanned by the movie "J.F.K.," lawmakers proposed making public almost all Government files on the assassination of President Kennedy.
A16  CULLING OUT THE RESERVES
The Defense Department proposed eliminating 140,000 positions from the National Guard, which long been a sacred cow of Congress.
A1  U.S.
ADMITS FAULT AT A-PLANT
The Government acknowledged that it shared responsibility with its contractor, Rockwell International, for environmental crimes at a nuclear weapons plant in Colorado.
A12
GETTING USED TO FREEDOM
Benny Powell and Clarence Chance tried to adjust after being imprisoned 17 years on what a judge said were concocted convictions.
A14  BRAIN TISSUE THAT REGENERATES
The adult mammalian brain, long thought to be incapable of repairing itself, possesses a pool of immature cells that can be coaxed to divide into new nerve tissue, scientists have found.
A1  OLDER, CHEAPER AND SAFER
A study comparing the drugs used to dissolve blood clots during heart attacks confirmed that all three are equally effective but that the oldest and cheapest is the safest.
A14  RECOGNIZING AN EATING DISORDER
Researchers have defined a common disorder marked by long eating binges.
Scientists hope to devise therapies to help those with the disorder control their weight.
A16  INDICTMENT FOR EDUCATION CHIEF
Bill Honig, California's widely respected education chief, has reportedly been indicted under a state conflict-of-interest law involving public money paid to four educators who worked with his wife.
A12  Law Page B16  A Bush nominee for the Federal judiciary and the death penalty debate.
The pace of executions climbs as appeals run their course.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 MALLS TRANSFORMING LANDSCAPE
It has been five years since the mall sprang up in Danbury, Conn., one of the climate-controlled selling palaces opened in the New York metropolitan area during the 80's that left the region with, some experts say, the greatest concentration of giant shopping malls anywhere.
And as the malls have mushroomed, downtowns have faltered.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-36  A 10-week tribute to Whitman.
C1  Film: "Ruby." C1  Theater: "The Virgin Molly." C3  Sports B6-13  TYSON SENTENCED IN RAPE CASE  Mike Tyson, the former world heavyweight boxing champion, was sentenced to 10 years in prison, with 4 years suspended, for his rape conviction.A1  Basketball: Indiana and Kentucky advance; Seton Hall falls.
B7  Obituaries A23  Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35  Editorials A34  Mr.
Brown's flat tax: tilted.
Rudman frees himself.
Bigotry, punished.
Topics: Senate sense.
Letters A34  A. M. Rosenthal: Popeye's revenge.
A35  Leslie H. Gelb: Bush report card.
A35  William S. Sessions: F.B.I. needs industry's help on crime.
A35  Janlori Goldman: Why cater to Luddites?
A35  Garry Trudeau: Believe it.
Not!
A35


Officials Deny Delay in Handling of Ambulances at Crash Scene
The agency that runs La Guardia Airport said yesterday that there was no delay in allowing the first ambulances to get to the runway where a jetliner crashed Sunday night, killing 27 people.
Officials of the agency, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, issued the denial a day after the Queens District Attorney said he was investigating the "adequacies" of the emergency response to the crash, partly because of a report that the first ambulances to arrive had to wait 12 minutes before they could move to the crash site.


EXECUTIVES
*
Aramis Inc., New York, a fragrance unit of Estee Lauder Cos., named Sharon Le Van senior vice president, marketing and creative services.  *
Economy Fire and Casaulty Co., Freeport, Ill., a unit of Kemper Corp., appointed Eric Putney executive vice president and chief operating officer.


First Boston, in Shift, Names Vice Chairman
The First Boston Corporation appointed a new vice chairman yesterday in a management shake-up that reflects the changing priorities on Wall Street.
James R. Maher, the 42-year-old current vice chairman, will leave the firm, to be succeeded by Robert M. Baylis, 53, the chief of the equities and research departments.
Mr.
Maher is also chief of investment banking, and his post will go to Charles J. Murphy, 44, whose specialty has been helping corporate clients to raise money.


Policeman Dies in Crash In Queens
A 31-year-old New York City police officer was killed early yesterday in a car crash while responding to a call in a Queens housing project.
He was the second New York City police officer to be killed this year and the first in the line of duty.
The officer, Joseph Alcamo, a four-year veteran of the Police Department, was killed when a patrol car in which he was riding skidded out of control into a utility pole about 1:30 A.M. in Rockaway Park in the Rockaways, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Norris Hollomon.
He was on his way to assist the housing police with an emotionally disturbed person.
Officer Alcamo was pronounced dead at 3:30 A.M. at Peninsula Hospital.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: President's Health; Doctor Says Bush's Health Is Fine But Advises a Break From Stress
President Bush emerged from an annual medical check-up today with a declaration from his doctor that he was in "perfect" health.
But in an unusual postscript, the doctor went out of his way to say that three years of the presidency had put Mr.
Bush under great stress and that he needed to reduce his hectic schedule and take vacations more often.
In an interview, the doctor, Burton J. Lee 3d, said Mr.
Bush needed a place where he "can go for a few days of peace and quiet so his engine can come back in balance from the incredible pace that he normally keeps."


Houses Passes a Student-Aid Bill Aimed at Middle-Class Families
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted tonight to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


Bridge
Upsets in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals have followed a pattern here this week.
On Monday the No. 1 seed was defeated, on Tuesday the No. 2 seed; in each case by teams that have since been defeated.
On Wednesday, the No. 3 seed was eliminated.


Maverick Resigns S.E.C. Post
Edward H. Fleischman, the senior commissioner at the Securities and Exchange Commission and its most vocal in-house critic, abruptly resigned today.
He cited frustrations over his limited impact on the agency and many sharp disagreements with its chairman, Richard C. Breeden, over policy issues and the management of the agency.
Mr.
Fleischman, one of three Republicans on the five-member commission and a 1986 Reagan appointee, has nevertheless been the agency's staunchest critic during the Reagan and Bush years.
He often argued for a much more limited role for the agency, leaving the markets to run and police themselves.


Custodial Helper Is Held in Rape of Girl, 8
A school custodial helper was arrested yesterday on charges that he raped and sexually abused an 8-year-old student at a Bronx elementary school last week, the police said.
The police identified the custodial helper as Jose Cruz, 22 years old, of 2837 Valentine Avenue in the Bronx.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, said that Mr.
Cruz had lured an 8-year-old girl into the auditorium at Public School 129, at 2055 Maples Avenue, and had assaulted her behind the curtain on the stage.


French Seek Libya Extradition in Ship Attack
A French judge today ordered the extradition from Libya of a Palestinian official of the terrorist Abu Nidal organization, which is accused of planning a July 1988 attack that killed nine people on a cruise ship off the coast of Greece.
Three of the victims were French.
The judge, Jean-Louis Bruguiere, France's senior terrorism investigator, formally requested the extradition of Samir Mohammed Ahmed Khaidir.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Texas Instruments Inc., Dallas, offered $150 million of 8 3/4 percent noncallable notes due in 2007 and priced at par through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Common  *
America Online Inc., Vienna, Va., completed the sale of 2.3 million shares through Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons and Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co. at $11.50 a share.


CHRONICLE
Reminiscing about how he and Dr.
Seuss developed their animated cartoons, CHUCK JONES said it was in 1930, before television.
"Since it was for theaters, we didn't know who was the audience, so we just tried to make each other laugh," he said.


Congressional Roundup; Bill Would Open Kennedy Death Files
Leading lawmakers from both houses of Congress today introduced legislation to make public almost everything in Government files on the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963.
Representative Louis Stokes, the Ohio Democrat who headed the House investigation into the killing in the late 1970's, said the measure was supported by Congressional leaders and had no discernible opposition.
"This resolution is going to sail through," he predicted.


Hervey Johnson, 51, Law Professor, Dies
Hervey M. Johnson, a professor at Pace University's School of Law for 16 years, died on March 20 at Presbyterian Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Money Fund Assets Fall
The assets of the nation's 592 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.38 billion, to $499.87 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 215 institutional funds increased by $778 million, to $172.18 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were down by $1.13 billion, to $179.93 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.03 billion, to $147.76 billion, the institute said.


U.S. Shares Blame in Abuses at A-Plant
In a frank admission of how poorly it managed the nation's nuclear-weapons industry, the Government today acknowledged that it shared responsibility with its contractor for environmental crimes at a nuclear-weapons plant in Colorado.
But the Government argued that it did not know about all of the violations, and today the contractor, the Rockwell International Corporation, pleaded guilty to 10 crimes, 5 of them felonies, and agreed to pay an $18.5 million fine, the second-largest penalty ever for environmental violations.


Apple and Sharp Form Electronics Venture
Apple Computer Inc. and the Sharp Corporation of Japan today announced an agreement to cooperate on the development of a computerized consumer electronics product.
The agreement was part of Apple's effort to apply its software expertise to develop a series of new devices, which John Sculley, Apple's chairman, called "personal digital assistants." These machines, many of which will be small enough to hold in a hand, would allow people to store their appointments and phone lists, send and receive information or store reference information.


Melvin Moore, Radiologist, 68
Dr.
Melvin Moore, a Brooklyn radiologist practicing in Bensonhurst for 35 years, died suddenly on Sunday.
He was 68 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack as he was driving a car on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, his family said.
They said there were no other injuries.


Sampling the St. Regis: Exaltation at a Price
ONE of the nice things about the St.
Regis-Sheraton Hotel is the three staff members on call to serve each guest.
Included, of course, is a maitre d'etage on each floor.
"We ordered better weather," the first of several said as he carefully hung our clothes.
"But sometimes it doesn't arrive."


U.S. Inspection Annoys Israel
As United States Army inspectors wound up an investigation here, Israeli officials said today that they were certain they would be cleared of suspicions that Israel had illegally supplied China with technology from Patriot missiles.
The Israelis were so confident that they called on the United States to make the inspectors' findings public.
Some officials went so far as to insist on an apology, and the new United States Ambassador said that seemed reasonable.


Cho-Liang Lin Concerts
The violinist Cho-Liang Lin is to inaugurate a Chinese-American Musicians Series with two concerts this weekend, tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, in Manhattan.
Joining Mr.
Lin for the program of chamber works will be Robert Chen, a violinist; Hsin-Yun Huang, a violist; Bion Tsang, a cellist, and Wu Han, a pianist.
They will play Dohnanyi's Serenade in C, Prokofiev's Sonata in C for Two Violins and Schumann's Piano Quintet.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Edward H. Fleischman resigned abruptly from the S.E.C.
The agency's senior commissioner and its most vocal in-house critic, he cited frustrations over his limited impact and many sharp disagreements with the chairman, Richard Breeden.  [ D1. ]
The U.S. economy edged up just 0.4 percent at an annual rate in the final three months of last year, an even weaker pace than previously calculated, the Government said.  [ D1. ]


Ariad Raises $46 Million In Placement
A new company that has only about a dozen employees and is years away from bringing any products to market has raised $46 million through a private placement of stock, the largest start-up financing in the history of the biotechnology industry.
The financing by Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. is considered large even in an industry that in the last year has seen dozens of early-stage companies sell stock to the public and raise sums that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.


Sotheby's Withdraws Sale Of a Disputed Painting
Sotheby's yesterday withdrew a painting whose provenance was questioned by dealers and auction house experts from its sale in London next Wednesday.
Last week, the auction house maintained that it had sworn evidence that the painting, by the 17th-century Dutch Mannerist Joachim Wtewael, had been given to a Russian soldier by residents of the Schlossmuseum, a small museum in a castle in Gotha in central Germany during World War II and that there was no legal barrier to its sale.
Sotheby's had prominently displayed the painting, "The Holy Family With Saints John and Elizabeth and Angels," on the cover of its sale catalogue and estimated that the work would bring $1 million to $1.3 million.


This Time, Tar Heels Aren't Top Dogs
The words "underdog" and "Tar Heel" appear incongruous when discussing North Carolina and the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
But North Carolina, seeded fourth in the Southeast Regional, finds itself in that position for Friday night's game against Ohio State, the top-seeded team.
The Tar Heels are making their 12th consecutive appearance in the round of 16, their 18th straight appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament and have been in the tournament 22 times in the last 26 years.
That kind of tradition breeds basketball blue blood and makes it tough for North Carolina to be considered an underdog to any opponent.


At the Bar; Sustained By Dictionaries, a Judge Rules That No Word, Or Word Play, Is Inadmissible.
When Bruce M. Selya became a judge a decade ago, he vowed that his opinions would not be the bromidic, otiose, etiolated, jejune, dessicated tomes that had put him to sleep as a practitioner.
He would forge at his judicial smithy a gleaming alloy of wit and erudition rather than the leaden dross pounded out on lesser legal anvils.
In other words, Judge Selya, who sits on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston, would forsake the usual boring legalisms for lively, polysyllabic words of the sort found only in the unabridged Oxford English Dictionary, puns of the sort once found in the headlines of Barron's and The Sporting News, and figures of speech found primarily in the "Block That Metaphor!" department of The New Yorker magazine.


Critic's Choices; Betty Carter At Alice Tully
Betty Carter belongs on the short list of the great jazz singers.
She is a dauntless improviser, someone who learns all of a song's structures in order to remake them on the spot, reinventing a melody line, toying with a rhythm, finding a note that would never seem to fit and then making it crown a chord.
With her velvet-and-mahogany voice, she can turn a ballad into a luxurious, leisurely caress, dropping into a breathy low register near the baritone range; she can also scat-sing rings around a tune, bouncing syncopations against every offbeat but the expected one.
Through the years, she has also rediscovered songs -- from failed musicals, from obscure movies -- that deserve to be part of the canon of pop standards.


Defending Kurds, Bonn Cuts Arms Flow to Turkey
Apparently reacting to strong domestic pressure, Germany said today that it would halt deliveries of military goods to Turkey until it cleared up accusations that the Turkish Army is using the equipment in a drive against Kurdish separatists.
The announcement by Germany, Turkey's biggest trade partner and principal ally in Western Europe, came as officials reported arson and bomb attacks by sympathizers of the Kurdish cause against Turkish diplomatic and commercial offices in several German cities and in Strasbourg, across the Rhine in France.


Machado Faces Trial in Venezuela
JULIO MACHADO, the Milwaukee Brewers relief pitcher who shot and killed a woman after a traffic accident in Venezuela last December, has reached an out-of-court settlement to pay the woman's parents $38,000 but still faces trial on a charges of unintended murder and illegal possession of a handgun.
Machado, who has been released from prison but restricted to the country pending trial, has admitted firing a shot after getting into an argument with the driver of the car the woman was riding in but maintains he acted in self defense because he thought he was going to be robbed. (AP)


Less Crime to Count; Was It Community Policing? Experts Try to Explain Drops in Major Crimes
With reported crime down in every major category in New York City last year for the first time since the early Eisenhower years, police officials are asking themselves: Did we do something right?
Experts agree it is too soon to say.
But the provisional answer appears to be yes, at least to some extent.
While the turnabout was marginal in some cases and hardly qualifies as a trend, examination of the figures suggests that the department's sweeping program of neighborhood patrols and saturation coverage seems to be having an effect in at least certain high-crime precincts.


N.H.L. Owners Drop the Gloves
As another round of talks ended and Monday's strike deadline drew closer after bargainers negotiated for more than nine hours in Toronto, the owners of two National Hockey League teams who were not on the scene voiced hard-line positions in the battle between the Players Association and the owners over a new collective bargaining agreement.
Ed Snider, owner of the Philadelphia Flyers and a member of the owners' bargaining committee, said he did not fear a strike.


On My Mind; Popeye's Revenge
Let us continue with the adventures of Evans, Novak and Popeye.
The first two are, of course, the famous American journalists.
Popeye is an Israeli.
But the famous journalists keep confusing him with some kind of secret American agent.
So the adventures are a little comical.


Nancy Walker, 69, of 'Rhoda' And TV Commercials, Is Dead
Nancy Walker, who played Rhoda's mother, McMillan and wife's housekeeper and a paper-towel-promoting waitress in television commercials, along with a string of brassy, loudmouthed cutups on Broadway, died on Wednesday at her home in Studio City, Calif.
She was 69 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said Frank Liberman, a family spokesman.


Chrysler Sale Of Mitsubishi
The cash-strapped Chrysler Corporation has sold nearly half its stake in the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation for about $205 million, the Japanese company said today.
Mitsubishi, Japan's third-ranked auto maker, said in a statement that Chrysler sold 43.6 million shares on Thursday to 11 Japanese companies, about half of which belong to the Mitsubishi group, and to institutional investors in Europe.


Review/Film; A Youngster Against The Power of Apartheid
John G. Avildsen directs the pious South African drama "The Power of One" as if it were "The Anti-Apartheid Kid," chronicling the brave attempts of a little blond, blue-eyed boy named P. K. to fight racial injustice.
The battle is waged mostly in terms of toothless platitudes ("a waterfall begins with only one drop of water") and ugly encounters with racist bullies, encounters that Mr.
Avildsen prefers shooting in close-up whenever possible.
On the affirmative side, the boy's every triumph is accompanied by Johnny Clegg's soaring choral music (and Hans Zimmer's instrumental score).
P.
K. (played by three actors of different ages, none of whom especially resemble the others) is introduced as a small, wise child during a shapeless preamble.
Typically, this part of the film is edited so unemphatically that it appears to place equal emphasis on the little boy's bed-wetting and the death of his mother.
It is half an hour before the excellent Morgan Freeman and Armin Mueller-Stahl enter P. K.'s story as an African prison inmate and the boy's kindly German grandfather, thus giving the film at least some reason to exist.


Both Error and Terror Dog Rushdie's Steps
To the Editor:
Irfan A. Omar errs in asserting that the subject matter Muslims find offensive in "The Satanic Verses" is "the highly abusive portrayal" of the wives of Mohammed (letter, March 6).
The wives of Mohammed are not portrayed in the novel by Salman Rushdie, for which its author is under threat of death.


Brown Uses a New Putter And Ties a Course Record
Taking advantage of ideal conditions and a hot new putter, Billy Ray Brown tied a course record with a score of 64 today to take a three-shot lead over six golfers after the first round of the Players Championship.
With the usually treacherous TPC Stadium Course softened by an overnight rain, Brown birdied nine holes, including the watery final three, to fire his lowest round in six seasons on the PGA Tour.


Brazil Debt Payment Set
Brazil will pay banks $8 billion in overdue interest this year on its foreign debt, a top central bank official said today.
Brazil has only paid part of its ovredue interest and according to Arminio Fraga, the bank's international affairs director, an additional payment will be made as soon as a debt-rescheduling agreement is reached.


19 People Are Hurt as South African Blacks Clash With Riot Police


Books of The Times; Flying Off to Paradise and Finding Only Real Life
Paradise News By David Lodge 294 pages, Viking. $21.
The gifted British writer David Lodge has long been fascinated by the consequences of plucking characters out of their normal environment and depositing them in an alien culture.
It's a time-honored device, of course, frequently employed by the likes of Henry James, who was fond of packing off naive young Americans to Europe; and Mr.
Lodge -- who is an honorary professor of modern English literature at the University of Birmingham in England -- has already used it several times in his own novels to great comic and emotional effect.
His early novel "Out of Shelter" (1970) chronicled the adventures of a naive teen-ager who leaves the grim postwar world of England to spend a summer with his sister in Germany.
And "Changing Places" (1975) depicted the hilarious results of an academic job swap between a retiring British humanist and a swaggering American post-modernist.


Knight Feels Relaxed After Invigorating Run
Their seasons began more than four months ago, on the same court, in the same game.
Now, Indiana and U.C.L.A. will meet again.
The stakes are much higher.
Both teams won tonight in West Regional semifinals at the University of New Mexico and advanced to Saturday afternoon's championship, with the winner advancing to the Final Four in Minneapolis.


U.S. Science Teaching Faulted
American students generally do not receive a good science education, especially if they are female, black, Hispanic or poor, according to a report made public today by the Department of Education.
The major reason for the overall poor performance of American students on the 1990 Science Report Card, one of a series of national tests in several subjects conducted for the Federal Government, is that science is not given a priority in the curriculum.
Fewer than half the nation's elementary schools and only about one-third of its high schools have made science education a priority in the curriculum, the report says.


Review/Film Festival; Seduction's Aftermath In a Comedy From Cuba
"Adorable Lies," Gerardo Chijona's new Cuban comedy, tries very hard to be bright and cheery, even madcap, but there is something melancholy about it.
It prompts the suspicion that the director and his associates cannot themselves believe in the carefree world they want to create.
The film even seems inhibited in its subject matter, as if this gentle send-up of Cuban movie makers couldn't possibly offend anybody of authority, the characters being too peripheral to matter seriously.
Chief among these are Jorge Luis, a young would-be director; Sissy, the pretty young woman he seduces by promising her a role in a nonexistent film, and Flora, Luis's jealous wife.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the week at 19,636.99 -- its lowest close in five years.
For the day, it fell 248.50 points, or 1.25 percent.
For the week, the index lost 548.1 points, or 2.7 percent.


New Claims By Jobless Up by 15,000
The number of people filing new claims for unemployment benefits climbed by 15,000 in the second week of March, the Labor Department said today, pointing to what various economists say is likely to be a lackluster, slow-to-arrive recovery.
The department said 447,000 people filed for unemployment benefits in the week ended March 14, up from a revised 432,000 the previous week.
It had previously put the number of new claims in the March 7 week at 433,000.


Dr. Paul Brancato, 68; Hematology Specialist
Dr.
Paul Brancato, a hematology specialist and the medical director of Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn, died on March 16 at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhasset Hills, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


ALBANIA'S CLERICS LEAD A REBIRTH
"Even a dog would not have slept where we had to," said Haxhi Hafiz Sabri Koci, the religious leader of Albania's Muslims, the largest of this country's three major religions.
Mr.
Koci, whose title is Mufti, showed his hands -- toilworn, the joints of some fingers swollen out of shape from his years in prison.


Review/Film; A Motorcycle Epic With Echoes of the 60's
The best thing about "Roadside Prophets," a film that blatantly aspires to be a 1990's answer to "Easy Rider," is its motorcyclist's-eye-view of the desert Southwest.
As Joe (John Doe) and Sam (Adam Horovitz) scour the highway for a mythical casino, they whiz through vistas more magical than any of the psychedelic visual effects in the film's 1969 forerunner.
Like "Easy Rider," "Roadside Prophets," which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, is a boys-on-bikes American odyssey drenched in an attitude of would-be hipness.
Abbe Wool, who wrote and directed the film, collaborated on the screenplay for the well-regarded punk-rock movie "Sid and Nancy." The two stars of "Roadside Prophets" are each admired figures in a particular pop subgenre.
Mr.
Doe once led the Los Angeles post-punk rock band X, and Mr.
Horovitz is a member of the rap group the Beastie Boys.


Pretoria Presses Mandela's Group To Disband Army and Yield Arms
The policy of armed struggle against white minority rule that the African National Congress suspended more than 19 months ago, has re-emerged as the latest obstacle to negotiations between the Government and the congress.
The Government of President F. W. de Klerk has intensified its insistence that the African National Congress renounce armed struggle altogether, disband its guerrillas and disclose its arms caches before an interim government now under discussion can be achieved.


For Children
Pet-Adoption Van
Various locations  (212) 876-7700  Recommended for all ages  Today and tomorrow


Shareholder Vote Set On Sale of Sears Units
An Allstate Insurance agent has succeeded in placing a shareholder resolution on the agenda for the coming annual meeting of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, which operates Allstate, even though his status as a stockholder is unclear.
The National Neighborhood Office Agents Club, an association of Allstate agents, said yesterday in a statement that Hazard J. Bentley, an Allstate agent in Montgomery, Ala., had submitted a shareholder resolution requesting that Sears's board of directors commission an independent study to determine what the value of the company would be if it were to spin off its financial services divisions, including Allstate.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article yesterday about former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s proposals for a flat tax referred incorrectly in some copies to the source of a critical analysis made available to The New York Times.
The analysis was ordered by Mayor David N. Dinkins, and a copy was provided to The Times by people who are close to the campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton and who are outside the Dinkins Administration; it was not provided by Mayor Dinkins.


Review/Art; Contemplating Shiva As the Cosmos Forms
As the centerpiece for the second of its "Objects in Context" exhibitions, intended to bring a single work into sharp focus, the Asia Society has chosen a sculpture from its Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Rockefeller 3d Collection.
It is a bronze Shiva Nataraja or Lord of the Dance, made toward the end of the 10th century A.D. under the Chola Dynasty of south India.
This splendid Hindu image is accompanied by 50 others of bronze, stone and wood, most of them on loan from American public and private collections.
There is no real Western equivalent to the Nataraja image.
Like much Indian religious sculpture, it is highly conceptual in nature.
Although the god, dancing the cosmos into existence, is humanlike, his body is actually a subtle composite of animal and vegetal forms: an arm is modeled on the shape of an elephant's trunk, a leg on that of a tree.
Every detail has symbolic import, from the objects the figure holds in his four hands (a drum to beat out the rhythm of life; a pot of flames to destroy it), to the faint, imperturbable smile on his face.


Julian J. McShane, 72, Ex-Distillery Executive
Julian J. McShane Jr., a former president and chief executive of the Jim Beam Brands Company, the makers of distilled beverages and other products, died on Sunday at his home in Peoria, Ill.
He was 72 years old.
He died of gastro-intestinal bleeding, his family said.


Specter of Strike Scrambles Cable Schedules
As Vin Scully might say, the sword of Damocles is hanging over the National Hockey League as its players prepare for a possible strike next Monday at noon.
If the players strike, it will endanger the last regular-season games and the Stanley Cup playoffs, leaving gaping holes in the schedules of the Madison Square Garden Network, SportsChannel and SportsChannel America.
Officials from each network hope they will lose only the regular-season games.
"The only dates we could be affected on the regular season are April 2, when the Rangers are home against Pittsburgh and on April 4, at Toronto," said Marty Brooks, a senior vice president of the MSG Network.
The former game would be replaced by a Knicks game now set to be broadcast on MSG II; the latter by a replay of a Mets-Yankees afternoon exhibition baseball game.


Critic's Choices; The Montreal At Carnegie
"Benjamin Britten and the Sea" might be a good title for musical life in New York City this weekend and next.
Providing a fanfare (and quite by happy accident, I'm sure) for the Metropolitan Opera's presentation of "Billy Budd" on April 4, Charles Dutoit, the conductor, and his Montreal Symphony Orchestra will come to Carnegie Hall tomorrow night and play Britten's Four Sea Interludes, the instrumental sequences that join the various scenes of his other maritime opera, "Peter Grimes."
This is orchestral music of surpassing beauty, richly colored, roiling with tidal energy and yet as transparent as the green Gulf Stream.
Britten was an original in the best sense of the word.
His music sounds as if it has its natural place in the evolutionary procession of style, yet on closer examination one discovers that it is unlike any other music around it.


Canadian Judge Calls Air Crash Avoidable
The head of a Canadian air crash inquiry said today that the crash at La Guardia Airport on Sunday night that killed 27 people could have been avoided if warnings in a report on a similar accident in Canada three years ago had been heeded.
The official, Justice Virgil P. Moshansky of Alberta's highest court, made the comment as he issued a voluminous final report on a crash of a Fokker F28 jet in Dryden, Ontario, on March 10, 1989.
The report blamed ice on the wings in part for the crash that killed 24 people.


Tourists Warned on Some Ex-Soviet Lands
The State Department has warned American citizens against traveling to disturbed areas of Russia and four other newly independent states because of political unrest and violence.
New travel warnings issued this week also mention widespread shortages of medicines and aircraft fuel and an increase in crimes against tourists throughout the former Soviet Union.


Knicks Squander Lead But Hold Off Nuggets
The Knicks continued their habit of winning dangerously.
Holding off a furious fourth-quarter rally by the Denver Nuggets, the Knicks escaped McNichols Arena tonight with a 106-104 victory.
The victoryclinched an Eastern Conference playoff spot for the Knicks (44-25) with 13 games remaining.
It was their fifth consecutive victory, and it moved them four and a half games in front of the Boston Celtics in the Atlantic Division.


Foreign Affairs; Bush Report Card
Polls now show that Americans have more confidence in Democrats than in President Bush on every issue except foreign policy.
A solid majority still sees him as a real pro on world affairs.
Which means Mr.
Bush will try to capitalize on this advantage in the campaign.
Which means the Democratic contender has no choice but to counter that the old pro is overrated.


TRANSPORTATION: Avoiding the Bridge


Ranger Chant: 'We're No. 1'
The Rangers had the night off but won the overall points title when Vancouver was beaten in Pittsburgh by the Penguins, 7-3.
As a result, New York is guaranteed the home-ice advantage throughout the National Hockey League playoffs.
When you haven't won a Stanley Cup since 1940, every edge counts.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Tsongas Candidacy Is Showing Some Signs of Revival in New York
Describing himself as "struck" by his 20 percent showing in the Connecticut primary, even after his withdrawal from the Presidential race, Paul E. Tsongas said tonight that New York voters could "send a message" by voting for him in the state's Democratic primary on April 7.
While hardly amounting to a formal re-entry into the campaign, Mr.
Tsongas's comments clearly indicated that he was re-evaluating his withdrawal in light of continued question about the political viabilty of the two remaining candidates, Gov.
Bill Clinton of and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr.


Stocks Close Day Mixed; Dow Up 8.28
Stock prices were mixed in moderatly heavy trading yesterday, with blue-chip issues firm, and the broad market weaker.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended at 3,267.67, up 8.28 points for the day.
Analysts said the market hardly reacted to yesterday's news that the United States economy edged up at an annual rate of just four-tenths of 1 percent in the final three months of last year, a pace that was even weaker than previously calculated, and that the number of Americans filing first-time claims for unemployment benefits jumped to 447,000 for the week ended March 14.
Instead, traders looked ahead to next week, when a fresh batch of economic data is due, including March consumer confidence and unemployment.


Diner's Journal
Expedition Through the Far East
Trekking through the menu at Asia, the new polycultural restaurant on Third Avenue at 67th Street, is like taking one of those tour packages of 9 countries in 10 days with almost everything thrown in except croissants and coffee with the Prime Minister of France.
O.K., that's a little exaggerated.
But when I saw Asia's menu, which embraces the cooking of more than 10 Asian countries, my gastronomic warning lights started flashing.
To many East Siders, Asia's expansive, good-looking space is still associated with the former eat-and-run fish house called Oscar's Salt of the Sea.
After that came two ill-fated efforts, Le Laurier and Alexandra's.


Art in Review
'Bridges and Boundaries: African-Americans and American Jews'
The Jewish Museum at the New York Historical Society  Central Park West at 77th Street  Through July 19


Which Tyson Will Emerge From Behind Bars?
For now, Mike Tyson is a convict, with the prospect of six years of prison time awaiting him.
But with good behavior, that jail term could be reduced by half, and three to four years from now Tyson could be ready to return to the boxing business.


New Jersey Court Lets Allstate Raise Auto Rates Nearly 17 Percent
In a ruling that raised questions about the state's method of regulating automobile insurance rates, a court has allowed New Jersey's largest insurer, the Allstate Insurance Company, to raise its rates for high-risk drivers by an average of nearly 17 percent.
A day after Insurance Commissioner Samuel F. Fortunato had rejected a rate increase for dozens of companies, a state appeals court ruled on Wednesday that Allstate could raise its rates next week on customers formerly insured through the state's high-risk pool, the Market Transition Facility.


Run Fair Project In Wisconsin Test
A pilot project to monitor political advertising during the Presidential campaign to try to eliminate unfair or misleading messages will be tested a second time.
The participants in Project Run Fair announced yesterday that they had selected Wisconsin, which has its primary on April 7, as the second test site.
The first test of the project, sponsored by the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the League of Women Voters and the Markle Foundation, came during the New Hampshire primary.


At the Movies
Return of the Pods
It's happening again, this time in Selma, Ala.
The alien pods are back, duplicating and replacing the human population, just as they did in Don Siegel's classic "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" in 1956 and in Philip Kaufman's remake in 1978.


Where to Celebrate Walt Whitman for the Next Two Months
"Democracy's Poet: A Walt Whitman Celebration" will feature a variety of events around New York City and on Long Island through May 31 to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the death of Walt Whitman.
The Museum of the City of New York has organized the celebration, with the help of many cultural and educational organizations.
Grants were provided by the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, the National Endowment for the Humanities and The New York Times Company Foundation.
Unless otherwise noted, all events are free. Times and dates are subject to change.


House Speaker, Under Criticism, Says He Has No Plans to Resign
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, the official with overall responsibility for the House bank and post office, said today that he had no intention of resigning from his post because of the uproar surrounding the two institutions.
"I'm elected as Speaker to be Speaker in this Congress," Mr.
Foley said at his daily news conference.
"I'm going to do my best to carry out that responsibility and to move both on the legislative program and internal improvements in House administration, management and operations, which I think is important to do."


Credit Markets;
The Tennessee Valley Authority, the operator of one of the nation's largest hydroelectric systems, plans to sell a $1 billion bond issue that might have a 50-year maturity.


For the Environmentalists, Hurdles on the Road to Rio
Ten weeks before a giant environmental summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro, the conference is clouded by giant woes: a corruption scandal, the replacement of Brazil's environmental leadership, the slow approach of a cholera epidemic, and doubts over whether President Bush will attend.
Calling Mr.
Bush's attendance "decisive," President Fernando Collor de Mello told reporters here today that he telephoned the American leader on Wednesday to urge him "to strongly consider" traveling to Rio for the June conference.
So far, 60 heads of state, including leaders of almost all industrialized nations, have confirmed their participation in the summit meeting, officially called the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.


After 17 Years, Sunshine and Freedom
Benny Powell was up with the sun on his first morning of freedom today, in a hurry to make up for 17 years in prison on a what a judge has called a concocted murder conviction.
"I'm a workaholic," he said.
"I'm trying to get my business established."
For Clarence Chance, who was also released on Wednesday, the world of freedom somehow did not seem big enough to contain him.


Region Rethinks Its Dependence on the Sales Tax; Some Government Officials See Wobbly Revenue and an Unfair Burden on the Poor
In the 1980's, when conspicuous consumption was elevated to an art, county and state governments around the New York region enjoyed a spectacular stream of revenue from sales taxes, with receipts routinely rising more than 10 percent a year.
But when the recession hit, that stream slowed to a trickle, contributing to fiscal crises in Hartford, Albany and Trenton.
In New York, for example, where sales taxes bring in about a fourth of the state's revenue, state sales-tax receipts fell $323 million between 1990 and 1991, to $5.4 billion.


INSIDE
Releasing the J.F.K. Files
Trying to quell suspicions fanned by the movie "J.F.K.," lawmakers proposed releasing almost all files on the Kennedy assassination.
Page A14. 5 Found Slain in Queens
Three women and two men were found shot to death in a private house in Cambria Heights.
The police have no motive for the killings.
Page B1.
Rethinking the Sales Tax
With the recession, officials in the region are re-examining their dependence on the sales tax, finding it an unreliable revenue source.
Page B1.
A Painting With a Past
After its origin was questioned by dealers and auction house experts, a painting was withdrawn by Sotheby's from a sale next week.
Page C3.


New Nerve Tissue Generated From the Brain Cells of Mice
The adult mammalian brain, long thought to be incapable of repairing itself, possesses a pool of immature cells that can be coaxed to divide into new nerve tissue, scientists have found.
The discovery is the first compelling evidence that the adult brain retains the potential to generate fresh nerve cells, a talent ordinarily limited to the embryo.
Although the result is extremely preliminary and is still limited to experiments on mice, many scientists said it had broad implications for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's, as well as spinal cord injuries.


La Guardia Closed In Busy Time of Day
All takeoffs and landings at La Guardia Airport were canceled during the busiest part of the day yesterday afternoon, in part because of damage caused by the crash of a USAir jet on Sunday but also because of high winds and rain, aviation officials said.
A spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,
Allen Morrison, said service was affected between 4:30 and 6:13 P.M.
He could not say precisely how many flights had been disrupted or how many passengers had been affected.
"It is the busiest time of the day at La Guardia," Mr.
Morrison said, "so dozens of flights would have been affected." Many of the arrivals were diverted to Kennedy International Airport.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Worked to Exempt His Office From Ethics Code
As Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton backed a comprehensive ethics and disclosure law for public officials, but before it was approved by voters in 1988, Mr.
Clinton and his advisers altered it so that he and other public officials were exempt from the requirements, imposed on legislators, to disclose potential conflicts of interest.
The deletion of the provision that could have covered Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, a lawyer in a firm that does business with the state, occurred during a private drafting process.
The participants included Mr.
Clinton, close political aides and allies of the Governor, and a senior partner in Mrs.
Clinton's law firm named Webb Hubbell.
Stalled in State Senate
Although Governor Clinton's work on an ethics code attracted wide attention and debate in Arkansas, the deletion of the conflict-of-interest provision for non-legislators -- and Mr.
Clinton's role in that deletion -- has apparently never been disclosed before.


Quotation of the Day
"You have to get away, to relax, to get a change of pace, to let your hair down, come out in old clothes without someone taking a telephoto picture of you, to be able to swear a little if you shank a shot on the golf course, and this guy does not have many opportunities to do that." -- DR.
BURTON J. LEE, the President's physician.  [ A21:1. ]


Art in Review
Peter Saul
Frumkin-Adams Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Through tomorrow


Economic Scene; Who Knows How To Bring Change?
ECONOMIC recovery has begun, but, as this week's primary elections in Connecticut showed, voters are still anxious over the state of the economy and are looking for a President who can change it.
Knowing this, all the candidates are promising to deliver "change," in one form or other.
President Bush, after more than 11 years of Republican control of the White House, blames the Democrats in Congress for the economic plight and for blocking his own proposals to cure the economy.
In effect, he is saying, like President Reagan before him, "We are the change."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Democrats Give New York's Hungry Press Something to Chew
Everyone knows how tough it is to be a New York City newspaper columnist.
Every day you have to deal with touchy ethnic groups, ignorant editors, outraged readers.
Then every four years, you are confronted with a bunch of uppity out-of-towners who, it seems, can't even speak proper English.
"Jerry Brown said 'very unique,' " grumbled Jimmy Breslin, the Newsday columnist.
"Bill Clinton uses the word 'shafted.' How can you run for President when you talk like that?"


Asian Concerns Sued By Loral Over Chips
The Loral Fairchild Corporation said yesterday that it had filed a suit charging big Japanese and South Korean consumer electronic companies with using a proprietary Loral computer chip process in their products.
The suit was filed in September in a Virginia Federal court, a Loral spokesman said yesterday, and then transferred to the Eastern District of New York late last year.
Loral had not previously announced that it had filed the suit.
The Loral spokesman said the suit was currently in the discovery, or investigative, stage and had not gone to trial.


Why Zurich's Bad Idea on Drugs Went Wrong
To the Editor:
I might agree with Gerald W. Lynch and Roberta Blotner in "Case for Decriminalizing Drugs Dies in Zurich" (letter, March 13) that drug decriminalization and legalization are bad ideas, if only Zurich's so-called "Needle Park" had been an example of either.
But the drug free-for-all that flourished at Platzspitz was the result of an unplanned local compromise not representative of any drug policy reform proposals.
What developed at Needle Park was the worst of both worlds.
The park was an island of limited decriminalization in the midst of one of the most harshly prohibitionist societies in Europe.
Platzspitz became Needle Park only gradually, as addicts congregated at the park in recent years.
Local authorities tolerated drug activities there largely to ghettoize the drug problem.


Michigan State and Wisconsin Topple Hockey East Opponents
The western invaders, Michigan State and Wisconsin, knocked Boston University and New Hampshire, the Hockey East teams, out of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament tonight.
The scores in both East Regional games were 4-2, and the eastern teams were shut out in the final periods of both games.
Michigan State (23-10-8) will next play mighty Maine (31-3-2), the team ranked first in the polls most of the season, and Wisconsin (25-13-2) meets St.
Lawrence (22-8-1) here on Saturday.
The Black Bears and the Saints had byes on this opening night of the tournament.


Financial Aides Scramble To Bolster Olympia &amp; York
Bankers and financial advisers continued scrambling yesterday to shore up the imperiled Olympia &amp; York empire, a spokesman for the company and several analysts in Toronto said.
The company is trying to arrange fresh bank loans and to extend maturing debt to meet short-term cash needs.
Olympia &amp; York is negotiating with the Bank of Nova Scotia, which has a $220 million first mortgage on the Scotia Plaza office tower in Toronto, one of the Toronto-based company's many holdings, for a one-year extension on an interest payment due next week.
The tower is one of the Canadian assets with unencumbered equity, and the banks are likely to try to divide it up as collateral for undersecured loans.


Why Zurich's Bad Idea on Drugs Went Wrong; Medical Marijuana
To the Editor:
We were saddened but not surprised by the Government's March 10 announcement that it would bar any extension of medical marijuana use (news article, March 21).
The Public Health Service justifies this action by pointing to supposed damage to the lungs or immune system and the availability of better treatments.
But these are obviously pretexts.
Thirteen patients are receiving marijuana legally for glaucoma, muscle spasms, severe pain or the nausea and vomiting caused by AIDS and cancer chemotherapy.
To get official approval, all of them had to go through a process so rigorous it could be better termed an obstacle course.
There is no evidence that any of them has been made sicker by marijuana in any way or that marijuana has ever impaired anyone's health by compromising the immune system, as the Government suggests.


Trends, in the City of What's Hot/Not
Long skirts, adopted with caution in America, are already the rage here, especially when they are very long and black and unzipped provocatively, swirling above precarious platform shoes.
"Thirty seconds after a trend happens, boom, they're onto it," said Marjorie Steinman, the fashion director of Candie's, a New York licensing company, as she watched the fashion crows, all wearing long black skirts, troop out into a courtyard of the Louvre this week during the fall and winter couture showings.


Austerity Never Had It So Good
Even with a booming market and record profits, talk on Wall Street nowadays is restrained about multimillion-dollar salaries and often peppered with references to cost control.
And nowhere has that gospel been preached with more solemnity than at Salomon Brothers, the errant brokerage badly tarred by scandal last August.
Warren E. Buffett, Salomon's interim chairman and cost-conscious, regular-guy billionaire in residence, takes every opportunity to lecture Wall Street on the virtues of changing its free-spending ways.


PENTAGON SEEKING 140,000 REDUCTION IN RESERVE FORCES
Challenging one of Congress's political sacred cows, the Defense Department today proposed eliminating 140,000 military reservist positions in the next two years to balance cuts already made in the shrinking active armed forces.
Lawmakers have traditionally shielded the National Guard and service Reserves from deep cuts, partly because of the economic benefit their constituents reap from the part-time salaries and local armories.


Jordan Won't Be Investigated For Gambling, Police Say
A spokesman for the Beaufort, S.C., Sheriff's Department said yesterday that Chicago Bulls star Michael Jordan will not be investigated for gambling on golf and poker games on Hilton Head Island, where he owns a vacation home.
Sgt.
P.
J.
Tanner said Beaufort law enforcement officials have obtained "bits and pieces of information" on money that Jordan has been said to have lost to two men from Gastonia, N.C., and another from Monroe, N.C. last October, including copies of several checks Jordan wrote, which have surfaced in the past three months.
Gambling in South Carolina is a misdemeanor, carrying a penalty of six months in prison and a $1000 fine.


Review/Film Festival; A New Vision of Leopold and Loeb
In "Swoon," his wildly audacious debut feature about the 1924 kidnapping and murder committed by Nathan (Babe) Leopold Jr. and Richard (Dickie) Loeb, Tom Kalin challenges his audience's every assumption about this story, and quite a few assumptions the viewer may never have made.
Mr.
Kalin's objective, dazzlingly well realized, is apparently to fracture any familiar notions and prejudices that have been incorporated into this much-studied story.
Removing all elements of the usual, and sometimes deliberately interjecting jarringly incongruous touches to disrupt the ordinary, Mr.
Kalin insists that his viewers re-invent the atmosphere that contributed to this enormously public 1924 crime.


Court Nominee's Death-Penalty Role Is Debated
Since 1980, Edward E. Carnes has gone to court eight times to argue for the constitutionality of the Alabama death penalty statute, paving the way for eight executions.
It was a role he played as head of the capital litigation division in the Alabama State Attorney General's office and a role that propelled him to prominence as a spokesman for those advocating limits on appeals in death penalty cases.
This role has placed Mr.
Carnes in the center of the debate over the death penalty for more than a decade, and it is expected to be the focus of opposition at a hearing on Wednesday on his nomination to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, which is based in Atlanta.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about liberalizing foreign sales of software that encodes information referred incorrectly to the National Security Agency in some editions.
It is part of the Pentagon.
In some editions the article also misidentified the Government office that controls the sales of cryptography software.
It is the Office of Defense Trade Controls in the State Department.


Fabled Calumet Farm Is Sold for $17 Million
Calumet Farm, for half a century the landmark farm in thoroughbred racing, was sold at auction to the horseman Henryk deKwiatkowski for $17 million yesterday to help pay the $150 million in debt that plunged it into bankruptcy last July.
The changing of the guard took place with pageantry and emotion in a 200-foot-long tent on the lawn at Calumet Farm in Lexington in the heart of the Kentucky bluegrass country where Whirlaway, Citation, Criminal Type and other champions once grazed.


Ernest J. Clark, 86, A Projects Engineer Under Robert Moses
Ernest J. Clark, the engineer who designed and supervised the construction of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, the Brooklyn Heights Promenade and several other projects for Robert Moses, died on Wednesday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Foley's Spouse No Stranger to Power
For 23 years, Heather S. Foley worked in the shadows of Capitol Hill, a mysterious, reclusive figure attached to a rising star in the House of Representatives.
As the unpaid chief of staff to her husband, Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington State, she grew in power as he ascended the ladder, from committee chairman to majority whip, majority leader and finally Speaker of the House.
In contrast to her husband, a gentle, friendly man whose success was built on his congeniality, Mrs.
Foley is blunt-spoken and strong-minded and has become increasingly resented and feared as her power has grown.
It is a familiar pattern in which the one spouse's toughness enables the other to be easygoing.


Landrum, Cut by Pirates, Joins Yanks for a Tryout
Bill Landrum has a glove, cleats and a truck full of gas.
He is searching for a job.
Still stunned over his release by the Pittsburgh Pirates last Thursday, the 33-year-old relief pitcher auditioned for the Yankees today.
Of the 10 clubs who expressed interest in Landrum, the Yankees were the first to ask him to pitch.
Landrum obliged by throwing for 12 minutes and then underwent a magnetic reasonance imaging of his right knee as part of a medical examination.


Doctors Put Dinkins Back on Liquid Diet
Mayor David N. Dinkins's doctors have put him temporarily back on a liquid diet after an examination of his colon found continued inflammation from the diverticulitis that sent him to the hospital with fever and chills nearly three weeks ago, City Hall said yesterday.
But the Mayor's personal physician, Dr.
Adrian L. Edwards, said in a written statement that a colonoscopy performed on Wednesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center showed "absolutely no evidence of any disturbance of the lining of the colon which would suggest a malignant process or a pre-malignant process," meaning no evidence of polyps or tumors.


Sounds Around Town
The Belmont Playboys
The Belmont Playboys, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
As a rockabilly band, the Belmont Playboys have retro stylings: the slicked-back hair, the pointy-toed shoes, the devilish goatees and Gretsch guitars.
But when this North Carolina foursome revs into a Chuck Berry or Johnny Cash tune, the line between past and present dissolves into frenzied energy and blues-boogie beats.
Their licks may not be new, but they play with the kind of tender, loving abandon that's rare in any time or place.
Tonight they open for Webb Wilder and the Beatnecks, tomorrow night for Loup Garou Zydeco.
Shows both nights are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Admission is $10.
Alice Donut and Revenge
Alice Donut, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 982-4052.
Punk rock, free jazz, social commentary, Black Sabbath, Betty Crocker and serial killers all live happily together in "Revenge Fantasies of the Impotent (Alternative Tentacles)," the latest release from the New York group Alice Donut.
The singer Tom Antona's tragicomic view of pop culture is offset by noisy guitar and a tight, slamming rhythm section.
The group isn't above an occasional foray into bad poetry, but its verbal and sonic experimentations usually lead into interesting territory.
Show time is tonight at 1 A.M.
Admission is $8.
The Horse Flies
The Horse Flies and the Hank Roberts Band, Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, 157 Montague Street, at Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 858-2424.
Experiments with folk music can be a tricky process.
Too much improvisation dilutes the style's fundamental simplicity; too much technology buries its traditional aspects.
The Horse Flies layer guitar, fiddle and banjo over minimalist electronic rhythms, forging a tentative bridge between old-timey folk and modern composition.
The cellist Hank Roberts plays with a grace that gives his instrument's heavy tones a gorgeous, melancholy beauty; his quartet will also make excursions into folk.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $13 and $15.


Ozone Depletion Threatening Latin Sun Worshipers
Eduardo Betancourt has worked for 13 years as a lifeguard on these golden beaches.
Seven hours a day, he says, he watches his Uruguayan compatriots and vacationers from Argentina lie out in the sun developing tans the color of coffee beans.
But now, Mr.
Betancourt says, he is worried: The sun has felt hotter in recent years, he believes, and he says it now "stings." For the first time this year, his skin peeled.
Others here also say they have noticed the change, which Mr.
Betancourt attributes to the ozone destruction scientists say has lessened the earth's natural protection from the sun.


Thief's Ill-Gotten Objets d'Art to Go Up for Auction
As burglars went, Frank J. Mascari cut a remarkable swath across Long Island.
Made up in a bouffant hairdo and furs, he carefully picked the homes of middle-aged and elderly women, making off with thousands of valuable items, including oil paintings, Persian rugs and crystal, from 1986 until his arrest in 1989.
Now, some of the bounty taken by Mr.
Mascari, a transvestite hairdresser known to his friends as "Frankie Mascara," could be yours.


Review/Film; Oh Well, Jumping Isn't Everything
The torrent of your-mama comic insults heard in the basketball film "White Men Can't Jump" suggests constant antipathy among the film's racially mixed cast of characters.
So does the fact that the actors are forever shoving one another's shoulders when they deliver these lines.
But this film unfolds in an uncommonly sweet, harmonious climate, one in which rude remarks are the sine qua non of friendship.
And that benign atmosphere becomes a large part of its charm.
As in his earlier "Bull Durham" and "Blaze," the writer and director Ron Shelton cares much more about how his characters play the game than whether they win or lose.
However fundamentally aimless his gamesmanship proves to be, it does have a lot of style.


Review/Theater; When You're a Marine Named Molly
The Virgin Molly," by Quincy Long, is a military-service comedy with a modern twist, dealing in a capricious manner with a charge of homosexuality in the peacetime United States Marines. At the center of the play is a sweet-tempered Kentuckian whose first name happens to be Molly. That name and aspects of his behavior cause him to become the object of barracks-room derision. As the play begins (at the Atlantic Theater Company), a military investigation is under way but not exactly in progress.
With a tip of his hat to "Catch-22," Mr.
Long finds comedy in contradictions, beginning with a captain who is embarrassed at having to express any kind of command.
Whatever it is that he is doing, he would prefer not to be doing it.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; White House Sees Trips As Way to Revive Bush
The White House is counting on a series of foreign trips and diplomatic events in coming months to resurrect foreign policy as a campaign issue and reassert President Bush's primacy in world affairs before the fall election.
For Mr.
Bush and his advisers, the effort is in part an attempt to redirect the political debate as the White House veers between campaign themes in its search for an approach that will cure Mr.
Bush's political problems.


Review/Theater; When You're a Marine Named Molly
The Virgin Molly," by Quincy Long, is a military-service comedy with a modern twist, dealing in a capricious manner with a charge of homosexuality in the peacetime United States Marines. At the center of the play is a sweet-tempered Kentuckian whose first name happens to be Molly. That name and aspects of his behavior cause him to become the object of barracks-room derision. As the play begins (at the Atlantic Theater Company), a military investigation is under way but not exactly in progress.
With a tip of his hat to "Catch-22," Mr.
Long finds comedy in contradictions, beginning with a captain who is embarrassed at having to express any kind of command.
Whatever it is that he is doing, he would prefer not to be doing it.


3 Die in Fighting in Southern Lebanon
Pro-Iranian Muslim fundamentalists exchanged artillery fire with Israeli-backed gunners today in southeast Lebanon, security officials said.
Three deaths were reported.
Voice of the South, the radio station of the South Lebanon Army, Israel's client militia, said two people died in an explosion in Kafr Hunah, on the border of Israel's "security zone." The Associated Press said a 14-year-old girl was killed in shelling in Ain Buswar in retaliation for the bombing.


Vote Setback Shakes Ruling Seoul Party
Two days after a poor showing in national elections, the governing party managed to regain a slim majority today in the National Assembly by wooing some independent candidates.
But the election upset has left the party riven by factional feuding, raising questions over its future and its probable candidate in the more important presidential election later this year.
The governing Democratic Liberal Party saw its 215 seats in the 299-seat Assembly slashed to 149 after Tuesday's polling, as voters reacted to signs of campaign fraud and a slowdown in the economy by throwing their support to a new conservative party and other opposition candidates.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.87
6.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.01
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.16
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.22
7.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.00
7.94
8.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.90
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.77
7.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Heart of the City Now Beats in the Mall
Here, as everywhere, it is just off the highway.
It is a great concrete box in an asphalt field and, with just a glimpse, a traveler can almost smell the scent of cinnamon and french fries that fills shopping-mall air everywhere.
It has been five years since the mall sprouted here, one of the climate-controlled selling palaces opened in the New York City area during the 1980's that left the region with, some experts say, the greatest concentration of giant shopping malls anywhere and helped foster a new suburban culture on the outskirts of the nation's most urbanized center.
Some Survive, Some Thrive
Within a 90-minute drive of Times Square there are now 48 of them, with an average of almost a million square feet each, which means there are 2.4 square feet of mega-mall for every man, woman and child in the region.


Art in Review
Dennis Balk
American Fine Arts  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow


Code of Ethics Rules Conduct of Lawyers; Minimum Obligation
To the Editor:
Marvin E. Frankel (Op-Ed, March 14) argues that the action taken against Kaye, Scholer by the Office of Thrift Supervision threatens confidentiality of communications between lawyers and their clients.
Mr.
Frankel does not take his analysis far enough.
The next step surely requires that a lawyer who knows or learns of a corporate client's widespread corrupt practices must demand at least that the client discontinue them and also that they be disclosed to the appropriate Government authority.
That was certainly Kaye, Scholer's minimum duty, assuming it had knowledge of illegal practices by Lincoln Savings.


Officer Is Killed In Jackson Hts. While Off Duty
An off-duty New York City Health and Hospitals police captain was shot and killed last night, apparently during a robbery, in the lobby of his Queens apartment building, the police said.
The officer died a little more than 30 minutes later at the City Hospital Center at Elmhurst.
The slain officer was James Rodriguez, 32 years old, of 91-08 32d Avenue, in Jackson Heights, the police said.
He had been assigned to North Central Bronx Hospital, said Steven Matthews, chief spokesman for the city health agency.
Mr.
Matthews said that officials at that hospital who knew Captain Rodriguez described him as "a fine officer and a friendly person."


Traffic Directions Weren't Necessary


A Film, a Leak and a Spat in Britain
"We didn't do it," said the Conservatives. "We didn't do it," said the Labor Party.
Midway through the least substantive British general election campaign in decades, all anybody seemed to want to know today was this: Who leaked the name of Jennifer Bennett, the 5-year-old girl whose yearlong wait for an ear operation was at the center of Labor's controversial television spot on Tuesday evening?


1 in 4 Scientists in Survey Suspect Fraud by Peers
A surprising one in four scientists suspect their peers of engaging in intellectual fakery, according to a new survey.
Driving the suspicious acts, respondents said, was the rat race atmosphere of modern science.


New York Sheriff, a Scofflaw Pursuer, Is Criticized
New York City's Sheriff, Philip A. Crimaldi, has come under fire for his aggressive campaign to crack down on parking-ticket scofflaws through such hard-nosed tactics as seizing their cars and leaving them stranded on the street.
After a heated hearing on Monday, in which witnesses accused the Sheriff of intimidating them or brandishing weapons to collect unpaid fines, the City Council came close yesterday to reprimanding Mr.
Crimaldi for what some Council members described as Gestapo-like actions.
Marshals Complaining
Councilman Noach Dear of Brooklyn, who heads the Council's Transportation Committee, planned to introduce a resolution urging Mayor David N. Dinkins to suspend the Sheriff's scofflaw program.
But he backed down after it became clear that he would not get the unanimous support needed to pass the resolution.


USAir Crash Survivor Says She Saw Ice on Wing Before Takeoff
One of the survivors of the USAir jet that crashed in a snowstorm at La Guardia Airport on Sunday night said yesterday that she saw considerable ice buildup on the right wing of the plane as it began to take off.
One of her flying companions, she said, warned her that if the pilot did not have the plane de-iced again they would all be dead.
The account by the survivor, Kathy Gray, contradicted a statement by the co-pilot of the plane that there had been no ice on the wing.
The possibility of ice accumulation on the plane's wings is one of the leading theories about why the jetliner crashed into Flushing Bay.


Agassi Is True to Country, But Mostly True to Himself
Andre Agassi without a tennis game is like Peter Pan without a shadow.
He's bereaved.
And motivated to a fault.
"What I need to do is believe in myself," said Agassi, who used to and used the belief to reach the No. 3 ranking in the world.
"People always say that winning makes you believe in yourself, but with me, it's a little different. It's believing in myself that makes me win. I just have to find the right way."


Islanders Step Back From the Precipice
The Islanders averted elimination from the playoffs with a 7-4 victory over the San Jose Sharks at Nassau Coliseum tonight.
But like the league strike situation, time is running out.
Unless a strike interrupts the last week of regular-season play, the Islanders will play five more games.
If they win them all, they can earn a possible 10 points to finish with 82.


Torborg Stashes Pencil And Names 5 Starters
The pitching for the Mets, according to Jeff Torborg, has come into its form, and so the manager's pitching chart for 1992 has at last taken its formal shape.
After making his plans with a pencil for weeks, Torborg has opted for ink.
Opening day: David Cone.


An Arson Suspect Is Arrested After Fire Destroys a Queens Grocery Store


People
*
Anthony L. Bucci, president and chief operating officer at MARC Advertising, Pittsburgh, was promoted to chief executive, succeeding Louis J. Cardamone, who remains chairman.


Restaurants
You know that this country has come a long way when you pull up a chair in a hotel restaurant -- one in the lobby, no less -- and order a meal that begins with spit-roasted sweetbreads and pheasant confit, followed by a stew of wood-grilled pigeon with barley and cured squash.
What's more, it is excellent.
Such refinement is all the more surprising in a fiercely hip, futuristic-looking place like the restaurant 44 in the Royalton Hotel.
Since the Royalton was refurbished in 1988 with the help of the architect Philippe Starck, its restaurant has had three incarnations.
First it was merely a sandwich outlet under the guidance of Larry Forgione, the owner of An American Place.
Then the full restaurant opened with Geoffrey Zakarian briefly as the chef and management by China Grill, an Asian restaurant on West 53d Street.
Recently, Mr.
Zakarian returned with a partner, Brian McNally, to run the operation.


Lawmaker in Trenton to Run for Congress
A Democratic Assemblyman, Robert G. Smith of Piscataway, announced today that he would oppose Representative Frank J. Pallone Jr., an incumbent, for the Democratic nomination in the Sixth Congressional District.
But Mr.
Smith also said he would join forces with Mr.
Pallone, in a sense, by suing to stop the dismantling of the Third District, which Mr.
Pallone now represents.
Mr.
Smith's suit would be the third in a series of legal challenges to the redistricting and the Congressional map it produced last week, reducing the number of districts in the state from 14 to 13.
Although New Jersey gained population over the decade, it did not grow as fast as other states, and thus will lose one seat.


Accounts
*
Entertainment Weekly, New York, to ADV Marketing Group Inc., Stamford, Conn., for consumer ads to appear within the magazine that will publicize coming special issues.
Billings were not disclosed.


Study Defines 'Binge Eating Disorder'
Researchers have defined an eating disorder that they say is far more common that either anorexia or bulimia and that accounts for a large proportion of seriously obese Americans who repeatedly try to lose weight but fail.
The problem, dubbed "binge eating disorder," is marked by frequent, uncontrolled and often hours-long eating episodes during which a person often consumes more than 2,000 calories, the amount a person would need for an entire day.


On Stage, and Off
Keeping 'Miss Saigon' a 'Sellout'
Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of "Miss Saigon," has acknowledged buying unsold seats to the musical during the January-February attendance slump.
By making such purchases he could maintain the perception in the theater industry (which follows the weekly grosses reported in Variety) that "Miss Saigon" was the only new musical of the past two seasons to sell out consistently, when, in fact, there were periodically empty seats.
Traditionally, producers have resorted to buying seats to their own shows only to remain above the stop clause, which is the weekly gross a production must maintain to avoid eviction by a theater owner.
That is not the case with "Miss Saigon," Mr.
Mackintosh says.
He says he bought the seats as "a marketing strategy for a mega-musical in its first year," a method he says he also used successfully with another of his Broadway shows, "Les Miserables." Although Mr.
Mackintosh would not confirm figures, members of the theater staff estimate that the producer purchased between 10 and 120 seats at various performances.
The Broadway seats 1,752.
Mr.
Mackintosh says he donated those tickets to charity groups.
His action became public after cast members started to question the consistent 100 percent attendance figure when, they say, large blocks of seats remained empty on week nights.
And, they asked, if the figure was correct, how could ads for the musical still offer "good seats available"?


Art in Review
Hans Namuth  Leo Castelli Gallery 578 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow


Review/Film: Ruby; Annals of an Assassin's Assassin
AS if heeding the advice of Jean-Luc Godard, who once said that the best way to criticize a movie is by making another, the English director John Mackenzie and the English writer Stephen Davis have concocted "Ruby," which they candidly describe as "speculative fiction."
Unlike "J. F. K.," Oliver Stone's kaleidoscopic consideration of the various conspiracy theories surrounding President John F. Kennedy's assassination, "Ruby" looks at the events in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, from a rather more modest point of view, which is not to say that its imagination doesn't run amok, sometimes deliriously.


Sounds Around Town
Two Newcomers
"New Stars of Jazz," the Church of the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Avenue at 90th Street, Manhattan, (212) 752-1428.
For its final concert of this season, the Heavenly Jazz series, which usually features well-established mainstream musicians like Dave McKenna, Kenny Davern and Scott Hamilton, is providing a concert showcase for a pair of relative newcomers: Danilo Perez, a 25-year-old Panamanian pianist who recently played with Dizzy Gillespie at the Blue Note, and Jesse Davis, also 25, an alto saxophonist from New Orleans whose first album for Concord Jazz, "Horn of Passion," brought him to wide attention.
They will form a trio with the bassist George Mraz, who played with Mr.
Perez in the Gillespie group.
For their concert on Sunday at 5 P.M., which benefits the Day School of the Church of the Heavenly Rest, tickets are $10, or $7 for students and the elderly.
Another Pizzarelli
John Pizzarelli and Big Band, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
The guitarist and singer John Pizzarelli winds up a series of Sunday evening concerts at the Ballroom this weekend with the 17-piece orchestra that played with him on "All of Me," his recently released debut album for RCA/Novus.
Mr.
Pizzarelli, who is the son of the celebrated guitarist Bucky Pizzarelli, will play and sing such jazz and pop standards from that album as " 'S Wonderful," "For All We Know" and "The More I See You." He will be backed by his regular accompanists -- his brother Martin on bass and Ken Levinsky on piano -- as well as the big band conducted by the trombonist Bob Alexander.
After his show, which is at 9 P.M. on Sunday, the band will continue playing for dancing.
Admission is $25 and there is a two-drink minimum.
Max Roach, Diversely
Max Roach, "To the Max," Count Basie Theater, 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank, N.J., (908) 842-9000.
The premiere performance of Max Roach's concert project, "To the Max," combining various ensembles he has developed over the past two decades, will take place this weekend in Count Basie's hometown, Red Bank, N.J.
The groups taking part are the Max Roach Quartet, the Double Quartet, the Uptown String Quartet, the Max Roach Chorus and Orchestra and "M'Boom," Mr.
Roach's eight-man, all-star percussion ensemble.
They will perform tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets for each performance are $22.50 and $16.50.
Following tonight's performance there will be a gala reception with Mr.
Roach and other celebrities, sponsored by the Monmouth Art Guild to assist the Count Basie Theater.
Tickets for both performance and reception are $75, most of which is tax-deductible.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic IssueS; Clinton on Blacks and Jews, and Himself
Gov.
Bill Clinton was scheduled to deliver what his Presidential campaign staff said would be an important speech on relations between black and Jews.
Instead, the Arkansas Governor yesterday morning talked of his own relations with blacks and his own relations with Jews.
In the context of a general message of brotherhood, Mr.
Clinton told a New York City audience of how, as a boy in Arkansas, he used to visit his grandfather's store, which had some customers "of African-American descent," and "hand out cookies to kids who came in without regard to their race."


Brown and Olazabal Share One-Shot Lead
As the wind began to blow and the greens started to harden, two players with three names shared the lead today after the second round of the Players Championship.
The first-round leader, Billy Ray Brown, and Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain were tied for the 36-hole lead with totals of 10-under-par 134.
They led Craig Parry and Davis Love 3d by one shot and Phil Blackmar and Nick Faldo by two.


Burmese Regime Evenhanded in Oppression
To the Editor:
Thaung Tun, a Myanmar (Burmese) embassy official, dismisses your coverage of the tragic situation on the Myanmar-Bangladesh border as "grossly inaccurate" (letter, March 7).
Although little else he writes accords with the findings of visitors to the region, he is correct in stating "There is no discrimination" against the Muslims of Myanmar in their treatment by the Government.


Review/Film Festival; A 10-Year-Old at the Wheel In a Road Movie About Cash
The protagonist of "Motorama" is a plucky 10-year-old named Gus (Jordan Christopher Michael) who, after overhearing one too many parental battles, steals his father's red Mustang and hits the road.
So short that he is barely able to see over the dashboard, he is nevertheless a good enough driver to hold his own on the open highway.
And in his baseball cap, sweat shirt and jeans, the boy suggests a pint-size Everyman.
The film, which will be shown today and tomorrow at the Museum of Modern Art as part of the New Directors/ New Films series, follows Gus's adventures across an unnamed fictional land that suggests America re-imagined as a surrealistic parlor game.
As Gus eludes a nosy highway patrolman and passes signs welcoming him to states with names like Essex and Bergen, one has the sense of his proceeding from square to square on a giant game board.
The currency looks a lot like Monopoly money.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Foreign Policy; Clinton Uses Loose Circle of Advisers
Even at this stage in the Presidential campaign, Gov.
Bill Clinton's foreign policy advisory team is still a loose collection of unpaid volunteers, distinguished by the absence of any single dominating guru and by the presence of a spectrum of traditional Democratic Party hawks and doves.
The unusually loose arrangement for advising Mr.
Clinton on foreign affairs is no accident.
In part it is a reflection of a campaign still primarily focused on domestic issues.
In part it is a reflection of Mr.
Clinton's own thinking that "we can no longer afford to have separate foreign and domestic policies," since economic policies at home increasingly determine any President's reach abroad.
And in part it is a deliberate attempt by the candidate to defuse the ideological feuds between the Henry Jackson-type conservatives and George McGovern-type liberals that have dogged the Democratic Party since the beginning of the cold war.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.00
5.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.01
4.02
5.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.16
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.28
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.94
8.00
8.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.93
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.78
7.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Opera; Strauss's 'Elektra' in a New Production at the Met
"Elektra" almost doesn't need a production.
The opera's set never changes.
It is simply the courtyard of the palace where Agamemnon once ruled and where now his wife -- his murderer -- reigns.
There is also not an elaborate amount of action.
Apart from the opening scene, Elektra, the King's daughter, half mad for revenge, never leaves the stage.
The drama is so excruciatingly inscribed in the score, so much a matter of Elektra's interior life, that the work can almost be as effective in concert or sung in front of a closed curtain.
Richard Strauss wrote an Expressionist symphony with characters.
But this one-act work poses greater challenges than might seem apparent at first.
It is no easy task to bring these characters to life, either through sound or through action.
And when Otto Schenk's new "Elektra" made its debut at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday night, the musical performance itself was quite strong, but the drama was often thwarted.
The staging was accomplished, but the acting was not.
I found myself attending to voices far more than characters.


China Is Warned Not to Veto Plan To Place U.N. Sanctions on Libya
After voicing opposition to a plan to impose Security Council sanctions on Libya, China has been warned by the United States, Britain and France that it will risk losing trade preferences from the United States and seriously damage relations with the other two countries if Beijing vetoes a resolution on the sanctions.
Because of China's opposition and a desire to drum up maximum support within the 15-nation Council, the vote, originally expected today, is now scheduled to take place on Monday, diplomats said.
Abstention Is Expected
But as a result of the warnings, delivered here and in Beijing, diplomats from the United States, Britain and France said they were now confident that China would abstain in next week's crucial Council vote, allowing them to impose a mandatory air-travel embargo against the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi starting on April 15.


Fetisov Goes to Court
The Devils were off yesterday, but defenseman SLAVA FETISOV spent several hours in custody in a Newark court as part of a dispute with his former agent.
Fetisov was taken into custody by United States marshals on orders of a Federal judge, who released him after a hearing.
The dispute revolves around a 1989 agreement Fetisov signed with MARK MALKOVICH, a classical music promoter from Rhode Island who maintains that he signed Fetisov and four other Soviet hockey players to agent contracts as the Soviet sports agency began to loosen its grip on athletes.
Malkovich has asked for more than $1 million from Fetisov to compensate for unpaid commissions and lost endorsements.


Trenton May Dance a Two-Step Tax Shuffle/Step 1: Cut Sales Tax. Step 2: Pay for It by Cutting a Tax Rebate Program.
With a $608-million rollback in taxes essentially a foregone conclusion, all eyes in Trenton have turned to the ticklish question of what will be cut from the budget to make up for the lost revenue.
A leading candidate for the block appears to be Gov.
Jim Florio's expanded Homestead Rebate program, a keystone of the Governor's legislative package that the new and all-powerful Republican majority seems bent on dismantling.
The Republicans, who enjoy veto-proof two-thirds majorities in both houses of the Legislature, are reluctant to say outright that the rebates will be cut, but the hints are less and less subtle.


Corrections
Articles on Feb. 26, March 11 and March 18 about the Democratic Presidential campaign rendered the name of an adviser to Paul E. Tsongas incorrectly.
He is Ted Van Dyk.
The Feb. 26 article and one on March 17 about the Tsongas campaign also referred incorrectly to Mr.
Van Dyk.
He served as a volunteer adviser to the Tsongas campaign; he was not hired as a senior adviser, as stated on March 17, and he is not a Democratic organizer, as stated on Feb. 26.


WALDHEIM IS GIVEN WELCOME BY KOHL
Chancellor Helmut Kohl met with President Kurt Waldheim of Austria in Munich today and then angrily criticized prominent Jews who had deplored the meeting as inappropriate.
In a nationally televised news conference after the meeting, Mr.
Kohl said he alone would decide with whom he was to meet in Germany.


Cone's Fastball Stops Yankees
David Cone, who had been searching for his best fastball all spring, discovered it tonight.
And the Yankees never caught up to it.
In his most dominant performance of the spring, Cone struck out seven and shut out the Yankees over six innings as the Mets won, 4-3, at Thomas J. White Stadium.


Slayings Shatter Community's Comfort
There had long been hints of trouble at 225-26 Murdock Avenue, a quiet street where West Indian immigrants carved from their neat red-brick row houses a sense of security apart from the rougher neighborhoods in Queens.
But no one could have foreseen the brutal end to that trouble.
Five people were killed -- including an elderly couple in their bed -- in a burst of violence so wild that the police found 33 9-millimeter shells in the home.


Patents; Golf Ball Designed To Be Hit Into Sea
Hoping to preserve the pastime of hitting golf balls into the ocean off cruise ships, a California entrepreneur has invented a ball that dissolves in water and, he said, overcomes environmental problems that have caused the sport to be banned.
Until recently, some cruise ships sold thousands of golfballs every month to passengers who enjoyed the pleasure of driving them into the sea.
The ships liked the game, too, because the balls sold for about $1 apiece.


Maker of USAir Plane Urged More Frequent De-Icing Plan
The manufacturer of the plane that crashed at La Guardia Airport on Sunday night recommended that airlines using its planes during snowstorms de-ice the wings more often than was done that night.
In a 1989 publication, the manufacturer of the Fokker F28 prescribed specific procedures that the crew of a plane should follow when taking off in a steady snow, including how the wings should be de-iced and at what intervals.


Review/Dance; Keeping And Losing Their Heads
Jody Oberfelder-Riehm made dancers struggle to get ahead -- and a head -- when her Overfoot Dance Company performed on Thursday night at the Ohio Theater.
"Head Trip," the first section of "The Head Trilogy," a new work, began with Lynn Brown, Anne Gfroerer and Lisa Powers bent over in an attempt to disentangle themselves from sculptural shapes that resembled lumps of earth.
Although no heads were visible on these dancers, one assumed that once they straightened up, their heads would naturally come into view.
But when they did stand erect, they had no heads whatsoever.
Thanks to ingenious costumes designed by Katrin Schnabl, with the assistance of Ms.
Powers, there was absolutely nothing visible above anyone's shoulders.


New Jersey Public Defenders Please Few
Penniless defendants facing serious charges in New Jersey's 535 municipal courts have long been guaranteed the right to counsel without charge.
In 307 communities, that means a paid public defender versed in the ways of the criminal bar.
But in the others it can mean Perry Mason du jour, a licensed practitioner who may never have seen the inside of a courtroom.
In about 40 percent of New Jersey's municipal courts, there are no paid public defenders.
Instead, defense lawyers are picked at random, often at the last minute, and must work for nothing.
These are assignments that the bar calls mandatory pro bono and that many lawyers call unconstitutional -- unfair to lawyers and defendants alike.


Review/Music; Previn Gives Three Also-Rans a Workout
There was a slightly quirky, off-center charm in the program Andre Previn conducted on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall and is to repeat on Tuesday evening.
The composers, Britten, Rachmaninoff and Prokofiev, are hardly strangers.
Yet in selecting from the works of each, Mr.
Previn sidestepped the obvious choices.
Instead of Britten's Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge, or the Simple Symphony, he offered the early Sinfonia da Requiem.
Instead of Rachmaninoff's crowd-pleasing Second or Third Piano Concertos, Mr.
Previn and the French pianist Jean-Philippe Collard collaborated on the less frequently heard First Concerto.
And the lure of Prokofiev's popular First and Fifth Symphonies was resisted in favor of the Seventh.
These works cannot truly be called rarities, given their availability on recordings.
But their concert hall appearances are few and far between.


Dow Off 36.23 Over Doubts On Recovery
Stock prices were down sharply in moderate trading yesterday, as investors' fears that the economic recovery would be sluggish left the market vulnerable to bouts of program trading.
Technology stocks, under pressure for weeks, were particularly hard-hit because of those doubts.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell to 3,231.44, down 36.23 points, or 1.11 percent, for the day and 44.95 points, or 1.90 percent, for the week.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Verbatim; Heckler Stirs Clinton Anger: Excerpts From the Exchange
Following are excerpts from an exchange on Thursday between Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Bob Rafsky, a member of the AIDS activism group Act Up, at Laura Belle, a nightclub in Midtown Manhattan, as recorded by the Cable News Network:
(Heckling begins)


Shoes Too Baggy or Tight? Turn a Disk
The same company that replaced shoelaces with Velcro tabs on sneakers two decades ago has devised a way to make shoes tighter or looser by turning a disk.
Puma recently introduced the Puma Disc System in Europe and plans to do so in the United States in July.
At the heart of the company's new line of men's tennis, running and cross-training athletic shoes is a rotating disk the size of a silver dollar. (A women's version is being planned, also.)


Land Price Begins Fall In Japan
After soaring to such heights that mere patches of Tokyo were worth more than the entire state of Florida, the price of land, Japan's most precious asset, is falling.
The National Land Agency reported on Thursday what real estate agents, bankers, some of the world's biggest manufacturers and scores of bankruptcy judges already knew: Land prices throughout the country have fallen significantly for the first time since 1975.


Avoiding the Bridge
The Port Authority is advising drivers to avoid the George Washington Bridge this weekend because construction has closed both the New Jersey-bound and New York-bound lanes on the lower level.
The lower level of the bridge will remain closed until 6 A.M.
Monday.


Judge Orders Lawyers for Haitian Refugees
A Federal judge in New York tonight reopened the legal battle over the treatment of Haitian exiles still at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, by ordering that they cannot be denied the help of lawyers in making formal applications for asylum.
Nearly all the Haitians remaining there have passed a preliminary interview and were not subject to forced return.


Writing New Chapter In Negotiations Lore
In the current book "Net Worth: Expoding the Myths of Pro Hockey," (Viking), the authors David Cruise and Alison Griffiths reconstruct a scene from 1957, when the first attempt to form a Players Association was defeated by team owners.
The place is the locker room of the Detroit Red Wings, whose players were among the leaders of the movement.
The general manager, Jack Adams, is standing with the owner, Bruce Norris, talking about loyalty.
The owner, Adams says, has a "broken heart" over the workers' attempt to organize.
Norris then speaks to the players.


Car Loan Bargain Days
This may be the time to think about buying a new car, because interest rates on car loans have been falling steadily.
According to the Bank Rate Monitor, the nationwide average fixed rate for a four-year car loan is 10.19 percent, well below 12.55 percent in 1989 (the highest in the nine years since deregulation), and 11.96 percent a year ago.
Here is a table that shows average rates and costs of a $10,000 four-year fixed-rate loan from three different types of lending institution.
Lender
Interest rate
Monthly payment
Total interest
Credit Union
8.88%
$248.28
$1,917.44
Commercial Bank
10.12
254.20
2,201.60
Savings Institution
10.26
254.88
2,234.24
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Naome Lewis, Editor, 67
Naome Lewis, a longtime magazine editor, died on March 18 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 67 years old.
She died of bone marrow cancer, her family said.


Bush Honors Science Medal Winners


Edward Feigen, 61; Ran Furniture Stores
Edward Feigen, the head of three furniture store chains, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Open Skies, at Last
From Vancouver to Vladivostok, the skies will soon be open to surveillance flights by once-hostile neighbors.
That's the result of an overdue but welcome agreement signed by 25 nations on Tuesday.
The Open Skies Treaty arrives 37 years too late to serve its original purpose: monitoring East-West tank and troop concentrations.
But it can still play a useful role in relaxing tensions among the insecure states in the center of Europe.
Those states don't have satellites to keep an eye on their neighbors.
The reconnaissance flights could build confidence that opposing armies are not being massed across the border, while restraining temptations to overbuild forces against the unknown.


Trying to Pass a Budget Without School Aid Cuts
On a day that negotiators had hoped would conclude with "a handshake deal" on the state budget, talks broke down when Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders could not agree on how to raise enough revenue to prevent cuts in state aid to schools.
State officials were waiting anxiously for the outcome of the budget negotiations, which have taken place almost totally in private.
One of them, Mayor David N. Dinkins, made a last-minute appeal to city lawmakers to "just vote no" on the budget because it would leave the city with an unanticipated budget gap of $100 million.


Gotti Summation Relies On Tapes and Testimony
Tapes of John Gotti's conversations and the testimony of Salvatore Gravano provide "absolutely overwhelming evidence" to convict Mr.
Gotti, a prosecutor said as the Government summed up its case yesterday.
The prosecutor, John Gleeson, used large charts to point out the tapes, the testimony and the charges against Mr.
Gotti and his co-defendant, Frank Locascio, in his all-day summation in the racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Dinkins and Hertz Escalate Fight on Car Rental Surcharges
In the latest salvo against the Hertz Corporation for imposing surcharges on drivers based upon where they live, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday signed a law making such a practice illegal.
Minutes later, Hertz filed suit in Federal court asserting that the law was unconstitutional.
"I oppose all forms of discrimination, including geographic discrimination," Mr.
Dinkins said.


Classical Music in Review
Wayne Horvitz  Roulette 228 West Broadway, at White Street
Wayne Horvitz is a keyboard player whose creative impulse grows from improvisatory jazz.
Judging from two hours of his music on Thursday night, jazz is a medium he is both restless with and loyal to, a recurring point of reference but one from which he seeks avenues of escape.


Slow Start for Appeal as Tyson Stays in Jail
INDIANAPOLIS, March 27 --
Mike Tyson's hopes of an immediate release from prison while his rape conviction is being appealed were dashed this afternoon when a state appeals court said that it would need more time to consider his request.
Lawyers for the former heavyweight champion, who on Thursday was sentenced to 10 years in prison, with four years suspended, and sent immediately to a prison in nearby Plainfield, Ind., had hoped for a decision on their request today.


Classical Music in Review
Simon Preston  Organist St. Bartholomew's Church
Simon Preston proved the ideal performer to open the three-program festival "The Great Organs of New York" on Wednesday evening.
It was hard to imagine that anyone could have displayed the mighty Skinner instrument of St.
Bartholomew's Church, said to be the largest pipe organ in New York, more fully and effectively.


Joe Klein to Write Column for Newsweek
Joe Klein, the chief political correspondent for New York magazine since 1987, is moving to Newsweek.
He will write a weekly column devoted to politics and national and international affairs, much like the one he has been writing for New York.
He will also write longer pieces for Newsweek on a variety of subjects.


Acoustic Evidence in Kennedy Shooting Fails
To the Editor:
Alfred Lee (letter, March 2) refers to the House Select Committee on Assassinations, which in 1979 came to the conclusion that "scientific acoustical evidence establishes a high probability that two gunmen fired at President John F. Kennedy."


The Defenses Won't Rest In East Regional Final
Kentucky seeks to wear opponents down with pressure defense.
Duke sets out to punish teams that try to press.


Johnson Beat McCarthy
To the Editor:
Carl Faith writes (letter, March 13), "Johnson got beat in the New Hampshire primary, panicked and dropped out of the race."


Review/Film Festival; A Matter-of-Fact Murder As a Symbol of Amorality
In the Russian film "Satan," the devil is a delicately handsome young man whose murderous opportunism is too easy to understand.
While the film registers shock at its protagonist's absolute amorality, it also presents him as part of a bitterly divided and pessimistic culture.
The world of "Satan" is one in which nothing really works, and therefore anything goes.
"Where's our motherland?" one character asks, looking at a map of the Soviet Union that is upside down (the film was made in 1990).
"At the bottom," another character replies.
"Satan," directed with a keen eye for detail and an unnerving matter-of-factness by Viktor Aristov, tells of the impassively good-looking Vitaly (Sergei Kuprianov), who at the beginning of the film cheerfully offers a bike ride to a pre-adolescent schoolgirl with whom he is acquainted.
They ride together for a while, singing, and then Vitaly pulls off into a deserted area and kills the child for no apparent reason.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY RECOMMENDATIONS ON DE-ICING


Patents; Medicating the Gums With Dental Floss
"Flossing," Ira Hill said, "is the most-lied-about health practice in the world. Everybody says they do it, but only about 13 percent of all people actually floss regularly."
Mr.
Hill, a biochemist who lives in Locust, N.J., and is a former top executive at International Flavors and Fragrances Inc. in New York, has invented a new kind of dental floss.
He said it was more pleasant to use than regular floss and contained therapeutic compounds that could help prevent gingivitis, or gum disease.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; After Party Rebuke, Brown Says Leadership Is Protecting Clinton
Edmund G. Brown Jr. found a new target today for his indignation at what he often calls the "power elite," accusing his own party's chairman of protecting Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Opening his attack at the gate of a paper plant in Green Bay, Wis., early this morning, the former California Governor said of Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic chairman, "I'm standing here in the cold of Wisconsin to send a message over there to the party hierarchy: If you can't be neutral, then step aside because this insurgency doesn't stop."


Review/Cabaret; 1940's Classics to Bossa Nova, With Chitchat
Watching Mary Cleere Haran's opening-night performance at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel on Tuesday evening, it was hard to know which to admire more, the warmth and naturalness of her singing or the brilliance of her patter.
Vocally, Ms.
Haran recalls Doris Day when she was with Les Brown's band in the 1940's.
In her between-song remarks, she suggests a contemporary update of one of Myrna Loy's no-nonsense movie heroines, tinged with Rita Hayworth's seductiveness.
Marveling at the early-evening revelries in the Algonquin's lobby, she imagined the scene as "a diorama at the Museum of Natural History: ancient urban dwellers' wing."
It is unusual to find a cabaret singer whose sentences have such a chiseled literary precision.
But Ms.
Haran, who will be at the Oak Room (59 West 44th Street in Manhattan) through April 25, blends an unaffected vocal fluency and sophisticated wit with astonishing ease.
An introduction to a suite of 1940's chestnuts by Jimmy Van Heusen and Johnny Burke included a pointed critical appreciation of the Bing Crosby-Bob Hope "Road" movies for which they wrote songs.
She also commented on the "boyishness" of Burke's lyric sensibility, an assessment borne out by her performance of the ingenuous "Polka Dots and Moonbeams."


BUSH IN 'ANGUISH' ON ISRAEL TENSION
Disturbed by a letter from a prominent Jewish supporter who questioned his basic commitment to Israel, President Bush wrote a fervid reply that spoke of his "anguish" over Israeli-American tensions and acknowledged that his Administration was not handling the relationship well enough.
The exchange of letters, in which Mr.
Bush reiterated his opposition to the construction of any more Israeli settlements on the occupied West Bank, served to emphasize the difficulties the Administration has had with American Jews since the President began his battle of wills with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over the settlements.


Memphis State and Cincinnati Roll On
All night long, Memphis State's offense chugged along as if it were an engine trying to run on water.
All night long, Jon Barry seemed to have an answer -- a tricky pass here, a wicked shot there -- for Georgia Tech's offense.
But when it really mattered, the roles were reversed tonight, and Memphis State finally won this Midwest Regional semifinal from Georgia Tech, 83-79 in overtime.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Denies He Exempted Himself From an Ethics Law
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas denied yesterday that he had acted to exempt himself and his wife, Hillary, from the provisions of a state law requiring disclosure of certain personal financial matters.
Mr.
Clinton said that he sponsored the original ethics legislation that would have placed disclosure requirements on the Governor and that he agreed to the weaker bill in 1988 only to enhance its chance of passage.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the health of President Bush misstated his age in some copies.
In June he will be 68 years old, not 69.


Miller Avoids A Jail Term In Fraud Case
Already stripped of his office and the vast power that went with it, former Assembly Speaker Mel Miller was spared prison yesterday for his conviction on fraud charges.
But the judge exhorted him not to forget he had acted criminally, "foolish pride and self-deception notwithstanding."
After a tense and emotional hearing in which he had seemed to be leaning toward sending Mr.
Miller to prison, Judge Raymond J. Dearie of Federal District Court suspended his three-year sentence to probation, plus 120 days of community service each year.
Mr.
Miller's former Assembly aide and former law partner, Jay Adolf, received the same sentence.


Sheffield to Padres
Infielder GARY SHEFFIELD, who has been criticizing Milwaukee management since he joined the Brewers in 1988, is getting a new management team to assess.
He was traded to the San Diego Padres along with minor league pitcher GEOFF KELLOG in a five-player deal.
In return the Brewers got pitcher RICKY BONES and two minor leaguers, shortstop JOSE VALENTIN and outfielder MATT MIESKE. (AP)


Debate Rages Over Site Proposed for Incinerator
After 10 years of looking for a place to put a major hazardous-waste incinerator and backing away in the face of local opposition across the state, New Jersey has been pushed onto a potential site on the Arthur Kill.
The state now finds itself in a fight, not only with local officials and residents, but with New York City, just across the brackish waterway.
The city, with New York State providing some legal support, has joined Linden and a group of its residents in opposing the incinerator, which New Jersey officials say could solve a major problem if it meets strict environmental criteria.


4 Officers Charged in Dispute Over Police Radio
Four New York City police officers were indicted yesterday on charges that they terrorized the occupants of two Harlem apartments, holding them captive for more than three hours while they ransacked the apartments in search of a missing police radio.
The officers, including a lieutenant, also threatened to charge two people in one of the apartments with narcotics possession if they did not help find the $1,500 radio, which one of the officers, John DeVito, had lost four days earlier, the authorities said.


Review/Dance; Choreography by Young Black Women
It would be hard to imagine a more emotionally or intellectually satisfying showcase than the one presented by Kuumba on Thursday night at the Dance Theater Workshop's Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Every one of the seven dances presented on this program of choreography by young black women was built on an idea with a ring of passionate truth.
The ideas were fully realized in well-crafted, smoothly staged dances of impressive variety.
And the performers were uniformly vibrant.
The evening opened with "Jumpers in Command," in which Stephon Webb introduced acrobatics to high-speed rope jumping by himself and by Onika Garcia, Latoya Harris and Tanya Miller.
The dance proper began with Edisa Weeks's haunting "Koros," a trio in which bare-breasted women wearing white tube gowns joined at the bottom, their skin powdered white and their hair covered, oozed and clung and pulled away from one another and out of their dresses to quietly percussive body sounds that built to an orgasmic pitch.
"Koros" was performed by Wendy S. Brown, Taiko Nomura and Ms.
Weeks.
Leslie Arlette Boyce created and performed the score.


WHITE HOUSE DROPS BARRIER TO BUYING SOVIET TECHNOLOGY
In a departure from policies that had restricted East-West trade, the White House announced today that it had cleared the way for the American purchase of major high technologies from the former Soviet Union.
The go-ahead for the space and nuclear purchases, which total $14 million, was characterized by the White House as a bold first step in what would be a substantial aid package to Russia.
While this was presented as a major objective, it was also clear that the goods being acquired were extremely valuable and were being offered at bargain prices.


Classical Music in Review
Isabelle Moretti, harpist, with Charles Libove, violinist, and Nina Lugovoy, pianist  Merkin Concert Hall
Most instruments are chameleons, to some extent.
In good hands they can sing cheerily one moment, lament the next, bully a listener or draw one into a composer's rumination.
The harp is not quite up to this range.
It can offer color and texture, or even clouds of mystery, when the right arpeggiations are played.
But complex emotions are generally beyond its grasp.


'Jelly's Last Jam' Delayed
The first preview of "Jelly's Last Jam" has been postponed from today to Tuesday because of construction work at the Virginia Theater.
The musical, inspired by the life of Jelly Roll Morton, is to open April 26.


Cuomo, Citing Economic Issues, Cancels Quebec Power Contract
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today abruptly cut short negotiations with the Quebec Government and canceled a 20-year contract to buy power from a giant hydroelectric complex that Quebec wants to build in the Canadian sub-Arctic.
The Governor said that New York did not need the power and that it would be cheaper to rely on energy conservation and other energy sources instead.
State energy officials said consumers could actually pay less because of the move.


DeBartolo Case Review
After a 24-year-old woman complained that the 49ers owner, EDDIE DeBARTOLO JR., had sexually assaulted her in his home in Menlo Park, Calif., on Feb. 11, the police who investigated the complaint asked the San Mateo County prosecutor to issue a criminal complaint accusing DeBartolo of sexual battery, a misdemeanor, and penetration with a foreign object, a felony.
Citing what he called "inconsistent statements" made by the woman, GINA BAROSS, the prosecutor, JAMES FOX, dismissed the complaint earlier this month.


The Word From Mets: Don't Even Try Asking
Portraying it as a demonstration of anger and solidarity, the players for the Mets today declared that they were ending all communication with the news media.
The players, frustrated by the daily dose of reporting on the rape investigation of three members of the team, the graphic details of a civil suit alleging sexual harassment filed against pitcher David Cone and published reports purporting to document their behavior at night, said their ban would include newspapers, magazines, television and radio and that it would extend to pre-game shows regarded as extensions of the organization.


No Bouts for Tyson in Prison
The Indiana Boxing Commission may have no prohibitions against allowing an inmate such as Mike Tyson to fight, but don't bet that Iron Mike will be lacing up the gloves while he is behind bars in that state.
"There's nothing that restricts us from licensing Tyson or licensing a promoter to hold a bout in a prison," Jacob Hall, chairman of the Indiana Boxing Commission, said yesterday.


Battery Park City Adds to New York Economy
To the Editor:
A March 8 news article speaks of Battery Park City as a project that no longer contributes to the economy of New York City.
The Battery Park City landfill was completed in 1975 after four years of work, at a cost of about $80 million.
From 1980 to 1988, the Battery Park City Authority spent about $11 million a year on such improvements as streets, the esplanade and public parks.


Quotations of the Day
"Chancellor Kohl, who brought us Bitburg, showed shocking insensitivity to the moral concerns of the Jewish people as well as others who feel deeply the tragedy of the Holocaust and those terrible years." -- ELAN STEINBERG of the World Jewish Congress.  [ 5:3. ]
"I don't need any advice." CHANCELLOR HELMUT KOHL of Germany.  [ 1:5. ]


A Second Go-Round For the Tipoff Two
They played the game more than four months ago, but today it was still a subject of great intrigue and interest.
Rewind to last Nov. 15, the Tipoff Classic at Springfield, Mass., the first game of the college basketball season.
That game should not necessarily be taken as a measuring stick of what will happen Saturday afternoon in the final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament's West Regional here, but for history's sake, take note that U.C.L.A. beat Indiana, 87-72, last fall.


Acoustic Evidence in Kennedy Shooting Fails; The Fatal Bullet
To the Editor:
Oliver Stone castigates Anthony Lewis in a Feb. 3 letter for drawing "misleading and false" conclusions in a Jan. 9 column about President Kennedy's movements after he was shot.
As a neurologist long interested in the medical side of the assassination, I believe Mr.
Stone has misinterpreted the facts.


Subway Burn Victim Dies
A 39-year-old homeless man who was set on fire while sleeping on a subway train Thursday morning died of his injuries late Thursday night, the transit police said.
The attack, the seventh such incident involving homeless people since Jan. 26, was reclassified as a homicide, and homicide detectives from the 42d Precinct joined the investigation, they said.
The man, identified as Robert Walther, had third-degree burns over 95 percent of his body after he was set on fire on a northbound No. 2 train in the Bronx at 4:30 A.M.
When the train pulled into the Freeman Street Station, witnesses saw four teen-agers running from the car where Mr.
Walther was burning, the transit police said.
The police have made no arrests in the case.


Observer; Going To the Dogs
John Kingery, 82, physically helpless, emptied of memory by Alzheimer's disease and holding a bag of diapers, was abandoned in his wheelchair at an Idaho dog track the other day.
"Proud To Be An American" were the words on his sweatshirt.
Something about the story caught editors' attention.
Maybe it was the dog-track angle.
Old-timers like Mr.
Kingery are usually abandoned at hospitals.
These abandonments are common enough nowadays, according to agents of the old-people's lobby, to constitute a trend which they call "granny dumping."


Knicks Are Both Lucky And Good
Thanks to another great escape, Thursday's 2-point victory in Denver, the Knicks arrived here riding the momentum of a five-game winning streak.
To call the Knicks (44-25) lucky during this streak might be too harsh.
After all, they were good enough to build leads of at least 19 points in all of their last four games.


The Weekend Warrior War
If you get up early tomorrow you may see them, trooping through the morning mist to their armories in midtown Manhattan and suburban Seattle, as they do on many weekends during the year: They are the reservists and National Guard members who serve as the country's second line of defense.
But if Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has his way, their numbers will drop by 140,000 in the next two years.
His proposal has ignited an expected counterattack from members of Congress and others eager to keep all those armories open.
But on this military personnel question, Mr.
Cheney is unarguably right and he deserves support.
America can't cut the defense budget and redeem the peace dividend if it also tries to preserve peacetime patronage for part-timers.


Concern for Greece Delays U.S. Move on Yugoslav Republics
Concerned about the fragility of the Greek Government, the Bush Administration has delayed action on recognition of the successor republics of shattered Yugoslavia because of Greece's objection to an independent republic called Macedonia.
The Macedonia dispute pits one Balkan nationalism against another, that of the Greeks against that of the South Slavs who call themselves Macedonians.


Successor Is Named To Nissan President
The Nissan Motor Company said yesterday that Yoshifumi Tsuji, an executive vice president and former production engineer of the auto maker, would succeed Yutaka Kume as president.
Mr.
Kume will take over Nissan's largely ceremonial position of chairman, replacing the retiring Takashi Ishihara.
Nissan executives in the United States described Mr.
Tsuji, 64 years old, as a decisive and straightforward manager who pays attention to subordinates' suggestions and views.
They added that Mr.
Tsuji was well suited to Nissan after years of rapid expansion that included building an assembly plant in Smyrna, Tenn., and a research and development center in suburban Detroit.


C.I.A. Chief Is Upset Over 'Politicization' Seen Within Agency
Robert M. Gates has told analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency that he is disturbed by the widespread impression inside the agency that intelligence reports are tailored to please superiors, and he has called for immediate remedies.
In a speech on March 16, Mr.
Gates said he based his conclusions on a report by an in-house group that conducted a comprehensive survey of C.I.A. analysts and managers.
But he seemed to go beyond the assessment of the group, which reported a few instances of "modest concern" that it said warranted "remedial action."


EXECUTIVES
*
ABC Carpet and Home, New York, named Irving Sacks senior executive vice president and chief administrative officer. *
Brown Brothers Harriman Advisory Services Ltd., New York, a division of Brown Brothers, Harriman &amp; Co., named Henry A. Frantzen managing editor.


Official Gets Top Posts At Integrated Resources
Integrated Resources Inc., the bankrupt syndicator of real estate partnerships, said yesterday that Frank W. Geller had been named chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Geller, 52, formerly senior executive vice president and general counsel, replaces Stephen D. Weinroth, who resigned after a bout of mud-slinging with Integrated's creditors.


Your Money; Military Personnel Face Hard Choice
As the Defense Department cuts the size of the armed forces, hundreds of thousands of military personnel face a critical choice: whether to apply for a voluntary separation for which special financial incentives are being offered.
Those who apply face another choice.
They can ask for either a lump-sum payment, called the Special Separation Benefit, or an annuity, called the Voluntary Separation Incentive plan.
The annuity pays much more money over the long term.
Yet, the department says, 85 percent of those applying are asking for the lump sum.


Police Seek Motive in Slaying of 5 in Queens


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign appearances in New York misidentified the winner of the Democratic primary in New Hampshire.
It was Paul E. Tsongas, not Mr.
Clinton.
The article also referred incorrectly to the black vote in the Connecticut primary; Governor Clinton, not former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., received 6 out of 10 black votes, according to voter surveys.


French Socialists Wince at Rightist Link
France's Socialist Government, still shaken by a major setback in regional elections on Sunday, faced a new embarrassment today when two Cabinet ministers won election as regional presidents apparently with the support of the extreme rightist National Front.
The scandal is expected to bring new calls from within the badly bruised Socialist Party for President Francois Mitterrand to replace Edith Cresson as Prime Minister as the only way of demonstrating that the Government is ready to make a new start.


Moratorium Spawns New Hope for Salmon
One of the major obstacles to the restoration of significant spawning runs of Atlantic salmon to the rivers of Newfoundland, mainland eastern Canada and New England has been swept away, and champions of the species are elated.
The obstacle was a fixed gill net fishery in Newfoundland that was depleting that province's salmon stocks and also intercepting salmon bound for their natal streams in other provinces and New England.
Some estimates, based on the recapture of tagged fish, had suggested that more than half of the salmon headed for the United States were being waylaid in the Newfoundland nets.


History Class Reads Between the White Lines
With dog-eared copies of "On the Road" under their arms and "Huckleberry Finn" in their bags, a class of Long Island college students is setting out on a new kind of college course -- a mad dash by sleeper bus to celebrate America -- 29 cities in six weeks, and six credits toward graduation.
Poised somewhere on the American landscape between Jack Kerouac and Charles Kuralt, these students, the tamer 1990's heirs, perhaps, to Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters of the 60's, say they have had enough of the malls and landscaped lawns in and around their campus at Hofstra University and are mad to experience a different America, from a bus equipped with beds, a television, a stereo system and even a shower.
The Beat Generation Gap
For their six-week course -- SGG19, An American Odyssey: Art &amp; Culture Across America -- the students, or their parents, will pay their full tuition of $2,450 and an extra $1,000 to zip across the country, reading a dozen authors, from Walt Whitman to Hunter S. Thompson and getting one last chance before graduation to shed their New York provincialism and discover an America that precious few have ventured to see before.


Hayes Isn't Sure About Yankee Spot
Three springs ago, Charlie Hayes was comfortably seated on an airplane that was headed from Scottsdale, Ariz., to San Francisco.
He had made the Giants and eagerly awaited opening day.
Hayes never left with the club.
San Francisco made a late roster move, took Hayes off the plane, sent him back to the minors and changed his perception of job security forever.
The incident never left Hayes's memory, which is why he refuses to think he has won the Yankee third-base battle over Hensley Meulens, even though those who have witnessed the fight concede it is basically over.


Bowie Unsure of Status For Tonight's Game
Although he worked out with his teammates for the first time in more than a week, SAM BOWIE won't know if he'll be ready to play for the Nets against Golden State tonight until he gets a wakeup call from his sore right leg.
"If you came in and watched him run up and down the floor, you would never know there was anything wrong with him," Coach BILL FITCH said after yesterday's workout.
"We'll determine how he feels when he gets out of bed and we'll go from there."


Bridge
The semifinal stage of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship began here this afternoon at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals with two more favored teams on the sidelines.
Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., were originally seeded sixth but lost by 55 imps to Andy Goodman of San Francisco, John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., John Schermer of Seattle and Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Celtics Defeat Pistons


Refugees Need People For English Practice
To the Editor:
Readers might be interested in knowing that volunteer help is needed for some of the many hundreds of refugees who have come to New York City from Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union and other countries.
Many of these people have completed courses in basic English but need practice in conversational English before they can become self-supporting and take their place in the American community.


Senate Passes Bill to Raise Bailout Fund by $25 Billion
After hours of behind-the-scenes maneuvering, the Senate voted late Thursday night to authorize another $25 billion in Federal spending to take over insolvent and unsound savings and loan institutions and to extend the April 1 deadline for the spending of another $17 billion already authorized.
The floor of the Senate was packed during the vote, as many senators sought to avoid voting for the measure unless their votes were absolutely needed.
While the Administration and Senate leaders said that passage of the measure was essential to maintaining public faith in the system of Federal deposit insurance, individual senators were worried that support for the measure might lead voters to associate them with exorbitant costs and possible fraud in the rescue of hundreds of failing savings and loans across the nation.


News Summary
International 2-6 DEAL ON RUSSIAN TECHNOLOGY
The White House has cleared the way for the purchase of $14 million in high technology from the former Soviet Union, including a nuclear reactor used for space power.  1


Plastics Unit Is Being Sold By Goodyear
Moving to reduce its debt sharply, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to sell its polyester resin business to the Shell Chemical Company, a division of the Shell Oil Company.
Neither company would not disclose the purchase price, but analysts said Goodyear was likely to receive $350 million to $400 million from the sale.


Lonrho Faces 'the Tycoon Factor'
If anyone knows how unfashionable it is these days to be a tycoon in what some Britons have dubbed the post-Maxwell era, it is Roland W. (Tiny) Rowland, the high-rolling, autocratic chief executive of Lonrho P.L.C.
Over three decades, Mr.
Rowland, 74 years old, has built Lonrho from a mining and farming company in southern Africa into one of Britain's largest multinational conglomerates, with holdings in everything from The Observer, a London Sunday newspaper, to hotels, sugar and textile interests and car dealerships.
He has tried for years to buy Harrods, the famous London department store, but so far has failed.


Health Care Evolves as Issue In Britain's General Election
Patrick Keane, a 44-year-old man from Cardiff, Wales, is entitled, like all other Britons, to medical care from the National Health Service.
Mr.
Keane changed doctors this winter, and the reasons he gave for doing so could spell trouble for Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party in the national elections on April 9.
"My doctor went private," Mr.
Keane said.
"He's gone computerized, and lost the personal touch. He just didn't give me as good care."


Concern for Greece Delays U.S. Move on Yugoslav Republics
Concerned about the fragility of the Greek Government, the Bush Administration has delayed action on recognition of the successor republics of shattered Yugoslavia because of Greece's objection to an independent republic called Macedonia.
The Macedonia dispute pits one Balkan nationalism against another, that of the Greeks against that of the South Slavs who call themselves Macedonians.


S. &amp; L. Role of Offcial Scruntinized
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan is being investigated by Federal authorities along with the other directors and executives of a failed Illinois savings association over their role in the institution, Federal officials said.
The investigation, which is standard practice in every failure of a bank and savings association, is concerned with whether Mr.
Madigan and the other directors and officers were negligent in their management of Olympic Federal Savings Association of Berwyn, Ill., a western suburb of Chicago.


Witness for Prosecution Is Likely to Be Milken
A Federal prosecutor said yesterday that there was a "substantial likelihood" that Michael R. Milken would be a Government witness in the coming securities fraud trial of a former colleague at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
It would be Mr.
Milken's first public testimony about the business activities of Drexel's junk bond division, which he headed, since the Government began its investigation in 1986.


John Strong, 87, Expert in Optics And Astronomy
John D. Strong, a scientist and inventor who discovered water vapor on Venus and advanced the development of telescope mirrors and other optical devices, died on Saturday at the Amherst Nursing Home in Amherst, Mass.
He was 87 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


S. &amp; L. Role of Offcial Scruntinized
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan is being investigated by Federal authorities along with the other directors and executives of a failed Illinois savings association over their role in the institution, Federal officials said.
The investigation, which is standard practice in every failure of a bank and savings association, is concerned with whether Mr.
Madigan and the other directors and officers were negligent in their management of Olympic Federal Savings Association of Berwyn, Ill., a western suburb of Chicago.


Israel Shocks Arabs: We're All Connected
Calling it a good-will gesture to promote peace, Israel has opened direct telephone links to 10 Arab countries, including nations with which it is technically at war.
Jordan said it would block the incoming calls, and an official in Amman charged that Israel had violated international conventions by acting unilaterally.
Israel said the action was legal.


Ex-Miss America Avoids Discussing Clinton
A former Miss America, Elizabeth Ward, declines in the May issue of Playboy magazine to discuss whether she had had an affair with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Speculation about the article has circulated around the Clinton campaign for months.
"Have I slept with this person," she said in response to a question in the article, which will be on newsstands before the April 7 New York primary.
"I don't believe that is anyone's business."


Sharing of Credit Card Numbers by Merchants Brings New Fears of Fraud
Each day, millions of Americans entrust their credit card numbers to businesses when they make purchases by telephone or mail.
But now some businesses are selling the numbers or providing access to them without their customers' knowledge.
That is creating both a new invasion of consumer privacy and fertile ground for fraud, regulators in several states say.
The regulators say scores of people across the country have been charged for products and services they did not want or never received, after their credit card numbers were provided by marketing companies to other businesses.
The officials say they are alarmed by the development because they see no legitimate reason to sell such information; this month, bills to prohibit sales of credit card numbers were introduced in Connecticut and New York State.


Classical Music in Review
Tchaikovsky Chamber Orchestra Alice Tully Hall
Concerts of the Tchaikovsky (formerly Soviet Emigre) Chamber Orchestra are fairly predictable affairs, and on Tuesday evening the group fell back on its well-traveled programming formula of Mozart, Schnittke and Shostakovich.
What is also predictable is a respectable standard of performance, but here the playing, too, sounded a bit tired.


Philadelphian With AIDS Tells of Sex With Many Boys
A man who has AIDS has told the authorities that he paid for sex with several hundred male teen-agers over the last several years, the Philadelphia District Attorney said today.
The man was arrested earlier this week on several charges, including the statutory rape of a boy under 16 years old.
The District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, refused to give the man's name, citing a Pennsylvania law that she said prohibited the release of names and other information that would tend to identify people stricken with AIDS.


A Three-Day Frederick Loewe Tribute
A three-day tribute to the composer Frederick Loewe, which is to include screenings, a symposium and the renaming of a theater, is planned for April 3 through 5 at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University, 721 Broadway, at Washington Place.
On April 3 at 6 P.M., the school's Mainstage II Theater is to be renamed the Frederick Loewe Theater.
The ceremony, which is by invitation, is to feature Broadway performers in a musical revue of works written by Loewe with the lyricist Alan Jay Lerner; Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairman of the New York State Council on the Arts, is to be the host for the evening.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Brown Laughs Last on '800' Number
As brash as a late night television pitchman, Edmund G. Brown Jr. hawks his Presidential candidacy as if it were a kitchen appliance that no household could do without.
The political mantra that Mr.
Brown insists will carry him to the White House is not about jobs or about war and peace.
It is an "800" number that people can call to donate money to the former California Governor's campaign.


Sports of The Times; A Publicity Machine Gone Awry
When it became clear about 20 years ago that television would elevate college basketball and football to unprecedented levels of popularity, college presidents hit upon the novel idea of using high-profile programs to sell, promote and advertise their universities.
The thinking was that these highly visible sports teams, especially ones with flamboyant coaches and star players, would act as magnets, pulling in alumni money and attracting new students.
For smaller, or lesser known schools, a successful athletic program might put an institution on the map.


Corrections
A picture yesterday showing a jetliner taxiing at La Guardia Airport was published in error.
It showed a McDonnell Douglas DC-9, not a Fokker F28, a plane of the type that crashed on Sunday night.


G.E.-Tungsram Venture In Hungary Hits Snags
The General Electric-Tungsram joint venture that opened to much fanfare here in 1989 has called a timeout in its light-bulb making as losses of more than $13 million a year continue and substantial layoffs seem possible.
The suspension of many Tungsram operations is the worst setback yet for the emerging market economy of Hungary, which has attracted more than $2.3 billion in foreign investment, more than its Central European neighbors combined, except for Germany.


And Then There Were 8: Regional Finals Set
Jim Jackson, Ohio State's spectacular senior guard, was not himself in the first half of the Southeast Regional semifinal against North Carolina tonight at Rupp Arena, and it appeared that the Tar Heels would control the game as long as Jackson stayed out of the mix.
But Jackson woke up after intermission, pulling his team to a 39-39 tie after three successive baskets in the first two and a half minutes of the second half and then holding the Buckeyes together down the stretch for an 80-73 victory over North Carolina.


Yurimaguas Journal; Fighting the Drug War In the Skies Over Peru
Peru's inability, or its unwillingness, to cut exports of semi-refined cocaine is as real as the nighttime droning of small planes taking off from this Amazon village for laboratories in Colombia.
"The cocaleros block a stretch of road, light it with cans of kerosene and the planes land for a quick pickup," a mahogany merchant said here last month of the regular export of coca base from this town in the Huallaga River Valley, Peru's largest coca-growing region.


BOSNIA ASKING U.N. FOR PEACE FORCES
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to the United Nations today to deploy peacekeeping forces in the republic as fighting raged for a third day in the town of Bosanski Brod.
"The situation in the republic is seriously deteriorating," Ejup Ganic, a member of the republic's collective presidency, wrote in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
"Military observers should urgently come to this republic."


Patents; A Washer That Doesn't Need Suds
In a radically new approach to washing laundry, a small Florida company has developed a machine that cleans clothes without detergent, uses only cold water and recycles waste water instead of sending it down the drain.
The key to the new machine is ozone, the molecule that consists of three atoms of oxygen.
Ozone, which has the symbol O3 , has long been used to sterilize water, remove unpleasant odors and preserve foods by killing bacteria.


Robert B. Blaikie Is Dead at 85; Poltical Gadfly Fought Tammany
Robert B. Blaikie, an insurgent Democratic district leader of the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He had worked as usual in his insurance office downtown during the day and died of a heart attack while watching the news on television, his son, Donald B., said.


Weeds, Too, Have Rights, or Do They?
To the Editor:
I read "Unhappy Harbinger" (Topics of the Times, March 6) with particular interest.
So that was what those strong-tasting chives were that I had found erupting in my garden half an hour before: wild onions!


Iran Is Unable to Stem West's Cultural Invasion
The Muslim clerics who set out 14 years ago to rid Iran of the decadence of secular Western culture are fighting a losing battle against a host of black marketeers who provide everything from music videos of Madonna to novels by Emile Zola.
The tapes of banned Iranian singers and Western pop stars, especially female soloists, are sold under the counter or out of the trunks of cars.
Worn copies of the prohibited works of authors like Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Milan Kundera, who deal with the intricacies of human relationships, are passed hand to hand.
And Western movies, from "Dances With Wolves" to hard-core pornography, are peddled door to door by legions of distributors.


Robert B. Blaikie Is Dead at 85; Poltical Gadfly Fought Tammany
Robert B. Blaikie, an insurgent Democratic district leader of the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He had worked as usual in his insurance office downtown during the day and died of a heart attack while watching the news on television, his son, Donald B., said.


INSIDE
Hundreds Are at Risk
A Philadelphia man infected with AIDS has told the authorities he had sex with hundreds of teen-age boys over the last several years.
Page 7.
Clinton Foreign Policy Team
Even at this stage in the Presidential campaign, Gov.
Bill Clinton's foreign policy advisers are still a loose collection of unpaid volunteers.
Page 8.


Review/Film; Coach Rodney Dangerfield And the Girls' Soccer Team
Rodney Dangerfield was 64 years old at the time his last hit comedy, "Back to School," was released in 1986.
Today he looks to be about 39, Jack Benny's favorite age, which may be why "Ladybugs" can't keep up with him.
The new comedy runs as if it were composed of plastic joints and transplanted organs not in mint condition.
Looking a bit more paunchy than he did in 1986, and with his short, thinning hair colored a quite vivid gold, Mr.
Dangerfield plays a salesman who, to earn a promotion, undertakes to coach the Ladybugs, a girl's soccer team, a sport about which he knows nothing.
There are a few funny gags and many more bad ones, including a couple about pedophilia.


House Passes Aid for Middle-Class Students
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted late Thursday to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


How an '800' Call Can Cost $15.60
Paul J. Ashenfelter of Auburn, Calif., received a postcard last month from Sweepstakes Clearinghouse stating that he had won a prize and could claim it by calling a toll-free number.
He called, and about a week later a bill for $15.60 arrived.
"The initial call is for an '800' number," he said.
"I made no agreement to be charged for the call."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Treading a Mosaic of Nerve Endings
Gov.
Bill Clinton wanted to spend last night at the circus.
It apparently never occurred to him that New York's savvy gay leaders can have their fun without politicians.
Eager to win their support, he asked to speak at the annual fund-raising performance of the circus for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Madison Square Garden.
Leaders of the AIDS charity told him he could stop by if he wanted to, but they weren't about to let him speak.
Chastened, the Arkansas Governor quickly developed a scheduling conflict and could not attend.


If You Have Hard-to-Fit Feet, Now There Is a Greater Choice in Shoe Styles
For millions of Americans, shoes are always too small, too narrow, too big, too wide or just plain uncomfortable.
Finding a pair that feels good and looks good is an exercise in frustration.
But in the last several years the choices for these shoppers have grown.
Dozens of specialty stores, department stores and even nonprofit organizations now cater to those whose feet don't fit the standard molds.


Beliefs
Abortion is the great white shark of American politics.
At the moment this intractable, emotional moral issue is gliding silently below the surface of the Presidential campaign.
But that won't last.
Within a few months the Supreme Court will almost certainly rule on the constitutionality of a Pennsylvania law that hedges access to abortion with a number of conditions.
The Court's decision may show the extent of the vulnerability of Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 ruling that gives women the right to choose abortion.


S. &amp; L. Role of Offcial Scruntinized
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan is being investigated by Federal authorities along with the other directors and executives of a failed Illinois savings association over their role in the institution, Federal officials said.
The investigation, which is standard practice in every failure of a bank and savings association, is concerned with whether Mr.
Madigan and the other directors and officers were negligent in their management of Olympic Federal Savings Association of Berwyn, Ill., a western suburb of Chicago.


Concern for Greece Delays U.S. Move on Yugoslav Republics
Concerned about the fragility of the Greek Government, the Bush Administration has delayed action on recognition of the successor republics of shattered Yugoslavia because of Greece's objection to an independent republic called Macedonia.
The Macedonia dispute pits one Balkan nationalism against another, that of the Greeks against that of the South Slavs who call themselves Macedonians.


S. &amp; L. Role of Offcial Scruntinized
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan is being investigated by Federal authorities along with the other directors and executives of a failed Illinois savings association over their role in the institution, Federal officials said.
The investigation, which is standard practice in every failure of a bank and savings association, is concerned with whether Mr.
Madigan and the other directors and officers were negligent in their management of Olympic Federal Savings Association of Berwyn, Ill., a western suburb of Chicago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
New York State canceled a 20-year contract to buy power from a giant hydroelectric complex that Quebec wants to build in the Canadian sub-Arctic, and abruptly cut short negotiations with the Quebec Government.
Governor Cuomo said that New York did not need the power and that it would be cheaper to rely on energy conservation and other energy sources instead.  [ Page 1. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Dover Corp., New York, said it had acquired A-C Compressor, a maker of air compressors controlled by Stonebridge Partners, for $75 million. *
Colgate-Palmolive Co. (Delaware), New York, completed its acquisition of Mennen Co., Morristown, N.J., for $670 million.


Library Hygiene in Morristown
A Federal appeals court has restored the right of the public library in Morristown, N.J., to expel people who behave so annoyingly -- or smell so bad -- that they interfere with those who want to study or enjoy books.
That right had been threatened by the ruling of a district court judge, zealous about individual liberty and sympathetic to a homeless man.
It's been a costly argument.
Richard Kreimer, a 42-year-old homeless man who had become something of a town character, so offended librarians and patrons that he was kicked out of the library at least five times.
People said he stared at them, followed them around, spoke loudly and belligerently and smelled so bad they couldn't work or read.


Children, Twice Neglected
How well does New York City protect its children?
Three recent deaths cast a harsh spotlight on the Child Welfare Administration, the agency within the Human Resources Administration that's responsible for cases of child abuse and neglect.
Nobody denies that the agency's task is immensely difficult; even so, it needs to be streamlined, quickly.
It also needs more city and state funds.
Reports of suspected child abuse in New York grow alarmingly.
The state's child abuse hot line registers 1,500 calls a day, up from 1,250 last year.
Calls worthy of investigation are referred to local agencies like the Child Welfare Administration.
Caseworkers must then quickly decide whether a child is in danger and whether the danger is sufficient to remove the child from the home.
As a result of those decisions, more than 50,000 city children have gone to foster care.


Pilot in USAir Crash Is Buried and His Union Calls for Silence
Friends and relatives of Capt.
Wallace J. Majure 2d gathered today in this tiny North Carolina town to mourn and bury the pilot who died along with 26 others when USAir Flight 405 crashed at La Guardia Airport on Sunday night.
But as the effort to assign blame for the crash has intensified, the pilots' union has urged Captain Majure's friends, family members and other pilots not to talk about him or the crash.


N.H.L. Negotiators Talk Into the Night in Toronto
Negotiations over a new collective bargaining agreement lasted late into the night in Toronto as representatives of the team owners and the N.H.L.
Players Association tried to prevent a players strike threatened for Monday at noon.
John Ziegler, president of the National Hockey League, and Bob Goodenow, executive director of the Players Association, spoke briefly last night after the two sides adjourned for a dinner break.


Acoustic Evidence in Kennedy Shooting Fails; Made Students Think
To the Editor:
David Belin (Op-Ed, March 7) fears that American students will be brainwashed by the teacher's guide we produced connected with the Oliver Stone film "J.F.K." Comments from hundreds of teachers are overwhelmingly positive.
Their most frequent comment about the film is that it "made students think."


Anita Colby, 77, a 'Supermodel' Who Also Wrote on Beauty, Dies
Anita Colby, perhaps the nation's first "supermodel" and known as "The Face" after her picture appeared on the cover of Time magazine, died yesterday at her home in Oyster Bay, L.I.
She was 77 years old.
Miss Colby died of lung disease, her sister, Francine Okie of East Greenwich, R.I., said.


Message Received in East
For Maine and St.
Lawrence, the top-seeded teams in the East Regional, the message is clear: There will be little room for mistakes, like leaving an opponent unguarded in front of the goal, when the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament reaches the quarterfinal level here Saturday night.
Michigan State and Wisconsin delivered the message in playing disciplined, patient hockey without need of many goals in a pair of 4-2 victories on a slow rink Thursday night.
The Spartans, who take on Maine next, defeated Boston University and the Badgers, St.
Lawrence's next opponent, eliminated New Hampshire.


Acoustic Evidence in Kennedy Shooting Fails; A Line of Cheap Guns
To the Editor:
Like Hudson Hatcher (letter, March 2), I have read that Lee Harvey Oswald was a marksman (lowest pass rating of a military rifleman).
Moreover, military targets are much larger than those civilian riflemen use.
But Oswald had the equivalent of a braced foxhole position, one of the steadiest and most accurate from which to fire.
He could use the windowsill to allow a steadier shot or shots.
And the low recoil of the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle would allow him to refocus on the target rapidly.


Mel Miller Sentenced to Probation


Sampras and Agassi Power U.S. to a 2-0 Cup Lead
Pete Sampras used a cavalcade of serves, and Andre Agassi vanquished his nagging nerves.
Together, they produced a pair of straight-set victories today to give the United States a commanding 2-0 lead against Czechoslovakia in a quarterfinal Davis Cup tennis confrontation.
Sampras, ranked No. 4 in the world and intent on cementing his Davis Cup credentials, opened this three-of-five-set, three-of-five-match competition with a 6-3, 6-4, 6-2 dismissal of Karel Novacek that was as technically sound as it was efficient.
The American broke his opponent's serve four times, saved all five break points he faced, produced 22 aces and brought the Czechoslovak veteran to a standstill by the final set.


Japan's Land Prices Are Starting to Fall
For the first time since 1975, the price of Japan's most precious asset - its land - is falling.
After years of sharp gains, the declines have come as a shock to the nation, especially since many speculators are deeply in debt.
Official statistics show that prices dropped more than 5 percent nationwide and upward of 15 percent in Tokyo.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Robert B. Blaikie Is Dead at 85; Poltical Gadfly Fought Tammany
Robert B. Blaikie, an insurgent Democratic district leader of the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He had worked as usual in his insurance office downtown during the day and died of a heart attack while watching the news on television, his son, Donald B., said.


Robert B. Blaikie Is Dead at 85; Poltical Gadfly Fought Tammany
Robert B. Blaikie, an insurgent Democratic district leader of the 1940's and 1950's, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He had worked as usual in his insurance office downtown during the day and died of a heart attack while watching the news on television, his son, Donald B., said.


A Bibliophile's Passion for a Poet
For 40 years, Leonard R. Levine made a nice living taking care of the veterinary needs of people living on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The experience left him with lots of stories.
One is about a chicken he boarded for a glamorous lady who took the bird for a ride in the country each week.
Another is about a myna bird who kept repeating, "I like Ike." There were Gloria Swanson's dachshunds, Jacqueline Onassis's springer spaniel and a countess who summoned him to her girdle-strewn apartment for urgent cat care.


Schuman Memorial
A memorial tribute to the composer William Schuman will be held on Wednesday at 5 P.M. in the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street.
Mr.
Schuman, who was president emeritus of the Juilliard School and Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, died on Feb. 15 at age 81.


Jamaican Premier Hailed by Old Foes
For many who knew the Michael N. Manley of the 1970's, a White House dinner with President Bush on Tuesday seemed an unlikely way to cap off four decades of a sometimes strident, sometimes eloquent, but always energetic public life lived on the left.
But as he makes his final public appearances before stepping down on Saturday, roughly halfway into his third term as Prime Minister, Mr.
Manley, who has been plagued by serious health problems, has found his calendar crowded with onetime political adversaries and ideological foes as well as friends seeking to wish him well.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: City Hall; Absence of a Hispanic Journalist On Debate Panel Prompts Dispute
A debate between the Democratic Presidential candidates planned for next week in the Bronx has prompted a prickly dispute between one of its organizers, Borough President Fernando Ferrer, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked him to include a Hispanic journalist among the questioners.
Yesterday, after City Hall made public a letter from the Mayor to Mr.
Ferrer urging him to broaden the panel, Mr.
Ferrer, the city's most prominent Hispanic official and a potential Dinkins rival, issued a withering reply, dismissing Mr.
Dinkins's objections as "patently wrong and without merit."


N.C.A.A. Denies Crackdown On Coaches
Hank Nichols, the national coordinator of men's basketball officials for the National Collegiate Athletic Association, said critical remarks made last week by Iowa State Coach Johnny Orr had not created an increased emphasis on keeping coaches in the coaching box.
A technical foul called Thursday night by official Lenny Wirtz against the Massachusetts coach, John Calipari, with 5 minutes 47 seconds to go in a 2-point game, became a factor in Kentucky's 87-77 victory over Massachusetts in the East Regional here.


Margaret R. Weiss, Writer, 69
Margaret R. Weiss, an author and photography editor, died on Monday at her home in New York City.
She was 69 years old.
She died of cancer, said her cousin, Michael M. Engel.


Woman With Link to Shah Slain in Her Yard
A woman whose husband and brother-in-law were connected to the Shah of Iran's Government in the 1970's was fatally shot in an ambush Thursday night outside her house in Franklin Lakes, N.J., officials said today.
The F.B.I. said the shooting may have been an act of terrorism.
The victim, Parivash Rafizadeh, 51 years old, was shot at close range at least five times in the abdomen and left thigh about 8:45 P.M. as she got out of her car 25 feet from the front door of her house, the Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said this afternoon.


More Cunningham Tickets
To meet the demand for tickets, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, has opened up its mezzanine section for performances by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 3 P.M.
The tickets, all $15, are available at the box office.
Information: 581-7907.


Despite Unresolved Issues, Legislative Panel Approves $8 Billion Budget
A legislative committee has approved an $8 billion state budget, even though its members failed to agree on several major issues that will have to be settled later.
In sending the budget to the House of Representatives for completion, the committee abandoned, for the second year, its tradition of not voting on anything short of a finished product.
Lawmakers, all of whom are up for re-election in November, admit to being eager to avoid a repeat of last year's budget fiasco, in which they deadlocked with Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. until late summer.


New Biweekly to Cover Congressional Issues
Congressional Quarterly announced yesterday that it would begin publishing a new biweekly journal, beginning Monday, that would be aimed at the general public.
It said the new publication, American Caucus, would report on issues before Congress and on Congressional procedural maneuvers.
With coverage modeled on the public-affairs programming of the cable channel C-SPAN, the new journal will seek to help readers participate in the political process, Congressional Quarterly said.


Olympia &amp; York Asks Banks for Rollover of Debt
Representatives of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the holding company for the financially troubled real estate empire of the Reichmann brothers, met with about 20 of the company's largest lenders today and asked the banks to roll over the hundreds of millions of dollars of debt that will mature in the next 10 days, the company said in a statement today.
Olympia &amp; York has been caught in a cash squeeze that has left it unable to repay or refinance enormous amounts of real estate debt coming due this year.


In Europe, Too, All Politics Is Local
The Treaty on European Union that was agreed on by the 12 European Community countries in December is a factor in elections being held this year throughout Europe, but it is only one concern in a season characterized by uncertainty over the future, discontent with current leadership and preoccupation with local issues.
France: Regional elections last Sunday.


The Brokers Are Prospering, But Will It Last?
On the American economic landscape, there are companies where profits never crumbled during the recession and there are companies where optimistic analysts see recovery coming soon.
But there are not very many industries where it can genuinely be said to be a boom time.
Wall Street, as it happens, is one of the few.
The quarter just ended may have been the best ever for America's brokers.
The first of them to report profits, discounter Quick &amp; Reilly, said earnings almost tripled in the quarter ended Feb. 29.
For every dime of revenues, better than three cents fell into the pre-tax profit line.


Karen Rupinski Has a Wedding
Karen Anne Rupinski, a senior vice president of the money-management concern of J.&amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Stuart Roberts, a vice president of A. L. Burbank, a ship brokerage in Fort Lee, N.J.
John A. K. Bradley, an acting Justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, performed the ceremony at the Americas Society in New York.
Mrs.
Roberts, 37 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Rupinski of New York.
She graduated from New York University.


Kathleen Brady Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Brady of Brielle, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Frances Brady to Gregory Joseph Heher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Heher Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
Miss Brady, 27 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is a casualty underwriter at American Reinsurance Company in New York.
Her parents are private real-estate investors.


'I Am Up to My Ears in Love'
LETTERS OF GUSTAVE COURBET
Edited and translated by Petra ten-Doesschate Chu.
Illustrated. 726 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $55.


Funeral Services Held for Auxiliary Police Officer Killed Off Duty


Ms. Cohn Weds Wallace Hettle
Leslie Cohn, a public relations associate for the national Y.M.C.A. in Chicago, and Wallace Hettle, a Ph.D. candidate in American history at Northwestern University, were married yesterday in New York.
Judge Stanley Green of the Civil Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony at the St.
Moritz Hotel.
Ms.
Cohn, 28 years old, as is the bridegroom, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Northwestern University and is the daughter of Lois and Arthur Cohn of New York.
Her father is the director of classical music at Carl Fischer Inc., music publishers in New York, and the author of six musicology books.
Her mother is the director of marketing and public relations for the New York Philharmonic.


Miss Rotondi Marries B. N. Rosner
Anita Louise Rotondi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic Rotondi of Troy, N.Y., was married yesterday to Benjamin Neal Rosner, a son of Frances Panczyk of Tappan, N.Y., and Alexander Rosner of Long Island City, Queens.
Rabbi Alvin Roth performed the ceremony at the chapel of the Emma Willard School in Troy with the Rev.
Edward Kacerguis, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
Mrs.
Rosner, 31 years old, is the director of operations for the Bosworth Group, management consultants for the financial services industry, in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
Her father is the director of unemployment insurance for the State Department of Labor in Albany.


Vivian Ducat, TV Producer, to Wed
Vivian Sophie Ducat, a television documentary producer and writer, and Ray Allen Segal, a photography researcher for museums and television, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Ducat, 36 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University and has completed the BBC's Film Directors' Training Course in London.
She is a daughter of Josef B. Ducat and Ellen W. Ducat, both of New York.
Her father is the president of Interlink Corporation, an import-export company in New York.
Her mother, who is a watercolorist, also works as an independent, multi-lingual tour guide in New York.


POSTINGS: Long Pull in Red Hook; The Couple That Could
In 1986, Holly Block and John Morton -- she is a gallery director and he is a sculptor and painter -- paid New York City $1 for a house at 259 Van Brunt Street in Red Hook, Brooklyn, under the now-defunct Artist Housing Program.
Six years and $250,000 in loans later, the couple's four-story building for artists only is three months from completion.
The project, which also demanded thousands of hours of the couple's sweat equity, now has four 1,400 square foot living/workspaces.
Of 14 houses in the program, it is one of only five that survived.


Heads Up! They're Marching for . . .
ON toward Great South Bay marched the La Salle 200.
Cannons to the right of them, cannons to the left.
Theirs was not to make reply.
Theirs was but to do, or face serious demerits.
So into a gale-force wind strode the 200.
Rifles in hand, sabers at the ready, the gray line marched, round and round.
Theirs was not to reason why.
At the La Salle Military Academy everyone marches under dawn skies.
From John H. Sununu, the former White House chief of staff, to Anastasio Somoza Debayle, the late Nicaraguan dictator, La Salle alumni have started their mornings with a left, right, left.


BUSH IN 'ANGUISH' ON ISRAEL TENSION
Disturbed by a letter from a prominent Jewish supporter who questioned his basic commitment to Israel, President Bush wrote a fervid reply that spoke of his "anguish" over Israeli-American tensions and acknowledged that his Administration was not handling the relationship well enough.
The exchange of letters, in which Mr.
Bush reiterated his opposition to the construction of any more Israeli settlements on the occupied West Bank, served to emphasize the difficulties the Administration has had with American Jews since the President began his battle of wills with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over the settlements.


Camera
In these days of anything-is-possible camera design, a new point-and-shoot camera -- the Nikon Touch 800 -- incorporates technical breakthroughs that make it the flagship of the Nikon Touch line.
Introduced a few weeks ago, the camera (list price $535) was styled by the Italian designer Giorgetto Giugiaro, who was also responsible for the Nikon F3 and F4s.
He has done a creditable job, except, perhaps, for his plans for my left thumb.
He wants it to rest up alongside the viewfinder, but I wanted, instinctively, to move it along the base of the camera.


Inkster and Sheehan Star In Dinah Shore TV Drama
Juli Inkster and Patty Sheehan, old friends and former college teammates, each overcame the effect of television in the third round of the Nabisco Dinah Shore tournament today, setting up a final-round showdown Sunday in the first major championship of the year on the L.P.G.A. tour.
Inkster, 31 years old, who began the day two shots behind Beth Daniel, birdied four of her final eight holes for a round of four-under-par 68.
That gave her a three-day total of 208, one ahead of Sheehan, her San Jose State teammate in 1980.
But she waited several minutes to sign her scorecard while L.P.G.A. officials reviewed a television replay to determine whether she had committed a penalty on the 13th hole.


The Red Army Fights a Rear Guard Action Against History
History has few instances when an empire died but its army lived on.
But here is the Soviet army -- orphaned, bankrupt, humiliated, demoralized, plundered, pulled asunder, angry and often for sale, but still the largest military force on earth, with 3.5 million men scattered across two continents and enough hardware to arm every dictator and destroy the planet several times over.
In its obsession with security, the Soviet state poured a totally disproportionate share of its resources, human and material, into defense.
In Russia alone, 8 million people work directly in defense industries; with dependents, that is 20 percent of the population.
The military also claims the heaviest concentration of scientific minds and institutes.


Ms. Steinbrink Has Wedding
Ellen G. Steinbrink, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Richard F. Steinbrink of Philadelphia, was married last night in Wynnewood, Pa., to Jack Soloff Jr., a son of Dorothy Soloff of Margate City, N.J., and the late Mr.
Soloff.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Main Line Reform Temple Beth Elohim.
Mrs.
Soloff, 26 years old, is the director of marketing and special events for the Foundation for Architecture in Philadelphia.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the rabbi of Or Chadash-the Reform Temple of Hunterdon County in Annandale, N.J.
Her mother, Diane G. Steinbrink, is the coordinator of Plays for Living, an educational division of Family Service of Philadelphia.


Miss Brookins To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Dale C. Brookins of Wayne, Pa., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Stephanie Leale Brookins, and Anthony Joseph Manzella 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Manzella of North Hampton, N.H.
Miss Brookins, 25 years old, is a research assistant at the Martin Luther King Jr.
Papers Project at Stanford University, where she received a master's degree in American history.
She graduated cum laude from Hamilton College.
Her father is president of American Visual Art Associates, a design concern in Malvern, Pa.


POSTINGS: Bed-Stuy Initiative; In Old Rowhouses, 60 New Condos
Sixty new condominium apartments are being carved out of a dozen abandoned brick and stone rowhouses in the Bedford-Stuyvestant section of Brooklyn for sale to moderate income buyers.
The developement, known as Bainbridge Mews, is part of the city's ongoing initiative to turn some of the empty structures it has acquired because of tax delinquencies of their owners back into livable homes.
The apartments will range in size from one to three bedrooms.
They are on Bainbridge and Chauncy Streets and Saratoga Avenue.


World Markets; Britain's Evolving Beverage Industry
British giants in the world alcoholic beverage market Bass, Guinness, Grand Met and Allied -- have been reshaping themselves in recent years by making a slew of acquisitions and divestitures, with various degrees of success, in the view of analysts.
One impetus has been the British Government's resolve to make the domestic beer market more competitive.
By Nov. 1, brewers must greatly reduce their control of the nation's bars, or pubs, as Britons call them.


Donna Kass and Seth Mendelson Are Married
Donna Ellen Kass, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving L. Kass of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Seth Ian Mendelson, a son of Zelda Blumenfeld of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Jacob Mendelson.
Rabbi Stanley L. Asekoff officiated at Greenbrook Country Club in North Caldwell, N.J.


How Half Hollow Hills Redistricts Schools
I would like to have the opportunity to clear up some misconceptions concerning the Half Hollow Hills School District.
The implications made in this article are that two schools, Burr's Lane Junior High and Sunquam Elementary School, were closed because of some brilliant master middle-school plan.
Poppycock!
The middle-school plan was based upon three working middle schools and seven elementary schools.
The study took over one year to prepare and cost a great deal of money.
The closing of schools was never part of this plan.
The middle school was accepted with enthusiasm by most parents.
More guidance counselors were to be hired to facilitate the program.
They were not hired.
The two remaining middle schools are now too crowded to effectively carry out the essence of the plan.
The two schools are beyond the capacity recommended by the plan.


On the Street; Hemline Vagaries in Paris
Longer hemlines are not an upsetting issue in Paris.
They are simply one of a number of choices.
Linda Evangelista, the model, on her way to work (top left), wore a long skirt one day and a short one the next.
On a bright day the model Claudia Schiffer (lower right) chose a long skirt and twin sweater set to wear to work and on a rainy day a thigh-high Chanel suit under a slicker.
The status print in Paris is the knitted leopard spot from Azzedine Alaia (top center), seen in dresses or cat suits.
One Parisian managed to ride her motor scooter in a long skirt.
Freedom to choose was the byword for these women.


Pornography and the New Puritans
THESE are censorial times.
I refer to the pornography victims' compensation bill, now under consideration by the Senate Judiciary Committee -- that same bunch of wise men who dispatched such clearheaded, objective jurisprudence in the Clarence Thomas hearings.
I can't wait to see what they're going to do with this maladroit proposal.
The bill would encourage victims of sexual crimes to bring civil suits against publishers and distributors of material that is "obscene or constitutes child pornography" --
if
they can prove that the material was "a substantial cause of the offense,"
and if
the publisher or distributor should have "foreseen" that such material created an "unreasonable risk of such a crime." If this bill passes, it will be the first piece of legislation to give credence to the unproven theory that sexually explicit material actually
causes
sexual crimes.
At the risk of sounding old-fashioned, I'm still pretty sure that rape and child molestation predate erotic books and pornographic magazines and X-rated videocassettes.
I also remember the report of the two-year, $2 million President's Commission on Obscenity and Pornography (1970), which concluded there was "no reliable evidence . . . that exposure to explicit sexual material plays a significant role in the causation of delinquent or criminal sexual behavior." In 1986, not satisfied with that conclusion, the Meese commission on pornography and the Surgeon General's conference on pornography also failed to establish such a link.
Now, here they go again.


DUMP BID ASSAILED ALONG RIO GRANDE
After months of United States criticism of Mexico's environmental practices and policies, proposals to build three hazardous waste dumps along the Texas border have caused an uproar on both sides of the Rio Grande.
Mexican state and city governments, environmental groups and political parties have all clamored against the proposal, arguing that the dumps could threaten the groundwater that communities in both countries share.
Last week hundreds of Mexicans joined Texans in protests at different border-crossing points.


Cruise Phone For Singles
A discount cruise agency has started a toll-free telephone line to help single travelers avoid supplements that make their fare on some cruise lines as much as twice the per person rate in a double cabin.
Travelers who call the agency, the Cruise Line, hear a recorded announcement and are asked to leave their name, phone number, preferred destination, approximate age, smoking preference and whether they would like to be matched with a cabin mate or travel alone.


Housing Plan Struggles For Support
TWO weeks after County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke proposed building 500 to 600 units of affordable housing on 20 county-owned sites across Westchester, many local officials remain cautious about a plan that was devised without consulting them, one they fear threatens municipal home rule.
Harrison town leaders, however, have endorsed the plan to provide their municipal workers, teachers and older residents moderate-income housing, and at least three other communities, not among the 13 chosen by Mr.
O'Rourke, have asked to participate.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic IssueS; Clinton on Blacks and Jews, and Himself
Gov.
Bill Clinton was scheduled to deliver what his Presidential campaign staff said would be an important speech on relations between black and Jews.
Instead, the Arkansas Governor yesterday morning talked of his own relations with blacks and his own relations with Jews.
In the context of a general message of brotherhood, Mr.
Clinton told a New York City audience of how, as a boy in Arkansas, he used to visit his grandfather's store, which had some customers "of African-American descent," and "hand out cookies to kids who came in without regard to their race."


Israel Shocks Arabs: We're All Connected
Calling it a good-will gesture to promote peace, Israel has opened direct telephone links to 10 Arab countries, including nations with which it is technically at war.
Jordan said it would block the incoming calls, and an official in Amman charged that Israel had violated international conventions by acting unilaterally.
Israel said the action was legal.


Mercedes Ellington Planning to Wed
Mercedes Doralyn Ellington, a choreographer and stage director, and Eric Butler, a musician, composer and vocalist, both in New York, are engaged to be married.
No date has been set.
Ms.
Ellington graduated from the Juilliard School of Music.
She is the artistic director of Dancellington Inc., a tap dance company in New York.
She is the daughter of Mercer Ellington of Copenhagen and New York, and Ruth V. Batts of Philadelphia.
Her father, whose instrument is the trumpet, is the conductor of the Duke Ellington Orchestra.
Her mother is a retired nurse.
She is a granddaughter of Duke Ellington and the stepdaughter of Dr.
James A. Batts, an obstetrician and gynecologist in Philadelphia.


Vivian Schiller Wed in Atlanta
Vivian Luisa Schiller, a vice president of TBS Productions, and Phillip Jeffrey Frank, a senior producer at CNN, both in Atlanta, were married there yesterday evening.
Rabbi Steven Lebow officiated at the Colony Square Hotel.
Ms.
Schiller, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University and has a master's degree in Russian from Middlebury College.
She is a daughter of Ronald and Lillian Schiller of Larchmont, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was an editor at Reader's Digest.


Sunday Menu; A Meal Fit for Spring: Lamb, Couscous With Prunes and Cucumbers
At first glance, lamb with prunes and sun-dried tomatoes seems an unlikely blend.
But the sharpness of the tomatoes and the sweetness of the prunes provide a fine balance.
Instant couscous has become so popular that it is easy to find in the supermarket.
But there is something even better that cooks as quickly: whole-wheat instant couscous.
Look for it in a health-food store.


Miss Clarfield Has Wedding
Cynthia Ann Clarfield, a daughter of Elinor Clarfield Toberoff of New York and the late Wallace J. Clarfield, was married last night to Andrew Michael Hess, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Hess of New Castle, Pa.
Rabbi Robert Orkand performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hess, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her mother, who is retired, was a travel agent with Four Seasons Travel in Darien, Conn.
Her father was a vice president of the Olin Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Employers Winning Wide Leeway to Cut Medical Insurance Benefits
A rapidly growing number of victims of cancer, AIDS and other serious illnesses are discovering that under recent court interpretations of a law that was originally intended to protect employees' benefits, their insurance coverage can evaporate when they need it most.
The recent Federal court rulings have given employers that now act as their own insurers wide leeway to cut back on existing coverage -- or to skimp on coverage in the first place.
These "self-insured" employers, a large majority of companies from giant corporations to an increasing number of smaller businesses, have been exempted from state insurance laws governing what ailments insurance companies must cover.
For example, many states require coverage for alcoholism, mental health problems and intensive care for infants with birth defects.


Landfill-on-Hudson Leads to a Court Battle
TO hear villagers tell the story, the problem of solid-waste disposal in this community has become a matter of insult added to injury.
Not only do residents see the abandoned relics of once-prosperous factories along their waterfront and worry about the presence of industrial pollutants there, but what started out four years ago as a legal transfer station on the docks has also become an unsightly construction- and demolition-debris site, one that state officials say is 20 times the allowed limit.


WHEN MEN HIT WOMEN
Your article "When Men Hit Women" by Jan Hoffman (Feb. 16) perpetuates the false stereotype that domestic violence is almost exclusively a matter of brutish men victimizing innocent women.
According to the article, "Experts agree that violence by women is usually in self-defense or retaliation, and is often less severe."
Murray A. Straus and Richard J. Gelles are the nation's leading researchers on domestic violence and are widely recognized as having been instrumental in heightening the visibility of this issue.
Although your writer found and quoted Gelles on another point, the article ignored the data collected by Straus and Gelles on the relative prevalence of male and female violence.


The April Fool


Kate R. Perkins To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Perkins of Bethlehem, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kate Riggs Perkins to David William Clewell, the son of Mrs.
Donald W. Clewell of Wyomissing, Pa., and the late Mr.
Clewell.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Perkins, 28 years old, is the display manager at John Wanamaker in Reading, Pa.
Her father, who is retired, was an assistant general counsel at the Bethlehem Steel Corporation in Bethlehem.


Technology; Is the Elusive Paperless Office About to Become a Reality?
The Xerox Corporation last week unveiled the first product in a line that the company believes will fundamentally alter the way computers and paper are used in modern offices.
The product is Paperworks, a computer program designed to link fax machines and personal computers so that a user on business in Chicago, say, could send a simple fax that would cause his computer in his office in Manhattan to store, retrieve or distribute data.
It is one of the first examples of the rebirth of Xerox's office of the future, and it is based on the company's twin design goals of ubiquity and transparency, says John Seeley Brown, the company's chief scientist and head of its Palo Alto Research Center, known familiarly as PARC.
If Xerox's goals are realized, microprocessors will seem to be everywhere in the office, but the high-tech hardware will be hidden in everyday office equipment.


That's Some Choice Republicans Offer
To the Editor:
I received a solicitation letter from Republicans for Choice, a political action group.
The letter, while calling attention to the danger posed to a woman's right of choice by "Phyllis Schlafly and her Religious Right," also calls attention to Republicans for Choice's own lack of dedication to women's equal rights.


Spring Training Is Taking a Toll Physically on Many Players
Spring training is supposed to get players ready for the season, not set them back.
Try telling that to Kent Hrbek, Rob Dibble, Bob Welch, Julio Franco, Jay Howell, Dave Henderson, Trevor Wilson, Bud Black, Mike Pagliarulo and an assorted too many others.
These players have suffered injuries that have interrupted their spring training and placed their availability for the start of the season in jeopardy.
The developments, unwelcomed by the players and their teams, have forced managers to shuffle plans and look for alternative answers just in case.


Networking; Keeping the Costs Down When Office Hopping
Connecting a local area network in small branch office to the home office or another branch office can be expensive if it isn't planned carefully.
A major problem with this process, called internetworking, is controlling the volume -- and cost -- of traffic over expensive long distance phone lines.
In most LAN operating systems, packets of data are sent along the network until they reach their intended destinations.
Much of that data involves requests for access to expensive shared resources, such tasks as producing something on a color laser printer.


God and Man in Peru
RELIGION IN THE ANDES
Vision and Imagination in Early Colonial Peru.
By Sabine MacCormack.
Illustrated. 488 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


Panel Tells Dinkins It Can't Find a Hospitals Chief
A committee named by Mayor David N. Dinkins to search for a new president for the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation has been unable to choose a candidate, Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales said yesterday.
At a meeting with the Mayor on Wednesday, Mr.
Perales said, the leaders of the committee "indicated that they had not been able to meet their mandate to find a slate of candidates, that they felt a long time had elapsed and that they felt obliged to report to the Mayor."


Moscow's Other Faiths
MENTION Moscow and churches in the same breath and most people immediately imagine the onion domes of Russian Orthodox edifices with their bright swirls of color or their pale, pearly hues.
This is certainly no surprise, since there are 42 Russian Orthodox churches in the Soviet capital, ranging from the famous, such as St.
Basil's Cathedral in Red Square, to a host of others, most of which stand in slow ruin.
Yet Moscow is home to churches and temples of other faiths -- Roman Catholic, Jewish, Muslim, Armenian and Baptist -- that are not even mentioned, let alone written about, in some of the guidebooks.
It is these places that flesh out an otherwise stereotypical image of Moscow, adding texture and detail to the panorama of a rapidly changing city and nation.
With perestroika has come a literal glasnost, or opening, of some of Moscow's places of worship and a renewed interest in religion, which had been suppressed for seven decades.
Now, new interior vistas are available to the casual traveler.
But these relatively unknown religious sites are still pretty much terra incognita for Westerners.
There is not a great wealth of information about them and, unfortunately, little of their history has been recorded.


Coins
Exposition Anniversary
The very first United States commemorative coin is 100 years old this year.
The controversy it stirred has long since abated; it is easily acquired today as a curiosity or to start a collection of American commemoratives.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Treading a Mosaic of Nerve Endings
Gov.
Bill Clinton wanted to spend last night at the circus.
It apparently never occurred to him that New York's savvy gay leaders can have their fun without politicians.
Eager to win their support, he asked to speak at the annual fund-raising performance of the circus for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Madison Square Garden.
Leaders of the AIDS charity told him he could stop by if he wanted to, but they weren't about to let him speak.
Chastened, the Arkansas Governor quickly developed a scheduling conflict and could not attend.


Q and A
A Buy-Back by a Sponsor Question: A couple of months ago the sponsor of my co-op set a new policy for buyers.
The sponsor will guarantee to buy the apartment back within five years for the exact amount paid.
This applies to outside buyers and to new renters who get an option to buy.
Those of us who bought when prices were high want to know if we have a right to the same benefit. . . .
Helen Yrissary, Sunnyside, Queens


New &amp; Noteworthy
WOMAN HOLLERING CREEK: And Other Stories, by Sandra Cisneros. (Vintage Contemporaries, $10.) Ms.
Cisneros, the author of "The House on Mango Street," again draws on her rich Hispanic heritage.
Many of the 22 stories in her second collection are about Mexican-American women, struggling with culture shock or faithless lovers.
She "seduces with precise, spare prose and creates unforgettable characters we want to lift off the page," Bebe Moore Campbell said here last year.
PATRIMONY: A True Story, by Philip Roth. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $10.) In this best-selling memoir, which recently won a National Book Critics Circle Award, Philip Roth recalls the death of his father, Herman Roth, of a brain tumor.
According to our reviewer, Robert Pinsky, the author's account shows him to be very much his father's son: blunt, ironic and unsentimental, yet often comic and moving.
Last year Mr.
Pinsky said: "In the arena of modern, post-industrial death, with its exquisite complexities of plain, ambiguous mercy and provisional healing, its impossible decisions and treacherous information, mysteriously cruel and merciful, the spirit that guides many people is a willing, humane materialism. It is a spirit that corresponds to the gloriously pragmatic, unpredictable genius of Philip Roth's narrative gifts."


Networking; Keeping the Costs Down When Office Hopping
Connecting a local area network in small branch office to the home office or another branch office can be expensive if it isn't planned carefully.
A major problem with this process, called internetworking, is controlling the volume -- and cost -- of traffic over expensive long distance phone lines.
In most LAN operating systems, packets of data are sent along the network until they reach their intended destinations.
Much of that data involves requests for access to expensive shared resources, such tasks as producing something on a color laser printer.


New York Research Program Lures Scientists
A philanthropy concerned that New York might be losing its edge in medical research, is offering $16.6 million to induce young scientists to work in the city rather than elsewhere.
The focus will be on two urgent problems, AIDS and drugs.


The Seven-Year Itch
AT MY IN-LAWS' 40th wedding anniversary party recently, someone asked about the origin of the phrase
the seven-year itch
. Do you know its provenance? Why seven years?"
This note comes from the office of the Vice President, signed "William Kristol, chief of staff (happily married for 16 years)."


Christina Horn To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Stoddard Horn of New York have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Christina Leslie Horn and Henry A. Wilmerding 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilmerding Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I.
Miss Horn, 29 years old, is the Women's Committee coordinator for the Central Park Conservancy in New York.
Her father is a partner of Benton, Corcoran, Lieb &amp; Company, New York Stock Exchange traders.


Fatal Attraction


BUILDING SADDAM HUSSEIN'S BOMB
The thing that puzzles me is that there is never any accountability for the actions of our Government and its agencies when they make these horrendous decisions that affect our lives.
No wonder people are cynical and disenchanted.
To vote Democrat or Republican doesn't seem to offer any solution to the myriad problems we have in and out of our country.
JAMES SOGORKA
Point Pleasant, N.J.


Where the Audience Is the Star
Romanticists may wonder what it would be like to be transported to a historical setting where culture was a matter of passionate communal concern: to join the Athenians in the fifth century B.C. in the Theater of Dionysus, or the populace of medieval York during performances of miracle plays.
Some of the texts and venues still exist, but long vanished is the degree of public fervor and participation, the "ekstasis" that animated those singular epochs.
To attend the season's first performance of Donizetti's "Elisir d'Amore" earlier this month at the Teatro Regio in Parma was to find oneself in a setting where 19th-century Italian opera is still experienced as a collective
event
that brings sustenance to a large part of the society.
Not only is the theater redolent of the past -- its ivory and crimson 1,300-seat interior, decorated with gold relief, is essentially unchanged since 1829 -- but the Parmigiani themselves maintain a living tradition carried over from the days when this northern Italian city was a proud, culturally privileged city-state.


Video That Caters To Viewers' Whims
The sheer passivity of watching video has enriched the language with metaphoric vegetables like the couch potato and the tube turnip.
Indeed, the hypnotic state induced by overdoses of video has been decried as a danger to mental and physical health.
An antidote, or at least an alternative, is now at hand: a new kind of video to end the torpor and challenge the viewer to become an active participant in the program.


Roll Over


Legal Definition of Death Is Questioned in Florida Infant Case
A baby girl born a week ago without a fully formed brain will probably not live longer than a few weeks.
But if her fate is unambiguous, less clear is the precedent that might be set by efforts in Florida to accelerate her death so that her organs can be used to save other children.
The baby, Theresa Ann Campo Pearson, was born last Saturday in Florida with a partially formed brain stem, the part of the brain that controls breathing and heartbeat.
Though her body and face are fully developed, the top of the baby's skull is missing.
A surgical cap covers her exposed brain stem and the area where the bulk of her brain, the cortex, would normally be.


Israel Shocks Arabs: We're All Connected
Calling it a good-will gesture to promote peace, Israel has opened direct telephone links to 10 Arab countries, including nations with which it is technically at war.
Jordan said it would block the incoming calls, and an official in Amman charged that Israel had violated international conventions by acting unilaterally.
Israel said the action was legal.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Novels about flying are frequently written by authors who know everything about the subject and very little about writing.
Here are two agreeable exceptions: ANGLE OF ATTACK by Robin A. White (Crown, $20) and COYOTE BIRD by Jim DeFelice (St. Martin's, $18.95).
Mr.
White's book starts just before the beginning of the Persian Gulf war, with American naval forces off Libya, with the Soviets developing a new weapon, with the Americans also coming up with something new, with Iraq in possession of an intercontinental ballistic missile and with Israel targeted for destruction.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE HOT HOUSE Life Inside Leavenworth Prison. By Pete Earley. Bantam, $22.50.


One Touch of Eros, and Worlds Divide
We know it's not nice to fool Mother Nature.
But it's pretty difficult to upstage her, too.
Witness "Four Baboons Adoring the Sun," John Guare's new play about love and ecstasy in our age of multiple marriages and fractured families.
It is set in Sicily, holiday playground of the ancient gods who, apparently, have not entirely abandoned the premises.
Strange watery murmurings and clawlike scratchings continue to fill the air, alerting Mr.
Guare's characters to the disasters that lie ahead, if they were only of a mind to heed such warnings.


Chess
The forecast for the two semifinal world championship candidates matches about to begin in Linares, Spain, is this: the former titleholder, Anatoly Karpov of Russia, must be regarded as the odds-on favorite to defeat the British grandmaster Nigel Short; the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman must also be regarded as having the better chances to defeat the German (formerly Russian) grandmaster Artur Yusupov.
This is what the outcome of the Linares International Tournament, which ended on March 14, points to.
Timman tied for second place with an 8-5 score, outdistancing Yusupov's 6-7 for a ninth-place tie.
Karpov took fourth place with 7 1/2-5 1/2, whereas Short tied for last place with 4-9.


Child Safety Seats
To the Editor: After reading Betsy Wade's column about airlines and their rules on safety seats for children (Practical Traveler, Nov. 10), I wanted to add my thoughts.
First, is there any reason why the airline cannot use a seat styled after the Chrysler Voyager van's optional child seat?
The seat is part of the standard adult seat, but it folds out to make a safety seat for a smaller child.


Try the Bike as a Commuting Vehicle
To the Editor:
Regarding "Electrify!", I take issue with the supposed need for electric cars.
A nine-mile commute from central Brooklyn into midtown Manhattan will take the same amount of time and stress, whether done in an electric or gasoline-powered car.
There are hundreds of other cars to be reckoned with, merges, slow traffic and, of course, parking.
Driving an electric car will do nothing to lessen those problems.


Philadelphian With AIDS Tells of Sex With Many Boys
A man who has AIDS has told the authorities that he paid for sex with several hundred male teen-agers over the last several years, the Philadelphia District Attorney said today.
The man was arrested earlier this week on several charges, including the statutory rape of a boy under 16 years old.
The District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, refused to give the man's name, citing a Pennsylvania law that she said prohibited the release of names and other information that would tend to identify people stricken with AIDS.


VICTIM'S IRAN LINK IS SEEN AS MOTIVE
Law-enforcement officials said today that they believed that the gunman who shot the wife of a former Iranian official on Thursday knew who his victim was.
Bergen County Prosecutor John J. Fahy said the victim, Parivash Rafizadeh, was shot twice from a distance of five or six feet as she was leaving her car in the circular driveway outside her colonial house at about 8:45 P.M.


Corrections
A chart on the Mutual Funds page last Sunday about the size of recent stock market upturns misstated the return for the latest one, through March 19.
It was 52.8 percent, as the brief adjoining article correctly stated.


Tories Say Party's Strategy Is Hurting Campaign
While it is too early to say who will win the British general election on April 9, Prime Minister John Major's Conservatives began today to sound like a party increasingly afraid that it could lose.
Several leading Conservatives blamed Mr.
Major's campaign team, headed by the party chairman, Chris Patten, for a defensive, negative approach that has let the opposition Labor Party and its leader, Neil Kinnock, set much of the agenda so far.


BOSNIA ASKING U.N. FOR PEACE FORCES
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to the United Nations today to deploy peacekeeping forces in the republic as fighting raged for a third day in the town of Bosanski Brod.
"The situation in the republic is seriously deteriorating," Ejup Ganic, a member of the republic's collective presidency, wrote in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
"Military observers should urgently come to this republic."


In a New Role


When Ritual Strangles 'Parsifal'
In Hans Jurgen Syberberg's 1982 film of "Parsifal," Amfortas's wound is an object carried about on a pillow, a mound of flesh, oozing blood.
Much of the action takes place on a stage-size death mask of Wagner himself. (Kundry likes a niche near one of his nostrils.) Klingsor's throne rests on the heads of Marx and Nietzsche.
And Parsifal appears as both a boy and a girl, each of whom sings with Reiner Goldberg's voice.
In Robert Wilson's production of "Parsifal," which I saw last month in Houston, there is no wound or blood.
The stage is bare, stripped even of Knights during the ceremonies.
Characters stare in fascination at their hands and fingers; they never look at or touch one another.
Kundry never kisses Parsifal.
There is no Grail.


The (Real) Winners Are . . . the Losers
The second most meaningful phrase of Academy Awards night is the one that is never spoken: "And the winner
isn't
. . . ." Those words define one of Hollywood's most illustrious fraternities, the should-be list of winners who never were. The academy's capricious streak has always lent certain losers a special cachet, particularly if they were supplanted by obviously less worthy candidates. Sentimentality, shortsightedness and misguided notions of lofty art have all conspired, on various occasions, to turn the academy's golden-boy trophy into Oscar the Grouch.
Oscar has vented his crankiness at some of the most significant figures in Hollywood history.
And the passage of time has regularly underscored the error of his ways.
To make amends for such oversights, the academy sometimes votes special Oscars to venerable nonwinners, but the consolation prize will never be mistaken for the real thing.
Oscar also-rans need not wish for the honorary awards accorded Cary Grant (1969), Orson Welles (1970), Charlie Chaplin (1971), Groucho Marx (1973), Jean Renoir, Howard Hawks (both 1974), Barbara Stanwyck (1981), Paul Newman (1985) or Myrna Loy (1990) to feel themselves in good company.
They need only look at the long list of others who have been slighted by Oscar, and consider how these oversights occurred.


Reading The Fine Print
To the Editor:
I should like to clarify a point made in Joy Horowitz's article "Hollywood Law: Whose Idea Is It, Anyway?"  [ March 15 ] .
The suit that Alain Bernheim and I brought against Paramount Pictures was not for plagiarism; it was for breach of contract.
Paramount had our story treatment for over two years and was developing it for Eddie Murphy.
Then they gave it back to us and said that they were no longer interested.


ALBANY'S LEADERS ANNOUNCE ACCORD ON STATE'S BUDGET
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the leaders of the New York State Legislature announced tonight that they had reached an accord on a roughly $31 billion spending plan for the fiscal year that begins on Wednesday.
The agreement appeared to end the colossal five-month fight over the budget, which Governor Cuomo said was the obstacle that kept him from running for President.


Wall Street; Did Crane Dump CF&amp;I's Pensions?
In 1985, the Crane Company initiated a far-reaching plan to reinvigorate itself by spinning off its unprofitable steel subsidiary, CF&amp;I Steel of Pueblo, Colo., to its own shareholders.
That, and other restructuring steps that followed, have paid huge benefits to investors in Crane.
The diversified industrial company's credit ratings have improved and its stock has outperformed the market in recent years.


Granny Dumping by the Thousands
It was a sad and troubling story.
John Kingery, 82, suffering from Alzheimer's disease and wearing a sweatshirt inscribed "Proud To Be An American," was abandoned outside the men's room at a dog racing track in Post Falls, Idaho.
His wheelchair had been stripped of identification and his clothing labels ripped out; he couldn't remember his own name.
Pictures of him clutching his teddy bear as attendants prepared to send him home to Oregon provoked a national wince.
But what turns a wince into an ache is the sudden awareness that John Kingery is no isolated case.
The American College of Emergency Physicians estimates that 70,000 elderly Americans were abandoned last year by family members unable or unwilling to care for them or pay for their care.


British Politics Have Nothing to Crow About
To the Editor:
"British Campaigning -- How Civilized" (Op-Ed, March 14), the description of British politics by Dudley Fishburn, Conservative member of Parliament for Kensington, bears little relation to reality.


Being a Role Model, in Tyson's Words
At Mike Tyson's sentencing in Indianapolis last Thursday, Judge Patricia J. Gifford asked the boxer his feelings about being a role model and if those feelings had changed.
What follows are excerpts from that exchange:
THE COURT: Mr.
Tyson, I was curious if there was a change in your feelings about your position as a role model.
I heard that question asked when we were questioning prospective jurors: whether or not a person who is in a celebrity position becomes a role model.
Do you feel that you do?


In Reality, Outward Bound
To the Editor:
I was intrigued to see myself as Jon Katz sees me  [ "Why Bill Moyers Shouldn't Run for President," March 8 ] .
I haven't seen Jon Katz for six years, but I knew that he had left journalism for fiction because I read his dandy roman a clef about his experiences at CBS News.
His considerable powers of imagination can create some confusion, however, when on his foray back into the real world they blur the line between fact and fiction.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
Lucky for Patricia Ireland that she didn't seek office in the National Organization for Women during her years as a Pan Am flight attendant ("Does She Speak for Today's Women" by Jane Gross, March 1).
In 1971, I, too, was flying for Pan Am and ran for office in the San Francisco chapter of NOW.
Even then, in the more idealistic days of the movement, sexual orientation and political correctness were the litmus tests for acceptance by many so-called feminists.
Despite the fact that flight attendants were burdened with discriminatory employment practices -- from sexist advertising to controls on weight, age, marital status and child-bearing -- few of us found much sympathy from the radical wing of NOW, which indulged in more sexual stereotyping than the most cynical ad men of the day.
Then as now, women who were attractive, heterosexual, held moderate political views or worked in a traditional female job were held suspect by radical feminists.


ETHNIC VIOLENCE IS SHAKING KENYA
In the last few days, many Kenyans -- as well as the foreign donors who have sunk billions of dollars of aid into Kenya -- have expressed concern that one of the few African countries with a relatively strong economy and capitalist economic practices may be in danger of unraveling.
Over the last year or so, a series of events have contributed to a feeling of uncertainty in Kenya, which Washington until recently considered one of its strongest allies in Africa.
These events have included widespread charges of Government corruption that have brought halts or cuts in the flow of foreign aid upon which Kenya's economy depends, and protests against the Government of President Daniel arap Moi that resulted in police attacks on demonstrators early this month.


Jane Jacobs Versus the World
To the Editor:
I was one of those fortunate enough to work with Jane Jacobs on Architectural Forum more than 30 years ago, so I was delighted to read Robert Fulford's perceptive article on Jane and her book "The Death and Life of Great American Cities" -- even though I am not in full agreement with him or, even now, with her.


Hawaii Hikes
To the Editor: I was surprised that in his article about his Hawaiian hiking tour ("On Foot on Four Islands," Travel, Jan. 26), Allan Chernoff disposes of the hike to Maui's Waimoku Falls in a paragraph or two, although three of the accompanying photos are of the falls or the trail to them.
The photo on the section's front page shows a quintet of hikers scrambling across the very stream that, on the afternoon I hiked that trail two years ago, abruptly swelled to a raging torrent that trapped me overnight in the jungle near the bamboo thicket Chernoff describes.


For the Sweet Science on Screen, a Split Decision
Watching the bloody boxing bouts in the new movies "Gladiator" and "The Power of One," I was reminded of a screening of "Rocky IV" I attended some years ago with the trainer Eddie Futch.
Mr.
Futch, who has worked with such champions as Joe Frazier, Larry Holmes and Ken Norton, watched the fight sequences through squinted eyes, frequently holding up a hand in front of his face as if he were witnessing an auto accident.
When he got up to leave, a sportswriter asked him if he would now support a move to ban boxing.
Mr.
Futch grinned and replied, "No, but I certainly would support a movement to ban boxing movies."
The suggestion has merit: it's a safe bet that almost any film featuring boxing has more blood and torn flesh than one is likely to see in a year of viewing real boxing matches.
As Willem Dafoe's character in the 1989 film "Triumph of the Spirit" observes after an especially gruesome match at Auschwitz, "Dis hiss not box-hing." No, indeed; it's the movies.


The Streets Weren't Paved With Gold
"VAGABOND STARS" is a little show with a big burden to bear.
On the surface, the revue at the Forum Theater Group is a mishmash of old and new songs, comedy sketches and dramatic scenes, performed in English, from the embryonic stages of Yiddish vaudeville.
In adaptation and in performance, those ingredients are not blended into a nourishing whole.
Some of the material is much more than 100 years old.
Some was reconstructed from library archives.
Some was never even performed.
Some is terribly serious.
And some is simply terrible.


Can Snelling Brainard Sell His Global Fishing Vision?
It is no accident that Snelling R. Brainard's yacht is named Tenacity.
His efforts in the mid-1980's to show New England's conservative fishermen they could make profits using 30-mile lines with thousands of hooks instead of environmentally destructive nets ended buried in debts.
But now Mr.
Brainard, a 64-year-old Harvard-educated banker, business consultant and real estate developer, is back with a daring global venture rooted in the same technique.
This time Mr.
Brainard hopes to do a lot more than save fishing stocks from overexploitation and seabeds from being scraped clean of habitats for various creatures.
He envisions creating billions of dollars of new business for American shipyards threatened by the downturn in military spending and helping developing nations profit from their natural resources.


Cleaner Streets at Lower Cost
Reduced sanitation budgets leave New York City dirtier than ever and undermine the recycling that once promised relief for landfills.
But a radical proposal to change commercial trash collection could ease those problems and save businesses tens of millions -- all at no cost to taxpayers.
In 1957, the city turned over to private carters the task of hauling trash from commercial establishments.
The firms that carry on the business today are relatively small -- some 475 companies haul trash from more than 250,000 businesses that produce 40 percent of the city's commercial waste.


Paint Rollers an Asset If the Surface Is Flat
ROLLERS are the most popular tools for painting large flat surfaces like ceilings, walls and floors.
They produce better-looking results, can cover areas more quickly than brushes and are less messy, less costly and less difficult to use than sprays.
A roller's most important feature is the cover, the woolly cylinder that carries and spreads the paint, but also shop carefully for the handle.


THE REGION: Q. &amp; A.: Barry F. Sullivan; New Deputy Mayor, a Banker, Outlines His Business Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins's relations with New York City's business community have often been rocky, but last week he hired a high-powered repairman who won Wall Street's cheers.
Barry F. Sullivan, a 61-year-old career banker who retired as chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, is the new deputy mayor for finance and economic development.
He succeeds Sally B. Hernandez-Pinero, who left to head the city Housing Authority.
Mr.
Sullivan will continue to earn $780,000 a year as a consultant to First Chicago -- more than the pay of the next five deputy mayors combined -- and give his $112,000 city salary to charity.
"We're frankly all a little scared of him," one senior mayoral aide said.


Noreen Stout, TV Producer, Weds
Noreen Ann Stout, a television producer, and John Buckhout McShane, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Alfred Isacsson officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Transfiguration.
The bride, 31 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Plattsburgh and has a master's degree in media studies from the New School for Social Research.
She is a producer of "Videofashion!," a syndicated television program about style.
She is the daughter of Josephine T. and James J. Stout, the owners of the James J. Stout Funeral Home in New York.


Making a Difference/Tax Time, 1992; Henry Bloch's Season to Shine
It's that time of year again, the homestretch before the April 15 deadline for filing tax returns.
For Henry W. Bloch, the 69-year-old chairman of H &amp; R Block Inc., it has been a typical tax season -- with a twist.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Red Wings Closer to Norris Title


Gang Boss or Proud Victim? Summations in Gotti Trial
Following are excerpts from summations in the trial of John Gotti.
The prosecutor spoke on Friday, the defense lawyer yesterday.
JOHN GLEESON  The Prosecutor
This is not a media event.
This is not a movie.
It's not about movie stars.
This is not a stage for oratory.
This is a trial in an American courtroom, a trial in which your decision will be based on the evidence that came from that witness stand, from the tape recordings, the other physical exhibits, and on that alone.
It's not nearly as exciting as the other stuff. .  .  .
These two defendants, ladies and gentlemen, together with Salvatore Gravano, ran a crime family, La Cosa Nostra, the Gambino crime family.
I submit to you, based on the evidence, that no reasonable person could dispute that John Gotti is the boss of that enterprise, of that crime family, since the time Paul Castellano was murdered in December of 1985.
I further submit to you that based on this evidence, no reasonable person could dispute that Frank Locascio, at the time that the Ravenite bug was in place in '89 and '90, was the acting underboss.  .  .  .
Out of his own mouth, John Gotti told you that he has people in his crime family who control the docks, who control garbage hauling, who control the construction industry, who control virtually the entire concrete industry in New York City. . . .
Murder plays a central role in the business of this enterprise.
It is the way in which discipline was maintained.
It's the way in which power was consolidated.
It's the way in which power was obtained.
It was the way to deal with people who have the audacity to speak to the Government about the enterprise.
It was the way to deal with people who have the audacity to be someone John Gotti thinks might be a rat some day.
Murder is the heart and soul of this enterprise." .  .  .
"I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you have this type of criminal committing this type of crime, there are only two ways to prove it. . . . There are two ways to do it: One, catch them talking about their crimes. Figure out a way to find those secret meetings and record them.  There's one other way. Get one of them to come in and tell you about the crimes. We did both. .  .  .
We would love to bring you witnesses with absolutely impeccable credentials, of unquestionable honesty and integrity, of good moral character.
The problem is they don't know any such people.
The people that they commit their crimes with, the people in the Gambino crime family, are people like Salvatore Gravano.
They picked him.
He's theirs.
He is what he is. . . .
ANTHONY M. CARDINALE  Lawyer for Frank Locascio
I'd also like to try to explain and almost apologize, if you will, for the nervousness and anxiety you might see as I give this summation.
It is usually that nervousness is brought about by the nature of the charges.
Quite frankly, it's quite a responsibility to have someone's life in your hands.
But I can tell you, ladies and gentlemen, after listening to Mr.
Gleeson sum up yesterday, after sitting through this case representing Frank Locascio for the past several weeks, I couldn't wait to get up.
What you see now is not nervousness because of what I have to do and because I have his life in my hands, but what you see, ladies and gentlemen, is outrage -- outrage at what the Government is trying to do. .  .  .
Yesterday Mr.
Gleeson, in a poignantly humorous remark, called my client Frank "Correct Me if I'm Wrong" Locascio.
Well,
his
name, Mr. Gleeson's name, is John "Get John Gotti at Any Cost" Gleeson.
These charges should not have been brought.
He shouldn't have been dragged from his home.
He shouldn't have been put in jail for 16 months.
He shouldn't have been put in a courtroom ringed with F.B.I. agents.
He shouldn't even be sitting there. .  .  .
This case is the single most important criminal trial in America today.
When the stakes are this high, ladies and gentlemen, when careers, when ambition are at stake, you can't expect that everything is going to be on the up-and-up, if you will, that everything is going to be absolutely by the letter, everything is going to be totally fair. .  .  .
When you can't catch fish, you poison the stream.
That's what's going on here.
That narcotic stuff is just to poison this atmosphere.
It's part of the stage, part of the production.
It's part of the F.B.I. agents ringing this room.
It's part of an effort, I submit -- accept it, reject it, but if you accept what I am saying, act accordingly -- to have you people ignore the true set of facts and the true evidence in this case.
ALBERT J. KRIEGER  Lawyer for John Gotti
I walk into that door 10 feet tall, three axe handles wide across the chest.
My eyes shoot lightning; my voice is thunder.
I represent the people.
I speak to you on behalf of Constitutional liberties.
A bar association to which I belong has as its motto, "We are liberty's last champion." We are the ones who defend those accused of crimes.  .  .  .
Mr.
Gravano testified that he expects less than the maximum.
I think that's very informative and tells you where his head is and what he had been, perhaps, led to believe will occur.
Let's think about that.
Let's think about it.
Nineteen murders, according to his calculations, roughly 18 years in jail, less than a year a murder.
Where are we?
Where are we?
Is that where our system of justice has dropped to?
Reward a sick serial killer, in exchange for what? .  .  .
Gravano, as described by Mr.
Cardinale this morning, was the ultimate high achiever in presenting two faces, three faces, seven faces, a man who could go to bed with his wife after having killed her brother, live with that fraud.


Gaye Greenberg and Lawrence Pecker Marry
Gaye Rebecca Greenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Greenberg of Miami Beach, Fla., was married last evening to Lawrence Alan Pecker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simeon Pecker of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Simchas Friedman officiated at Temple Beth David in Coral Gables, Fla.


Tech Notes; A Wearable Manual Called Red
The United States Army is about to start testing a portable computer system meant to serve as a kind of multimedia maintenance manual for personnel performing field tests on M-119 howitzers.
The device, called Red, is from Reddy Information Systems Inc., a two-year-old Manhattan-based concern.
Red has earphones that deliver spoken information as well as a tiny screen attached to headgear that produces a computer-screen-size image that floats in space about nine inches in front of the wearer.
The user wears a belt containing a DOS-based computer that plays read-only compact disks capable of holding the equivalent of 550,000 pages of text.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: City Hall; Absence of a Hispanic Journalist On Debate Panel Prompts Dispute
A debate between the Democratic Presidential candidates planned for next week in the Bronx has prompted a prickly dispute between one of its organizers, Borough President Fernando Ferrer, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked him to include a Hispanic journalist among the questioners.
Yesterday, after City Hall made public a letter from the Mayor to Mr.
Ferrer urging him to broaden the panel, Mr.
Ferrer, the city's most prominent Hispanic official and a potential Dinkins rival, issued a withering reply, dismissing Mr.
Dinkins's objections as "patently wrong and without merit."


Windows Blown From 2 Buildings in Midtown
Strong gusting winds blew several plate-glass windows and panels from two high-rise buildings under construction in the theater district in midtown Manhattan yesterday, forcing the police to close several streets to traffic around Times Square.
No one was injured, but the street closures disrupted traffic and forced theatergoers to file through a roped-off lane under the marquees of Shubert Alley.


THE GUIDE
MUSIC OF SEPHARDIM
Two men and two women calling themselves the Voice of the Turtle will sing and play the music of medieval Spanish and Portuguese Jews known as Sephardim in Theater C of the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase Monday at 8 P.M.
The concert, "Paths of Exile," marks the quincentenary of the signing of the edict to expel the Jews from Spain in 1492, and it was arranged by the university's Jewish Studies Program.


Russian Ships Serve as Hotels At Seville Expo
Organizers of Expo '92 in Seville, Spain, have turned to an unlikely source to expand their supply of hotel rooms -- the Government of Russia, which is dispatching seven Volga River cruise ships to be used as floating hotels for the international exposition.
The ships are to arrive in Seville shortly before the event begins on April 20, and will remain until it closes on Oct. 12, providing 2,000 beds, according to CORAL, the central hotel reservations system for Expo '92.
All will be equipped with air-conditioned cabins, each with a private bathroom, refrigerator and stereo, as well as laundry service, medical care and other services.


Making a Difference/Tax Time, 1992; Lobbying for Simplicity
As proposals to change the tax code proliferate in Washington despite President Bush's recent veto of the Democrats' tax bill, Gerald A. Polansky, chairman of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, says he has one overriding hope: that an already complicated tax system not get even more tangled.
"Our posture is for simplicity in the tax code," he said.
"A simpler tax system produces more revenue because you have a higher degree of compliance."


Navy Opener Is Windy Test
The men's heavyweight crews of Navy and Princeton tried to open their rowing seasons today, but the elements conspired to thwart the best efforts of all concerned.
The Severn River is notoriously susceptible to the vagaries of the winds that follow down the course, and this morning, despite a posted start of 6 A.M. for racing, the regulation course was unrowable.
Rick Clothier, Navy's coach, shifted the racing to an alternate stretch of the Severn.


Where the Chef Is Serious About the Food
DESPITE its name, Miche Mache is no hodgepodge of a place.
Michael (Miche) Nischan, the chef-owner of the new South Norwalk restaurant (in space formerly occupied by Portofino), knows exactly what he's doing and does it with elan.
There is whimsy, too, in the pricing ($4.93, $6.02, $11.74 and so forth), and in the clay garden pots used on each table to hold fresh flowers, table lights and delicious pepper-and-oregano-scented foccacia and Portuguese rolls.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Feb. 92
Jan. 92
Feb. 91
New York
1,631
1,661
1,199
New Jersey
1,130
1,323
682
Connecticut
300
502
261
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.20
9.15
9.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.26
6.21
7.52
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.03
8.95
9.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.13
6.08
7.38
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.12
9.04
9.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.13
6.08
7.33
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.30
9.23
10.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.54
6.62
7.82
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.73
4.64
6.41
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.02
8.02
9.49
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Meg Murphy to Marry in August
Mr. and Mrs.
John Cullen Murphy of Cos Cob, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mairead Walsh Murphy to Timothy Patrick Nash, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Nash Jr. of Stamford, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Murphy, 25 years old, is known as Meg.
She graduated cum laude from Providence College.
Until recently, she was the manager of the Cos Cob branch of Wolfhound Imports, a clothing importer.
She does the lettering and painting for "Prince Valiant," the comic strip illustrated by her father.
Her mother, Joan Murphy, is a past president of the Cos Cob Library.


A 'Slap in the Face'
The Chicago Cubs have told ANDRE DAWSON that they will not offer him a contract extension, which means that the outfielder will become a free agent at the end of the season.
Dawson, calling the decision a "slap in the face," said he would not negotiate with the Cubs during the season and expected to be with a new team next year.(AP)


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Darien, Conn. 505,000
227 Leroy Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old colonial; new roof, pond, 1.4 acres; taxes $4,744.
Southport, Conn. 267,100
10 Taintor Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; walk to harbor, Mexican tile floor, half acre; taxes $4,703.
Old Saybrook, Conn. 145,000
179 Bokum Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; eat-in kitchen, living room with fireplace, 2.2 acres; taxes $1,690.
Armonk, N.Y. 425,000
4 Dogwood Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, family room, study, sitting room, screened porch; taxes $6,441.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 293,500
34 Old Mill Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck, stone patio; taxes $6,694.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 437,000  8 Rock Hill Lane  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 40-year-old contemporary; den, fireplace, wet bar, playroom, screened porch, 1 acre; taxes $14,841.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 225,000
122 Robertsville Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial, in-ground pool, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $3,526.
Edison, N.J. 118,000
25 Overlook Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; corner lot, eat-in- kitchen, washer, dryer and air-conditioner; taxes $2,032 Great River, L.I. 240,000
7 Pine Tree Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old farm ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, office, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


'To the End of Time'
To the Editor:
As the editor in chief of Time Warner Inc., I would like to respond to your review of Richard M. Clurman's book "To the End of Time" (Feb. 16).
The review quotes the author's charge that I subverted the editorial independence of Time Warner's magazines by imposing a contract on their managing editors that meant that they "could thereafter be fired for running a negative review of a Time Warner book or movie, or speaking critically to a reporter about anyone or any aspect of the huge enterprise."


On the Trail


Susan Arnot Is a Bride
Susan Eileen Arnot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Arnot of Verona, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Kevin Barry Heaney, a son of Peter P. Heaney of Southbury, Conn., and the late Rita Barry Heaney.
The Rev.
Ronald W. Cadmus performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church.
Mrs.
Heaney, 34 years old, is the public relations director at Elizabeth Arden in New York.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at Prudential Insurance in Roseland, N.J.
Her mother, Mae Arnot, also retired, was a senior computer operator in the finance department of the Salvation Army national headquarters, then in Verona.


'To the End of Time'
To the Editor:
Your review of "To the End of Time" says that managing editors of Time Inc. magazines were presented with a contract that tied their jobs and severance to a clause forbidding them to denigrate, criticize or ridicule the company and its products.
That is true.
But the review also repeats Richard Clurman's assertion that all the company's editors signed the contract.
That is false.


Gaining Information From Interviews
"Determining if Someone Is Telling a Lie" (Westchester Q&amp;A, March 1) made interesting reading.
However, I am an investigator with many years of interviewing experience and must point out certain fallacies in the article.
First, there is quite a difference between an interview and an interrogation, no matter how "gentle" the latter.


Dixie Carter Sings of a Journey That Makes All Listeners One
When Dixie Carter, the Tennessee-born singer and actress, performs Cole Porter's "Let's Do It" at the Cafe Carlyle in Manhattan, the baby grand becomes the stage for a comic reincarnation of Scarlett O'Hara.
The song's lascivious menagerie seems to overrun that sedate room, as she sits atop the piano, mimicking refined ladybugs, courageous kangaroos and giraffes on the sly.
On reaching the line "Old sloths who hang down from twigs do it," she all but dangles upside down while kicking up her legs toward the ceiling.
Afterward she kneels on the polished lid to take a bow, her mop of brunette hair thrown back.
"There's a lot to be said for stayin' up late and carryin' on," she says.


Coping With Death of a Classmate
WHEN a student died after a recent weekend track meet, the principal of Stagecoach Elementary School in the Middle Country School District knew how to respond.
On Monday morning, psychologists and social workers spoke to the girl's classmates, as well as to the classmates of her sister in the fifth grade.


Columbia's Big Medical Center Plans Expansion
THE Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, already the most formidable private force in upper Manhattan real estate, is poised to expand significantly westward, to the river side of Riverside Drive, where its affiliate, the New York State Psychiatric Institute, would build a new home.
The site is an empty 1.37-acre tract south of 168th Street.
Wooded and shrubby, the land looks much like the surrounding Fort Washington Park, but it is owned by Columbia University.
If developed, the six-story institute would be one of few large structures ever built on the west side of Riverside Drive.
It would also have pedestrian bridges over the drive.


BILL CLINTON'S UNCERTAIN JOURNEY
Regarding your article on Bill Clinton, I find his arrogance unsettling ("Bill Clinton's Uncertain Journey" by Peter Applebome, March 8).
If he
has
had the Presidency as his life's goal, why did he not behave more circumspectly in his private life?
Does he truly believe that his morals and honesty do not count on the national stage?
Watching the antics of our "leaders" -- local, state and national -- has convinced me that they are all out for themselves and Governor Clinton fits the mold perfectly.
MARYANN DIPASQUA
Sussex, N.J.


The Art of Craft
Columbia County is still a particularly picturesque region of New York State, with its rural landscape and stately 18th- and 19th-century Federal and Greek Revival houses.
Its brand of American architecture has aged well over time.
This house is the only known Arts and Crafts residence in the county.
Named Oak Hearth by its original owners, the stone and shingled structure is the work of Wilson Eyre, a Philadelphia architect who was an important figure at the turn of the century.


'Smart' Cars That Navigate
THE rental car of the future has a small video screen in the dashboard with a map showing where you are and how to get where you are heading.
It also has a computer voice that tells you when a turn is coming up, a two-way radio for assistance and a cellular phone.
There is no point in asking how much such cars cost, because they are not for sale.
A hundred of them, white Oldsmobile Toronados, are operating in Orlando, Fla., in a one-year test that began last Wednesday.
The majority of test drivers are expected to be Automobile Association members who reserve through their clubs, paying $139 a week.


Barnyard Gig


Israel Shocks Arabs: We're All Connected
Calling it a good-will gesture to promote peace, Israel has opened direct telephone links to 10 Arab countries, including nations with which it is technically at war.
Jordan said it would block the incoming calls, and an official in Amman charged that Israel had violated international conventions by acting unilaterally.
Israel said the action was legal.


Commercial Property: The Diamond District; Behind the Glitter, Recession Hurts an Exotic Bazaar
GREETING everyone by name, Robert Waldron Jr., leasing agent for 36 West 47th Street, a 16-story, turn-of-the century building in the heart of the Diamond District, was making his weekly rounds of tenants occupying booths on the "exchange" -- the building's first floor retail space of 7,500 square feet.
It is here among the 62 booths that dealers, some born in Eastern Europe, Russia, Israel, the Middle East, India, Hong Kong, Korea and Iran, spend the day among a glittering cornucopia of gems, selling their wares in a lively atmosphere that combines elements of the Lower East Side a century ago with an Oriental bazaar.


Violence Becomes Routine at a Black Township in South Africa


Perspectives: Rental Housing; Taking Steps to Head Off Abandonment
WITH a fervent "Thank you O Lord!" Linda Frank walked out of a City Hall hearing room a happy woman last Tuesday.
An arcane city body called the In Rem Foreclosure Release Board had just voted to allow her to redeem the eight-family house at 36 Hawthorne Street in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn that the city had taken for nonpayment of taxes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Treading a Mosaic of Nerve Endings
Gov.
Bill Clinton wanted to spend last night at the circus.
It apparently never occurred to him that New York's savvy gay leaders can have their fun without politicians.
Eager to win their support, he asked to speak at the annual fund-raising performance of the circus for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Madison Square Garden.
Leaders of the AIDS charity told him he could stop by if he wanted to, but they weren't about to let him speak.
Chastened, the Arkansas Governor quickly developed a scheduling conflict and could not attend.


Quotation of the Day
"Every human being born has a right to live their allotted time with dignity, whether it's two days or two weeks." -- KAREN SCHOUTEN, who gave birth to a daughter in 1987 who was anencephalic.  [ 12:6. ]


Networking; Keeping the Costs Down When Office Hopping
Connecting a local area network in small branch office to the home office or another branch office can be expensive if it isn't planned carefully.
A major problem with this process, called internetworking, is controlling the volume -- and cost -- of traffic over expensive long distance phone lines.
In most LAN operating systems, packets of data are sent along the network until they reach their intended destinations.
Much of that data involves requests for access to expensive shared resources, such tasks as producing something on a color laser printer.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 225,000
122 Robertsville Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial, in-ground pool, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $3,526.
Edison 118,000
25 Overlook Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; corner lot, eat-in- kitchen, washer, dryer and air-conditioner; taxes $2,032.
Jackson 215,000
15 Danielle Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; full basement, c/a, deck; $5,014.
Manchester 75,000
3100 Richmond Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch, fenced yard, w/w carpeting, appliances; taxes $1,495.
Princeton Junction 190,000
347 Clarksville Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old renovated bi-level; skylights, deck; taxes $3,672.
South Amboy 103,000
176 North Broadway
3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-100 year-old colonial; new heating, wiring, plumbing, large fireplace; taxes $2,032.
OTHER AREAS Old Saybrook, Conn. 145,000
179 Bokum Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; living room w/fireplace, 2.2 acres; taxes $1,690.
Armonk, N.Y. 425,000
4 Dogwood Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, family room, study, sitting room, eat-in kitchen, screened porch; taxes $6,441.
Great River, L.I. 240,000  7 Pine Tree Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old farm ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, office, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


Snacking on the Side Streets
VISITORS to Barcelona during this summer's Olympic Games may find that the crowds in well-known restaurants rival those in the spectator stands.
The tapas bars in tourist neighborhoods, too, may resemble the starting line of a marathon.
Now for the good news.
Many restaurants, bars and specialty food stores that normally close in August for vacation plan to remain open this year, so if you venture off the beaten track ample dining opportunities should exist.
One unconventional and colorful way to beat the crowds is seeking out various charcuteries in Barcelona that have several tables in the back for those who can't wait to take the groceries home.
In these shops you can taste anything from silken serrano ham to distinctive regional cheeses, wines, breads, and pastries; some serve tapas.


Point of Reference
To the Editor:
In his essay " 'Carmen Sandiego' Without Buttons"  [ March 8 ] , Douglas Davis refers to "the Broderbund almanac." In fact, the only almanac that has ever been distributed by Broderbund as part of its game "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?" is "The World Almanac and Book of Facts," published by Pharos Books.
DAVID HENDIN New York
The writer is publisher and senior vice president of Pharos Books.


Beat the Bulldog
To the Editor:
Your article about the success of Yale Law School graduates (Law page, March 20) omits one pertinent fact: more graduates of Harvard University than any other college in the country have become Presidents of the United States.


Mutual Funds; Stand Back, It's an Election Year
Conventional wisdom says that the stock market rises in Presidential election years.
Incumbents tinker with the economy in efforts to make the best case for their re-election, the thinking goes.
And in fact, stock mutual funds have had positive performances in seven of the eight election years starting in 1960.
The average annual return in these years was 15.6 percent, half again the average 10.1 percent annual return for all years since 1960, according to Lipper Analytical Services.


Networking; Keeping the Costs Down When Office Hopping
Connecting a local area network in small branch office to the home office or another branch office can be expensive if it isn't planned carefully.
A major problem with this process, called internetworking, is controlling the volume -- and cost -- of traffic over expensive long distance phone lines.
In most LAN operating systems, packets of data are sent along the network until they reach their intended destinations.
Much of that data involves requests for access to expensive shared resources, such tasks as producing something on a color laser printer.


Pact Limits Use of Hudson Water in Power Plants
Three public utilities and the Power Authority of New York have agreed to limit their use of Hudson River water to cool their generating plants during the spring and summer spawning season of striped bass, shad and other fish.
Under the terms of a court-approved settlement, the power companies and the Power Authority also agreed to give $200,000 to three environmental groups for more studies on the impact of the plants on fish in the river.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 1 with an article about the Amazon misidentified a reptile.
It was a caiman, not an alligator.


Preaching the Gospel With the Shirt on Your Back
From street corners to college campuses to celebrity closets, the gospel is quietly becoming a fashion statement.
T-shirts, sweatsuits, caps, tote bags and buttons embossed with religious scripture and spiritual messages are being bought and proudly worn by young and old of various faiths.


This Week
Impatient for Spring
Since spring is slow to come this year, bring it inside by cutting some branches of flowering quince, pussy willow or flowering cherry and forcing them to bloom indoors.
Wait a few weeks before cutting branches of crab apple, apple, pear or lilac, because these trees and shrubs need longer periods of chilling (at 32 to 40 degrees Fahrenheit) before they will bloom.
Just watch for the buds to swell before cutting.


Employers Winning Wide Leeway to Cut Medical Insurance Benefits
A rapidly growing number of victims of cancer, AIDS and other serious illnesses are discovering that under recent court interpretations of a law that was originally intended to protect employees' benefits, their insurance coverage can evaporate when they need it most.
The recent Federal court rulings have given employers that now act as their own insurers wide leeway to cut back on existing coverage -- or to skimp on coverage in the first place.
These "self-insured" employers, a large majority of companies from giant corporations to an increasing number of smaller businesses, have been exempted from state insurance laws governing what ailments insurance companies must cover.
For example, many states require coverage for alcoholism, mental health problems and intensive care for infants with birth defects.


BUILDING SADDAM HUSSEIN'S BOMB
In his article "Building Saddam Hussein's Bomb" (March 8), Gary Milhollin hit the nail right on the head.
The problem is not Saddam Hussein but the flow of Western technology that enabled Iraq to build and procure its nuclear capability.
Although one may question the justification of leaving Saddam Hussein in power, one cannot ignore the tragedy that Western technology was largely responsible for the deaths of men and women in the Persian Gulf.
RON MEADOR
New York, N.Y.


For Broccoli to Be Persuasive, Use Imagination. And Don't Boil.
AFTER broccoli started to become a staple in the United States, the New Yorker magazine ran a cartoon in the 1970's showing a small child scowling down at his plate.
"It's broccoli, dear," his mother is saying.
The child replies, "I say it's spinach and I say the hell with it."
Nevertheless, American consumption of broccoli is said to have risen 800 percent from 1970 to 1989.
And now that medical research has indicated that broccoli contains a powerful anti-cancer agent, perhaps even President Bush will have kinder things to say about it.


Seasonal Schubert


Joan Schlager Weds Mark Weinsten
Joan Ellen Schlager, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Lawrence Schlager of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married last night in Boston to Mark Robert Weinsten, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Weinsten of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Mrs.
Weinsten graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Bulfinch Companies, a Boston real-estate investment firm.


At Work; Will Pensions Follow the S.&amp;L.'s?
In itself, the decision 10 days ago by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the Federal agency that insures pension plans, to assume the pension liabilities of CF&amp;I Steel, was no surprise.
The Pueblo, Colo., company has been on the agency's villain list of the 50 top underfunded pensions since 1990, the year it sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
When the P.B.G.C. realized CF&amp;I's fund money was still flowing only one way -- out -- it decided to move in.
That is precisely how the P.B.G.C., which was created in 1974 by a provision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, is meant to work: despite CF&amp;I's problems, the pensions of 4,200 employees and retirees have been preserved.


Oh, for a Chance to Chatter at the White House!
As Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown fight it out for the Democratic nomination, pollsters and public opinion experts are assessing their strength among the constituencies they need to win.
How are they doing with the middle class, labor, blacks, Jews?
What no one has troubled to look into is how they are doing among that statistically insignificant but intangibly crucial sector -- intangibly crucial in their own eyes, at least -- the intellectuals.
As a class, American intellectuals have never been more than minor players in electoral politics.
Or, indeed, in much of anything else.
Isolated in universities, "marginalized" -- to borrow a term from contemporary academic discourse -- by the specialization of literary studies, they're perpetually on the verge of obsolescence.
In his influential book, "The Last Intellectuals: American Culture in the Age of Academe," Russell Jacoby lamented the possible disappearance of an "endangered species" from American life: "While the aging industrial plant of America elicits much talk, the aging intellectual plant passes unnoticed."


Peter's Tale II: What About the Wolf?
DID you ever wonder what happened to the duck after the wolf ate her up, or to the wolf after Peter led the parade to the zoo?
Barbara Eliason Dunkel not only pondered the questions, but came up with the answers, which will be revealed today at 2 P.M. when Al Roker of NBC News narrates the premiere of "Peter and the Wolf: The Sequel."
The score was put together from various works of Prokofiev by Mrs.
Dunkel's husband, Paul Lustig Dunkel, who will conduct members of the New Orchestra of Westchester at the Fox Lane School in Bedford.
The free program is a joint venture of the orchestra and the Mount Kisco Concert Association.
Call 966-9181 for additional information.


Bridge Finals Played In Vanderbilt Teams
Teams headed by Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va., and Andy Goodman of San Francisco, clashed here today in the final of the prestigious Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
The victors will become candidates to represent the United States in the 1993 World Team Championships in Santiago, Chile.
After 16 deals out of a scheduled 64, the Robinson team led the Goodman team by 10 international match points, 26 to 16.


Israel Shocks Arabs: We're All Connected
Calling it a good-will gesture to promote peace, Israel has opened direct telephone links to 10 Arab countries, including nations with which it is technically at war.
Jordan said it would block the incoming calls, and an official in Amman charged that Israel had violated international conventions by acting unilaterally.
Israel said the action was legal.


Maria C. Flynn Has Wedding
Maria Christina Flynn, the beauty editor of Seventeen magazine, and Mark Kenwill Schmidt, a securities analyst, both in New York, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
William Pindar officiated at Central Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
She is the daughter of Joseph Flynn, a retired airline pilot in Naples, Fla., and Dulce Cardoso de Almeida Flynn of Rio de Janeiro.


Corrections
A report on March 15 about the engagement of Jan T. Wilson and Jerome D. Abernathy misstated the hometown of the prospective bride's mother.
It is Lauderhill, Fla.


Making a Difference/Tax Time, 1992; Looking Ahead at the I.R.S.
Just weeks into her tenure as Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Shirley D. Peterson is facing the annual tax deadline, when taxpayer stress hits its peak and the agency is flooded with paperwork.
Not surprisingly, Ms.
Peterson already is looking forward to the day when April 15 isn't quite as dreaded as it is now.
"To reduce the burden on the taxpayers -- I feel very strongly about that," she said in a recent interview.


Women's Humor Reflects Society's Changing Roles
THE changing role of women in society is being reflected in their use of humor, says Dr.
Regina Barreca, who teaches English at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
Dr.
Barreca, author of the book "I Used to Be Snow White . . . But I Drifted: Women's Strategic Use of Humor," published last year by Viking, said that women's humor has a long tradition, but it used to be more constrained and less recognized.
Now women's humor is taking new directions and getting more visibility, because "women are ready to take risks, step over the line," she said.
Her book features quotes from dozens of funny women, from Mae West to Judy Tenuta, as well as Dr.
Barreca's own advice.
She writes that a woman should stay ready for "the guys at the bar, the nasty co-worker, the snotty salesman" by maintaining an assortment of humorous responses, cultivated "like a beautiful and slightly poisonous garden."


Decisions, Decisions: Yanks Have a Mouthful
Day after day, Buck Showalter sits in the cramped manager's office at Fort Lauderdale Stadium and is peppered with the same questions about the Yankees.
Since his answers have been sparse, the questions linger.
Showalter simply gets the truncated versions these days.
Third base? Starting rotation? Leadoff hitter? Backup catcher? Fifth outfielder?


Valerie Jacobson Weds J. J. Kelleher
Valerie Lynn Jacobson, the daughter of Beverly and Donald Jacobson of Lake Mohegan, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Joseph John Kelleher, a son of Helen Kelleher of Ramsey, N.J., and the late Michael Kelleher.
The Rev.
Rick Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Colonial Terrace in Cortlandt Manor, N.Y., with Rabbi Joseph Gelberman attending.
Mrs.
Kelleher, 27 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler in New York.
She is a Johns Hopkins University graduate and received a law degree cum laude from Fordham University, as did her husband.
Her father is the general counsel to Pergament Home Centers in Melville, L.I.
Her mother is a vice president of the Bank of New York in White Plains.


Jeanne Shapiro Has Wedding
Jeanne Shapiro, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Shapiro of New York, was married in New York last evening to Robert Lewis Savitt, the son of Mrs.
Henry A. Grunwald and Richard Savitt, both of New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Savitt, 24 years old, is a promotion coordinator at the Clinique Laboratories in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, a former co-chairman of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, is president of RFS &amp; Associates, an investment concern, in New York.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Medical Towers Seek Tenants
TWO buildings with a special niche in the downtown office market are actively seeking tenants after a hiatus of nearly two years for renovations.
The 15-story Medical Arts Building at 16th and Walnut Streets and the 30-story Medical Tower on 17th between Spruce and Locust Streets are seeking medical professionals.
They were designed specifically for medical offices, with central compressed-air and suction lines, said Leigh Purdy, leasing agent for the owner, GMH Associates of Wayne, Pa.


Olympic Trials in New Orleans
Before they can get to the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, American track and field athletes will first have to make the grade in New Orleans.
That city will be the setting for the 1992 United States Track and Field Trials from June 19 to 28.
Some 1,300 hopefuls will compete for 120 spaces on the American track and field team; among those expected to participate are world record holders Carl Lewis, Mike Powell, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Evelyn Ashford and Edwin Moses.
The 10-day event, to be held at the Tad Gormley Stadium-Alerion Field in City Park, will consist of eight days of competition, with two rest days on June 23 and 25.
The 36 events include the dashes, javelin, decathlon, jumps, shot-put, hammer, discus and hurdles.
Each day of competition, except for the first, will feature at least three finals.


From Gadfly To Supervisor, A Rocky Path For Feiner
ONE of the first changes Paul J. Feiner introduced after being sworn in as the top elected official here was to bow to a constituent's wishes and abolish the reserved parking spot for Town Supervisor.
That act, his supporters and detractors would agree, is representative of the man.
"Someone came up to me when I was parking my car and said, 'You politicians, you all get special treatment,' " Mr.
Feiner recalled.
"So I decided to park my car wherever I could find a space, like everyone else has to do when they come to work."


Talking: Insurance; Getting Optimum Coverage
RATES and terms for insurance policies covering New York City co-op buildings are better than they have been for years, and competition has grown fierce among carriers and their representatives to lure buildings into some of the broader and more cost-effective arrangements.
Personal letters and printed fliers are being sent to board members with statements like, "we've made a major breakthrough," or, "we can save you at least 30 percent." Those claims are tempting to directors who are under heavy pressure to keep a lid on maintenance costs.


15-Year-Old Takes His L.I. Realism to Hollywood
JONATHAN BRANDIS laughs nervously as he analyzes his dual role as a boy and a girl in the film "Ladybugs."
"What are my friends going to say?" he asked.


BUSH IN 'ANGUISH' ON ISRAEL TENSION
Disturbed by a letter from a prominent Jewish supporter who questioned his basic commitment to Israel, President Bush wrote a fervid reply that spoke of his "anguish" over Israeli-American tensions and acknowledged that his Administration was not handling the relationship well enough.
The exchange of letters, in which Mr.
Bush reiterated his opposition to the construction of any more Israeli settlements on the occupied West Bank, served to emphasize the difficulties the Administration has had with American Jews since the President began his battle of wills with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over the settlements.


Michigan Saved By 'Forgotten' Player
They call themselves the Forgotten Five, a named coined by Michigan senior guard Kirk Taylor, who along with junior Eric Riley, senior Rob Pelinka, junior James Voskuil and junior Michael Talley have been virtually swallowed up by the excitement generated by the Fab Five, Michigan's five freshmen starters.
At the start of this college basketball season, these five upperclassmen were supposed to provide the nucleus of a team that would contend for a Big Ten championship and possibly a national championship.


In Deaths In Custody, Cocaine Is A Suspect
Early on Feb. 5, 1991, as cars whizzed by on the nearby Long Island Expressway in the Forest Hills section of Queens, five New York City police officers surrounded a parked stolen car.
When they opened the door to arrest the 21-year-old man inside, they later reported, he put up a violent struggle in which he continued to thrash and kick even while handcuffed and pressed to the pavement -- until he suddenly stopped breathing.
Two civilian witnesses saw it differently, saying that some of the officers beat and kicked Federico Pereira as he lay on the ground face down and "hogtied" -- his hands cuffed behind his back with his feet attached.
One officer had sat on his back and pulled him up by the neck, chest or chin.
Armed with these accounts and a medical examiner's finding that Mr.
Pereira, a cocaine addict with past theft and drug convictions, had died of "traumatic asphyxia," a grand jury indicted the five officers for murder, accusing one of fatally choking him and the others of "acting in concert."


Rangers at Their Best But Not for Islanders
The Rangers are assured of having the National Hockey League's best record for the first time since 1942, and they may well capture the Stanley Cup if there's no strike.
But the hockey history books will show that despite their accomplishments this season, they went without a victory at Nassau Coliseum, home of the rival Islanders.
The Islanders swept all four games against the Rangers here this season after tonight's 4-1 triumph and have now kept the Rangers without a victory here in their last 10 visits (0-8-2).
The Islanders also captured the over all series against the Rangers, 4-2-1.


Knicks Rookie Has Share Of Bumps
At this time last year, Greg Anthony was confidently directing Nevada-Las Vegas into the Final Four of the national collegiate basketball tournament.
This year, Anthony is trying to establish himself as a rookie point guard in the National Basketball Association.
The transition has not always been smooth.
In some games, Anthony has sparkled.
In others, like the game Thursday in Denver, Anthony has fizzled.


Debra Bradley to Marry Eric Ruder
Debra Ann Bradley, a reporter for The Harvard University Gazette, the university's weekly newspaper, and Eric Ruder, an environmental analyst at Industrial Economics, Cambridge, Mass., consultants, are engaged to be married in August.
Ms.
Bradley, 33 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She is the daughter of Prof.
Trudy Festinger of New York and the late Dan F. Bradley, a chemist at the Polytechnic Institute in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a professor of social work at New York University.


Unser Still Upbeat About New Car
It did not take long for Al Unser Jr. to dispel the rumors that his team's new car was a flop.
Unser put the new Galmer chassis on the pole for the first Indy-car race of the season, last Sunday in Surfers Paradise, Australia, and was chasing Michael Andretti for the lead much of the race.
Although Unser eventually finished fourth, just ahead of his teammate Danny Sullivan in a similar car, he sounded happy with the car in a telephone conversation last week.


The British Billboard as Rapier and Bludgeon
In Britain, the billboard endures as a form of high political art.
With paid political spots barred from British television, the next best way for marketing gurus to burn a punchy and highly visual message into the public eye is to splash it over thousands of buildings and roadsides.
Indeed, as the month-long British political season reached full stride last week, the Outdoor Advertising Association estimated that as many as one-third of the nation's 30,000 larger outdoor billboards were now being devoted to political messages.
The very best of the billboards can score their points with the caustic wit of an Oxford Union debate.
In 1987, for example, the Conservatives produced a billboard aiming to depict Labor as soft on defense policy.
Showing a soldier with his hands raised in the air in a gesture of surrender, it read: "Labor's Policy on Arms."


French Rococo: Art That Cannot Speak for Itself
Eighteenth-Century French painting is underexplored territory, and, in a way, one understands why.
More than any other European art, that of the Rococo, with its images of coquettish goddesses and bewigged lovers trysting in parks, feels out of sync with the 20th century.
It seems to be, as someone has said, an art primarily about style, its moral sensibility implicit in the porcelain-white, glazed faces in some of its figures -- chilly, curiously childlike, far removed from the social and psychic imperatives that have motivated art in recent years.
This view does not, in fact, represent an accurate picture of a complex subject, and an exhibition with a revisionist approach would be most welcome.
It might take the form of a horizontal sweep, capturing the variety of a period that offered work both religious and secular, grand and intimate, with subjects ranging from royal portraits to the humblest of genre scenes.
Or it might isolate a single motif and pursue it in depth, exploring meanings intended and hidden.


Not Quite Letter-Perfect
Oldsmobile Division General Motors Corporation 920 Townsend Street Lansing, Mich. 48921 Dear Division:


To the Dustbin of History
THE COMMUNISTS
The Story of Power and Lost Illusions: 1948-1991.
By Adam B. Ulam.  528 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.


Pass the Plates and Share the Dishes
FOR 15 years, La Viola has been a weathervane of Long Island's taste in Italian food.
When this Cedarhurst institution opened, its cuisine was continental.
Later, it changed to trendy Italian with cutting-edge pastas, a glistening antipasto array and olive oil and balsamic vinegar bottles on the tables.
Two years ago, La Viola was a leader in the current march to family dining.
But more than style has changed.
A year and a half ago, a fire forced La Viola to move a few blocks away into a landmark hotel, across from the railroad station.
The hotel formerly housed Al Steiner's.


Catherine Hamilton to Marry in June
Charles K. Hamilton of Mount Hermon, Mass., and Margaret B. Howland of Marion, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Howland Hamilton, to Jeffory Martin FitzGerald, the son of Leda S. FitzGerald of Enfield, Conn., and the late Col.
Robert W. FitzGerald.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hamilton, 25 years old, is an analyst at the New York City Office of Employment Services.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father teaches English at Northfield Mount Hermon School.
Her mother is the director of visitor services at the Harvard University art museums in Cambridge, Mass.


Corrections
A report on March 15 about the marriage of Pamela A. Bresnahan and Peter F. Axelrad misstated the wedding date.
It was March 7.


Who's That Bluebird? And Who's That White Cat?
"THE SLEEPING BEAUTY" IS one of ballet's most enthralling flights of fancy.
So it's no wonder that both the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater will be performing it later this spring.
The ballet tells a splendid story.
Actually, it does more than that.
This 19th-century classic abounds with references to a multitude of stories.
These occur in the last act, when Princess Aurora celebrates her wedding.
Depending upon the elaborateness of each individual production, the party guests might include Little Red Riding Hood, Cinderella, Hop o' My Thumb and Bluebeard -- all of whom need no introductions.


Cella Irvine and Hart Hooton Marry
Cella Maria Irvine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bonnell Irvine of New York, was married yesterday to Hart Hooton, the son of Bruce Duff Hooton of Upper Brookville, L.I., and Claire Krich Hooton of East Hampton, L.I.
Judge Michael R. Sonberg of the New York Civil Court officiated at the Fifteenth Street Friends Meetinghouse.
Ms.
Irvine, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the customer relations manager of Prodigy Services Company, a computer service in White Plains.
She graduated from Cornell University and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is an architect in New York.
Her mother, Josephine Irvine, is the director of educational services for the Ballet Hispanico in New York.


Snyder Wins Giants Job
He had to prove himself a jack-of-all-trades to do it, but CORY SNYDER has won a job with the San Francisco Giants, as a jack-of-all-trades.
"Cory will fill a utility role," said Manager ROGER CRAIG.
"He'll pinch-hit and he can play a lot of positions, so he'll get enough at-bats to stay sharp."


Past Administration Of Hospital Defended
The article on March 1, "O'Rourke Overrules Hospital Chief," provides an apparently clear path for St.
Agnes Hospital to full prosperity.
Due to the intervention of Cardinal O'Connor and the evident skillful administration of Michael Delicce, St.
Agnes appears to be ready to operate profitably as an affiliate of New York Medical College and the Westchester County Medical Center.
Unfortunately, the history of the hospital is tainted in the article by the comment of "some staff members" that St.
Agnes Hospital endured "years of mismanagement."


Jane Jacobs Versus the World
To the Editor:
I was glad to see your piece on Jane Jacobs, Lewis Mumford, et al., but as an idolater of both (not as contradictory as it may seem), I was baffled by your labels.
She (the woman) is dubbed an "amateur"; he (the man) is deemed the professional.
Ah, well.


UP AND COMING: Rosie Perez; Just Don't Call Her a Loudmouth
When Rosie Perez showed up to audition for the role of Gloria in the comedy "White Men Can't Jump," it was clear that the Brooklyn-born, Puerto Rican actress did not fit the part.
Gloria was supposed to be a WASP who rebelled against a privileged background by running off with a college basketball player.
But when Ms.
Perez read for the role, things changed.
"She gave a very surprising, honest reading," recalls the director Ron Shelton.
"She was very focused, extremely prepared. I started to rethink the part."


Where Wine Choices Are as Varied as Unusual
THE first time that Mark Fox came upon a Lebanese wine, the gulf war had just ended and he wondered aloud if there was shrapnel in the wine.
Now that wine, a rather sturdy syrah called Chateau Musar '82, is on one of Long Island's most exotic and exciting lists.
It, along with wines from Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the United States and elsewhere, is part of the array of wines at Conrad's Bar &amp; Grill at 326 West Jericho Turnpike in Huntington.


Top House Officials Impeded an Inquiry
The head of criminal investigations for the Capitol police in Washington said in a February memorandum that top House administrators intervened last June to keep his office from investigating cash shortages at the House post office and eventually got the investigation transferred to another agency.


Making a Difference/Tax Time, 1992; . . . and in the White House
On tax policy as well as almost every other aspect of economic and domestic affairs, Richard G. Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, was the dominant figure in the first three years of the Bush Administration.
He was the driving force behind the sweeping budget compromise the Administration struck with Congress in 1990, which caused President Bush to break his campaign promise of "no new taxes." And he is the primary architect of the tax policies the President wants enacted this year, including a lower capital gains tax.


Preaching Love Thy Competitor
Four years ago, Novell Inc. was little more than a pesky fly on the rump of a giant computer software elephant named Microsoft.
Novell, a small, obscure company situated here in the shadow of Utah's Wasatch Range, produced software to hook desktop computers together so they could share peripheral devices, such things as printers and hard disks.
The Microsoft Corporation, in Redmond, Wash., was large, rich and famous for its MS-DOS operating system, which had become the standard operating system software installed in millions of personal computers.


Streetscapes: 829 Park Avenue; Getting Window Colors Right
THE question of color in New York's buildings doesn't get much attention -- maybe this is just a black and white city, or maybe color seems a trivial aspect of Architecture.
So only the student of small things will find satisfaction in a trip to the 1912 apartment house at 829 Park Avenue at 76th Street where a major exterior restoration is under way.
The repointing and cleaning of the facade there is an improvement, but hardly news.
What is exceptional is the color of the windows -- instead of the ubiquitous black or bronze that predominates on Park Avenue and other apartment-house thoroghfares, the windows are a soft buff.
This small detail changes dramatically the appearance of the building and is in fact how it was meant to look.


Perot Supporters, Lots of Them, Call In


Mary McKenna to Wed in October
Mr. and Mrs.
George S. McKenna of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Martin McKenna, to Stewart Alan Stockdale, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan G. Stockdale of Mexico City.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss McKenna, 25 years old, is a production unit manager in New York for MTV Networks.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the president of McKenna Insurance Associates in West Hartford.


Good News for Keough
MATT KEOUGH, the Angels pitching hopeful who had emergency brain surgery after being struck by a foul ball on March 16, has been told by his doctor that he will probably be able to pitch again in two months.
While that is certainly good news for Keough, who is recuperating at his home in Cota de Caza, Calif., the next question is whether he will be able to pitch well enough to make the majors.


Revolution and the Cosmo Girl
To the Editor:
Deirdre English's review of "Revolution From Within" by Gloria Steinem (Feb. 2) strikes me as foolish.
Self-esteem has nothing to do with a chipped fingernail.
Its core lies deep inside our psychic essence.
The only way to start a revolution is to change the one thing that we have 100 percent control over -- ourselves.
LILI WHITE Philadelphia


A Savory Bean Classic: Cassoulet From Languedoc
THE French like to think of their classic dishes as having been born, not made.
Thus, cassoulet, the famous bean casserole of the Languedoc region in southwestern France, is said to have been born in Castelnaudary, about midway between Carcassonne and Toulouse.
The legend is that during the Hundred Years War, when Castelnaudary was being besieged by the English, the starving inhabitants pooled their few provisions -- white beans, lard, sausage and confit d'oie, or preserved goose -- and cooked them in an earthenware pot in a wood-fired oven.
And sowas born cassoulet.
The legend is still appropriate, first because the basic ingredients of cassoulet remain the same, and second because it is truly a feast for the famished; no light eaters need apply.
Not only is it a meal in a dish, but also the dish itself is by tradition a rather large, high-sided bowl that comes to the table amply filled.
Also by tradition, diners may be invited to serve themselves, family style, cassoulet being a triumph of country cooking rather than haute cuisine.


Social Events
S.O.S. for Hunger Relief
March 30 -- More than 100 culinary fund-raising events for Share Our Strengths will be held around the nation this week with funds going to 175 food banks, shelters and social-service agencies.
The New York benefit will be aboard the yacht New Yorker.
Guests will board at 7 P.M. at Pier 62, 23d Street and the Hudson River.
Cocktails will be followed by dancing and a buffet prepared by 30 chefs from some of the city's more elegant restaurants.
At 9 P.M., there will be an auction of vacations, events and fashion items followed at 10 P.M. by a one-hour cruise around the harbor.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 382-5766.
Helping Young Artists
March 31 -- Frederica von Stade will perform at the annual benefit for the Glimmerglass Opera Company in Cooperstown, N.Y., to raise funds for its young American artists program.
The black-tie evening at the Hudson Theater, 145 West 44th Street, will start with cocktails at 7 P.M.
The 8 P.M. recital will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 874-5457.
Upper West Side Party
April 1 -- Dessert and dancing at Tavern on the Green will mark the annual spring benefit of the Jewish Community Center of the Upper West Side.
Tickets, $75 for those 35 and under, $150 for others, from (212) 580-0299.
French Night at the Plaza
April 1 -- The French-American Foundation, which promotes economic, political and cultural ties between the two countries, will hold its spring benefit at the Plaza, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M. followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660.
Parking Violations Party
April 1 -- Dancing in the Streets will go indoors for an 8 P.M. party at the Parking Violations Bureau.
The dance group, which presents programs in public schools, will hold its dance party at a branch of the city agency in a former bank building at 51 Chambers Street near City Hall.
Tickets, $40, , $20 for artists and guests under 16, from (212) 989-6830.
Dinners with Authors
April 1 -- The literacy programs of the Union Settlement Association in East Harlem will benefit from a series of private dinners and a reading at the 92d Street YMHA.
Oscar Hijuelos, Richard Rhodes, Terry McMillan, Marianne Wiggins and Henry Louis Gates Jr. will read from their works starting at 8 P.M.
Dinners at six Manhattan homes, held at various times, precede the readings.
A reception follows the reading.
Tickets, $25 for the reading, $65 including the reception, and $125 for dinner, the reading and the reception, from (212) 360-8818.
Artists Space Celebration
April 1 -- Artists Space, which provides exhibition space for artists who might not find it in the more traditional galleries, is celebrating its 18th anniversary with a far-flung benefit that starts at 7 P.M. in 25 SoHo and Tribeca restaurants.
Dancing from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. follows at Artists Space, 223 West Broadway between White and Franklin Street.
Tickets, $225, or for dancing alone, $30, from (212) 226-3970.
Friends of Israel Philharmonic
April 1 -- The American Friends of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra will hold an "April Fool's Musical Frolic" at Carnegie Hall with Peter Schickele, in the guise of P.D.Q.
Bach, conducting Itzhak Perlman and Yo-Yo Ma.
Works will include "Fuga Meshuga for Flute, Oboe, Violin and Bassoon" and "Schleptet." Dinner at the Pierre follows the 7 P.M. concert.
Black-tie.
Tickets, $1,000, or $75 for concert and a buffet supper party at "21" Club for Young Friends of the Israel Philharmonic, also after the concert, from (212) 697-2949.
Concert tickets alone, $12 to $75 from Carnegie Hall box office.
Auction of Celebrity Doodles
April 1 -- An auction of doodles from 100 celebrities, including one from President Bush that is expected to be offered for more than $7,000, will benefit the National Kidney Foundation of New York and New Jersey.
A 6 P.M. supper at the Seagram Building, 375 Park Avenue at 47th Street, precedes the 7:30 P.M. auction.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 629-9770.
Art Show for Nature Benefit
April 2 -- The Flat Rock Brook Nature Association, an environmental education center in Englewood, N.J., will have a benefit wildlife art show with hors d'oeuvres, cocktails and music from 7:30 to 10 P.M. at its 150-acre sanctuary on Van Nostrand Avenue, one block north of the Jones Road Exit off Route 4.
Tickets, $25, from (201) 567-1265.
International House Benefit
April 2 -- Founded in 1924 by John D. Rockefeller, International House, at 500 Riverside Drive at West 123d Street, houses some 700 graduates students from scores of countries attending institutions in the New York area.
A benefit for the house will be held there starting with cocktails at 7 P.M. followed by dinner and an auction of events, trips and luxury items ranging in price from about $500 to $10,000.
Tickets, $30 , from (212) 316-8470.
Aiding Daytop Village
April 2 -- Daytop Village's drug and alcohol rehabilitation centers around the country will benefit from a reception and auction of celebrity paraphernalia like a "Mary Tyler Moore Show" script autographed by the star.
The benefit, from 7 to 10 P.M., will be at Tavern on the Green.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 354-6000, or at the door.
Forward Face for Children
April 2 -- Forward Face, a group affiliated with the Institute of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery at the New York University Medical Center that provides support for children with craniofacial abnormalities, will have a dinner and jazz concert benefit at Bridgewaters in the South Street Seaport.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and the concert.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 263-5205.
Hell's Kitchen AIDS Project
April 2 -- The 8 P.M. performance of the comedy "The Lady from Havana" at INTAR, 420 West 42d Street, will benefit the H.I.V./AIDS education programs of the Hell's Kitchen AIDS Project.
Students from the Professional Performing Arts School will give a presentation at intermission.
A 6:15 P.M. reception will be held at the theater.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 956-7587.
Down Syndrome Benefit
April 2 -- A cocktail party and preview of Sanford Smith's "Works on Paper" show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will benefit the National Down Syndrome Society.
The benefit, with first opportunity to buy the works, will be from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, (212) 460-9330.
Rape Crisis Program
April 2 -- Hugh Downs and Geraldine Ferraro will be the guest speakers at a cocktail party for the Mount Sinai Medical Center's rape crisis intervention program.
Ellen King, a retired New York City Police Department detective, will be honored for work on sex crimes.
The benefit will be from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Westbury Hotel.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 241-5461.
Dance Opening and Party
April 3 -- The opening night performance of Dances Patrelle at the Florence Gould Hall of the French Institute, 55 East 59th Street, followed by a champagne reception will benefit the ballet company.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 721-4163.
Staten Island Cocktails and Tea
April 3, 4 -- The Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences at 75 Stuyvesant Place, a short walk from the ferry, is holding a cocktail party from 7 to 9 P.M. on Friday and an afternoon tea from 3 to 5 P.M. on Saturday to benefit the institute.
Tickets, $35, for cocktail party, $20 for tea, from (718) 727-1135.
Children's Cancer Fund
April 3, 4, 5 -- Cocktail receptions and an exhibition of works by the artist Menelaos Katafigiotis will be held at the Greek Consulate, 69 East 79th Street.
The receptions and exhibition will be from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M., Friday and Saturday, and 4 to 6 P.M. on Sunday.
Proceeds will benefit the Greek Children's Fund at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 639-3520.
Teddy Bear Sale
April 4 -- More than 100 teddy bears autographed by celebrities, including Nick Nolte, Woody Allen and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, will be auctioned at Greenwich House, 27 Barrow Street, at 2 P.M., to benefit the organization's child abuse prevention and treatment program.
Refreshments will be sold.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 924-1091, or $25 at the door.
St.
Bart's Benefit Bash
April 4 -- The St.
Bartholomew Community Club will hold a fund-raising party at the China Club, 2130 Broadway at 75th Street, from 8 to 10 P.M.
The evening will benefit the club's programs for the homeless.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 751-1616, extension 216.
Homes for the Homeless
April 4 -- Habitat for Humanity, which aids the nation's homeless, is holding a black-tie dinner and dance at 7 P.M. at Bridgewaters in the South Street Seaport.
All proceeds will go for completion of a Lower East Side residence for 21 families.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 505-2230.
Union Theological Memorial
April 5 -- The Union Theological Seminary will commemorate the theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer, executed by the Nazis for his participation in a plot on Hitler's life, in a concert at the Riverside Church conducted by Christoph von Dohnanyi, music director of the Cleveland Orchestra and the honoree's nephew.
Bill Moyers will be the master of ceremonies.
A movie on the German Resistance will be shown at 3 P.M. at the Jewish Theological Seminary in conjunction with the benefit, which will help establish the Bonhoeffer Chair in Theology and Ethics at Union.
Tickets, $1,000 for movie, dinner, concert and reception afterward, $25 for the concert alone, from (212) 722-6226.
Spring Dance at the Met
April 6 -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art's annual black-tie spring dance will be held in several parts of the museum.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing in the Carroll and Milton Petrie European Sculpture Court.
Another dance starts at 9:30 P.M. in the Temple of Dendur while still another starts then in the Charles Engelhard Court.
Tickets, $1,000 for cocktails, dinner and three dances, $125 for 9:30 P.M. dances and reception, from (212) 570-3956.
Tribute to Liza Minnelli
April 6 -- A musical tribute to Liza Minnelli will be held at the Marriott Marquis starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. followed by dinner and the musical salute.
The evening benefits the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health, a psychoanalytic training institute that also provides housing and counseling for the homeless and victims of AIDS and family violence.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 576-4177.
Foundation for the Elderly
April 6 -- The New York Foundation for Senior Citizens, which provides housing, employment and other services for the elderly in New York City, will hold its annual awards benefit at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 962-7559.
Benefiting WPA Theater
April 6 -- The Off Off Broadway WPA Theater will hold its 15th-anniversary benefit starting with cocktails and then dinner at the Broadway Grill in the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza.
Guests will then attend the 8 P.M. preview performance of the musical "Five Guys Named Moe" at the Eugene O'Neill Theater.
Tickets, $250, or for the performance alone, $125, from (212) 206-0523.


Jordan's Image at Risk, And Image Is Everything
His face is on Wheaties boxes, breakfast of gravity-defying champions.
He is the centerpiece for worldwide, multimillion-dollar advertising campaigns of Gatorade and McDonald's.
The shoe manufacturer, Nike, has treated him as if he created not only the trendy basketball shoe, but also the basketball.
He has become as much an American symbol of excellence as he is a great basketball player.
But now, after reports linking Jordan to high-stakes wagering on golf and card games, people close to the Chicago Bulls star worry that his flight to unchartered popular heights may soon begin to lose altitude.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: City Hall; Absence of a Hispanic Journalist On Debate Panel Prompts Dispute
A debate between the Democratic Presidential candidates planned for next week in the Bronx has prompted a prickly dispute between one of its organizers, Borough President Fernando Ferrer, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked him to include a Hispanic journalist among the questioners.
Yesterday, after City Hall made public a letter from the Mayor to Mr.
Ferrer urging him to broaden the panel, Mr.
Ferrer, the city's most prominent Hispanic official and a potential Dinkins rival, issued a withering reply, dismissing Mr.
Dinkins's objections as "patently wrong and without merit."


As Money Gets Tighter, Tax Collectors Get Tougher
IN the first two weeks of March, Bridgeport issued almost 60 tax warrants, which allow it to attach the salaries and bank accounts of people who owe municipal taxes.
By contrast, the city issued only about 15 such warrants in the previous five years.
The city's finance director, Richard V. Robinson, said the accelerated collection efforts would continue, and the number of warrants "could be in the thousands by the time we're done."
As the recession continues to squeeze their finances, municipalities throughout the state are getting tough with taxpayers.
In addition to issuing warrants, towns and cities are expediting foreclosures and sales of tax liens, even turning delinquent accounts over to private collection agencies.


Paint Rollers an Asset If the Surface Is Flat
ROLLERS are the most popular tools for painting large flat surfaces like ceilings, walls and floors.
They produce better-looking results, can cover areas more quickly than brushes and are less messy, less costly and less difficult to use than sprays.
A roller's most important feature is the cover, the woolly cylinder that carries and spreads the paint, but also shop carefully for the handle.


It's Not Just Breast Implants the F.D.A. Is After
No one would deny that the potential hazards of using new medical devices should be thoroughly understood before the products are marketed, and that unnecessarily dangerous devices should be banned.
But what if the review process becomes so complex and expensive that it blocks innovative devices from ever leaving the laboratory?
As the Food and Drug Administration steps up its regulation of medical devices, debate about the right balance is growing.
Some argue that new rules and stricter enforcement will protect users of medical equipment and boost their confidence in the products.
President Bush, who has been seeking to show that his Administration is a foe of regulatory interference, is siding with those who argue that excessive regulation leads to less innovation, higher prices and a growing number of "orphan" devices that small groups of people need but no one can make profitably.


Paint Rollers an Asset If the Surface Is Flat
ROLLERS are the most popular tools for painting large flat surfaces like ceilings, walls and floors.
They produce better-looking results, can cover areas more quickly than brushes and are less messy, less costly and less difficult to use than sprays.
A roller's most important feature is the cover, the woolly cylinder that carries and spreads the paint, but also shop carefully for the handle.


Easy as What?
For centuries, scholars have gazed at the frieze on the ancient Portland vase and asked, "What's going on here?" The expressions of the human and mythical figures suggest that the artist was depicting more than people at leisure, and over the years dozens of exegeses have been offered only to be found wanting.
Now comes Randall L. Skalsky, a graduate student at the University of Massachusetts, with what appears to be the snuggest analysis yet.
Focusing not on the six human figures but on the architecture in the scene, he noticed that an arch looked like the Greek letter pi.
From this and the details it unraveled, Mr.
Skalsky, whose theory was initially rejected by academic journals, was finally able to convince skeptics that the frieze was a visual representation of Catullus's poem "The Marriage of Peleus and Thetis." He has accepted one of two offers to publish his monograph and the 43-year-old Mr.
Skalsky -- he took the scenic route to higher education -- is to receive a master's degree in May.


Where the Money Washes Up
IN ANY FLIGHT FROM MIAMI TO the Cayman Islands, passengers can usually be divided into two groups.
There are the vacationers, in their T-shirts and sneakers, on their way to a Caribbean holiday of sun and scuba diving.
Then there are the suits.
With Rolex watches on their wrists and leather attache cases by their feet, they barely glance up from their papers to take in the palm-fringed isles below as the plane nears its destination.
The button-down crowd has been commuting regularly to do business in a tax-and-regulatory haven that, by some measures, now rivals Switzerland.
Three slivers of sand tucked south of Cuba and northwest of Jamaica, the Cayman Islands are an unlikely location for a world-class financial center.
Mere flyspecks on most maps, they are so out of the way that Christopher Columbus discovered them by accident when his flotilla was blown off course on his final voyage to the New World in 1503.
For centuries afterward, the Caymans were a hideaway for adventurers like Edward Teach, also known as Blackbeard the Pirate, who hid ill-gotten loot on the remote isles.


Making a Difference/Tax Time, 1992; Mr. Taxes in the House . . .
This, many thought, was to have been the finale for Dan Rostenkowski, the year the 64-year-old chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee would pack up his gavel and, after 17 terms, slip into a comfortable steak-and-golf retirement.
As he contemplated the political twists that kept him from becoming Speaker of the House or Mayor of Chicago, Mr.
Rostenkowski would be consoled by such legislative successes as the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and the leftover campaign contributions -- in his case, about $1 million -- that those retiring by the end of this Congressional session could take along.


Sweet Words


Historical Landmarks
To the Editor:
I was thrilled to see the front-page review of "The Radicalism of the American Revolution" by Gordon S. Wood (March 1).
I think, however, that when Pauline Maier says the book is the best on the subject to appear in over 20 years, she is guilty of false modesty.
Ms.
Maier's "From Resistance to Revolution" belongs on any list of masterworks on the Revolution.
DAVID C. WHITE Brooklyn


Revolution and the Cosmo Girl
To the Editor:
Deirdre English writes: "Ms. Steinem became, in effect, America's first smart blonde. She bridged the distance from Helen Gurley Brown to Murphy Brown, from the 'single girl' -- little more than a Playboy Bunny with a clerical job -- to today's feisty feminist professional." Possibly Ms.
English doesn't
read
Cosmo, but I think I should mention that Cosmo predated the feminist movement, and our format has been since 1964 "a magazine for a woman between the ages of 18 and 34 who loves men, loves children but doesn't want to gain her identity through others, who wants to achieve on her own." There is nothing wrong with being a Playboy Bunny, but Cosmo's 11 million readers range from clerical workers and secretaries to television producers and psychiatrists.
I don't know whether they are
feisty,
as in Ms.
English's designation "feisty feminist professional," but they certainly are feminist and they certainly are professional.
HELEN GURLEY BROWN New York


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independents; Perot, the 'Simple' Billionaire, Says Voters Can Force His Presidential Bid
In a year in which half the cards in the political deck seem to be jokers, the ultimate wild card may be playing out in a corporate suite full of Norman Rockwell paintings in a high rise here.
"I'm a very simple person," said H. Ross Perot, the Texas entrepreneur and billionaire, who the telephone company says has received more than a million calls from would-be volunteers over the past three weeks since he discussed a possible Presidential bid on the Larry King Show.
"I told the people if they do their job, I'm obligated to do my job, and I will not come up with some limp-wristed excuse because it's unpleasant."


Duke Nips Kentucky With Basket at the Buzzer
Duke University's hope to defend its national collegiate basketball championship was kept alive in one stunning moment tonight when Christian Laettner outleaped a group of Kentucky Wildcats for a looping desperation pass and released a 17-foot jump shot barely before the final buzzer for a 104-103 overtime victory in the East regional championship game.
Duke (32-2) will make its fifth consecutive Final Four appearance, and its sixth in seven tournaments, when it meets the West champion, Indiana, next Saturday night at the Metrodome in Minneapolis, Minn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: City Hall; Absence of a Hispanic Journalist On Debate Panel Prompts Dispute
A debate between the Democratic Presidential candidates planned for next week in the Bronx has prompted a prickly dispute between one of its organizers, Borough President Fernando Ferrer, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked him to include a Hispanic journalist among the questioners.
Yesterday, after City Hall made public a letter from the Mayor to Mr.
Ferrer urging him to broaden the panel, Mr.
Ferrer, the city's most prominent Hispanic official and a potential Dinkins rival, issued a withering reply, dismissing Mr.
Dinkins's objections as "patently wrong and without merit."


Political Talk
Overdraft Opportunity?
While New York City has been distinctly short in recent years on close two-party races for Congress, the twin factors of redistricting and the House check scandal could change all that this fall.
A good case in point is in Queens, where a 10-term State Senator, Frank Padavan, a Republican, is considering a bid against Representative James H. Scheuer, a Democrat.


Correction
A caption on March 15 about the rock band U2 misidentified the instrument played by The Edge.
It is the guitar.


House Passes Aid for Middle-Class Students
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted late Thursday to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ALPHA AND THE DIRTY BABY.
Written and illustrated by Brock Cole.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) A naughty imp invades Alpha's relatively tidy Edwardian household, and chaos ensues.
Alpha cleans the dirty baby imp and re-establishes order.
There is a charming conclusion.


Borg to Face Svensson
PARKER SVENSSON of Sweden will be the first-round opponent of BJORN BORG on Tuesday when the 35-year-old Borg resumes his comeback at the River Oaks International, a clay-court exhibition tournament in Houston.


A Thickening Plot In a Den of Iniquity
THE mystery of "In for the Kill," a suspense drama by Derek Benfield at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, is not who is murdered, but who was the intended victim.
If it can be determined who was supposed to have been killed, then who the killer is will become clear.
As in any good mystery plot, all the characters are candidates for either victim or killer.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Traded Paul Sorrento, first baseman, to the Cleveland Indians for Oscar Munoz and Curt Leskanic, pitchers.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Released Ted Power, pitcher.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Don Slaught, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Sent Jeff Ballard and Paul Kilgus, pitchers; Luis Alicea, infielder; Jose Fernandez, catcher, to Louisville of the American Association.
Sent Fidel Compres, pitcher, to Arkansas of the Texas League.
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Bennie Thompson, safety. World League
BIRMINGHAM FIRE -- Released Craig Hudson, tight end.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Denies He Exempted Himself From an Ethics Law
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas denied yesterday that he had acted to exempt himself and his wife, Hillary, from the provisions of a state law requiring disclosure of certain personal financial matters.
Mr.
Clinton said that he sponsored the original ethics legislation that would have placed disclosure requirements on the Governor and that he agreed to the weaker bill in 1988 only to enhance its chance of passage.


Stark Beauty on the Emporda Plain
THE Emporda plain is a 70-mile-long secret garden in Spain in the north of Catalonia.
Although it is only an hour from Barcelona, most Europeans don't know the Emporda exists; many Spaniards don't know it by name.
I had never heard of the area before the day last summer when I made one random turn inland, away from the palm-tree languor of the Costa Brava, and drove up a hill: the lush geometry of the plain's yellow wheat fields and mossy green almond woods lay beneath me.
Outcroppings of castles and stony hill towns with sheep grazing by their walls give the Emporda the flavor of Tuscany while its ruined temples and olive groves look like the setting for an ancient Greek myth.
The serenity is deceptive.
From my hill I could also see the vivid extremes of the Emporda's borders: the electric blue Mediterranean to the east, the shaggy foothills of the Pyrenees stretching northwest to France.
I was soon to learn that extremes are also at the heart of the Empordan personality, embodied most flamboyantly in the region's most famous native son, Salvador Dali.
Apparently, the Empordans' taste for the renegade and talent for irreverence are legendary in Catalonia; some historians credit the Empordans with providing the seedbed for the anarchic imagination that shaped Barcelona, their extravagant neighbor to the south.


Review/Film Festival; A Parisian Triangle of Misdirected Love and Alienation
Looking at "Le Ciel de Paris," a new French film by Michel Bena, one would never suspect that the world is on the point of being dangerously overpopulated.
It's about emotional isolation so complete that even its contemporary Parisian settings, though filled with people, appear to be empty.
The movie looks at the lives of Suzanne (Sandrine Bonnaire) and Marc (Marc Fourastier), who share a flat but are not lovers, and Lucien (Paul Blain), whom they meet one day at a swimming pool.
Very quickly it is appearent that Suzanne loves Marc, but Marc loves Lucien who loves Suzanne.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
New York NOW members march and demonstrate for reproductive choice and civil rights for lesbians and gay men, but we have also worked long and hard to help women assert their economic rights and to change the laws that maintain the unequal status of women as wives and mothers as well as in the workplace.
Very little of this activity gets reported by the news media or is understood by the public.


Mets Could Learn From Past
It was Day 2 of the Boycott of the Media in the Mets camp, and the silence of the lambs continued.
Many, many reasons, most rooted in raw emotions, underlie the action initiated by the 31 players on the team Friday as they signed a petition vowing not to speak to newspaper, television and radio reporters.
This action was a response to the fact that certain members of the team have been torn apart by reports of legal problems, including an investigation of rape allegations, and peek-and-tell accounts of players' life styles.


Taking Aim at Insect Pests, Naturally
THIS is the perfect time of year to get rid of many garden insect problems safely.
With so much concern expressed about the misuse of garden chemicals, this good news can be spread.
Those who do not take advantage of this effort now will be missing a good deal.
This is the time of year when oil sprays can be used.
The sprays are widely sold at garden centers, and the directions for mixing and application are clearly indicated on the labels.
There used to be tremendous caution about the use of dormant oils, because they were formulated on a thicker basis, and many cautionary statements were issued.


For Broccoli to Be Persuasive, Use Imagination. And Don't Boil.
AFTER broccoli started to become a staple in the United States, the New Yorker magazine ran a cartoon in the 1970's showing a small child scowling down at his plate.
"It's broccoli, dear," his mother is saying.
The child replies, "I say it's spinach and I say the hell with it."
Nevertheless, American consumption of broccoli is said to have risen 800 percent from 1970 to 1989.
And now that medical research has indicated that broccoli contains a powerful anti-cancer agent, perhaps even President Bush will have kinder things to say about it.


POSTINGS: Police Headquarters Units; On the Block on Centre St.
"Public Auction. Notice of Foreclosure. Sale of Co-operative Apartments." The announcement stood out since it involved 26 of the 54 units in the lavishly renovated former Police Headquarters, a Baroque landmark at 240 Centre Street, between Broome and Grand Streets, in Little Italy.
Among the apartments being offered by the Dime Savings Bank of New York on April 17 is 5H, which was once the gymnasium and has 32-foot ceilings.


A Bear for All Seasons
The Yavapai Indians of Arizona said that bears were like humans without fire.
This anthropomorphism informed native Americans' ambiguous relationship with the bear, a symbol of dangerous, irrational power but also a reliable source of winter meat and thus of survival.
GIVING VOICE TO BEAR: North American Indian Rituals, Myths, and Images of the Bear (Roberts Rinehart, $25) is an engrossing and accessible anthropological study that evokes the essential atmosphere of spirituality that pervaded that relationship.
David Rockwell's account, at once sober and magical, covers the bear's roles as everything from folk-tale figure to benevolent guardian spirit to Jungian archetype of human consciousness.
Hibernation suggested resurrection, so bear images were used in initiations and other rituals marking rebirth and renewal, the participants in which were sometimes thought to metamorphose into bears.
Because the animals dug for roots, they were thought to be the medicine men of the wild and were thus associated with shamanism and healing.
There were also elaborate hunting ceremonies to insure that bears would continue to give themselves up for the kill.
Focusing on one aspect of American Indian life, Mr.
Rockwell, the president of C.W.
Natural Resource Consulting in Arlee, Mont., has written a coherent and comprehensible introduction to tribal attitudes, customs and rituals.
It is a stirring reminder of what it was like to be alive when being human meant living intimately with nature.


Merryl Thaler Has Wedding
Merryl Lynn Thaler, a vice president of Corwood Laboratories in Hauppauge, L.I., and Barry Seth Gersten, a real-estate finance associate at the Toronto Dominion Bank in New York, were married last evening in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Moshe Pomerantz officiated at Temple Israel.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Tulane University and is a daughter of Shirley and Irwin Thaler of Dix Hills, L.I.
Her parents own Corwood Laboratories, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals manufacturers.


Hrbek, Slaught Hurt   Spring-training casualties continue to mount with Minnesota first baseman KENT HRBEK and Pittsburgh Pirates catcher DON SLAUGHT the latest to join the walking wounded.   Hrbek suffered a dislocation of his left shoulder sliding headfirst into third base yesterday during the Twins' 2-1 victory against the St. Louis Cardinals. The team physician, Dr. JOHN STEUBS, said Hrbek would probably be out for two to six weeks.


Hostel for Zulu Workers Is a Center for Snipers
His startled face frozen in death, the sniper's victim lay bleeding this afternoon into the garbage-littered dirt.
The fatal bullet that ripped through his blue coveralls appeared fired from an open window of the nearby migrant workers' hostel.
Policemen in camouflaged fatigues hugged the surrounding shacks and glanced about for the sniper before they scooped the body onto a metal stretcher.


Collapse of Inner-City Families Creates America's New Orphans
Marianne Nolte avoids saying "mom" or "dad" in her ninth-grade math class, referring instead to "family" in deference to the many shamefaced children who have been abandoned to other relatives, foster homes or institutions.
Sylvia Parker knows she will dial multiple wrong numbers when she tries to call a student's home, spending hours if not days retracing the zigzag path these children travel from parent to grandparent to foster home and sometimes back again.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lehigh; Giving Homelessness A Meaning and a Face
How do you make homelessness meaningful to students whose families can afford a $20,000-a-year tuition?
That was the task of the Rev.
Jo Clare Hartsig when Lehigh University here asked her to teach a class on homelessness.
Miss Hartsig, a minister in the United Church of Christ, came up with a simple idea: have the two sides talk about things they have in common.


A Siberian Town: Not a Secret and Ready to Deal
At the huge secret heart of the former Soviet military-industrial complex is a place that looks like a well-kept little town in Germany, though it is surrounded by electrified barbed wire and checkpoints.
Unlike most cities throughout the former Soviet empire, the streets here are beautifully paved and maintained; the shops are clean, attractive and well stocked; there are ponds and parks; the apartment buildings are elegant and substantial, and the wooden windows are nicely varnished, rather than covered with flaking layers of badly applied paint.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  INSECURITY IN SIBERIA


For the Sweet Science on Screen, a Split Decision
Watching the bloody boxing bouts in the new movies "Gladiator" and "The Power of One," I was reminded of a screening of "Rocky IV" I attended some years ago with the trainer Eddie Futch.
Mr.
Futch, who has worked with such champions as Joe Frazier, Larry Holmes and Ken Norton, watched the fight sequences through squinted eyes, frequently holding up a hand in front of his face as if he were witnessing an auto accident.
When he got up to leave, a sportswriter asked him if he would now support a move to ban boxing.
Mr.
Futch grinned and replied, "No, but I certainly would support a movement to ban boxing movies."
The suggestion has merit: it's a safe bet that almost any film featuring boxing has more blood and torn flesh than one is likely to see in a year of viewing real boxing matches.
As Willem Dafoe's character in the 1989 film "Triumph of the Spirit" observes after an especially gruesome match at Auschwitz, "Dis hiss not box-hing." No, indeed; it's the movies.


Diane Levy, Book Designer, Marries
Diane Fontaine Levy, a freelance book designer in Brighton, Mass., was married last evening to Igor Tepermeister, a doctoral candidate in chemical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Rabbi Emily Lipof officiated at Temple Ohabei Shalom in Brookline, Mass.
Ms.
Levy, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University and has a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Billie M. Levy and Prof.
Nathan Levy Jr. of West Hartford, Conn.
Her father is a law professor at the University of Connecticut in Hartford and the author of "A Bankruptcy Handbook." Her mother is the founder of the Billie M. Levy Collection of Illustrated Children's Books at the University of Connecticut.


The End Justifies . . .
To the Editor:
The answer to the provocative question Jack Anderson raised in his essay "To Cut or Not to Cut"  [ March 1 ]  is not maybe but where.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Every Day an Adventure With Brown
If ever there was a Presidential candidate who embodied Crusader Rabbit, the brainy 1950's cartoon character who hopped around everywhere devoutly spouting his beliefs, it is Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Ever since his surprise showing in the Connecticut primary Tuesday, Mr.
Brown has popped up everywhere, often unexpectedly, appealing to what one New York supporter, Charles Riggs, termed the "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take it any more constituency" of the former California governor.


Wedding Plans For Ms. Bahna
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph M. Bahna of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Christen Bahna to William Jerome Lovejoy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lovejoy of Birmingham, Mich.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bahna, 24 years old, is an account executive in Chicago for Cato Johnson Advertising, a division of Young &amp; Rubicam.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father, who retired as the chief executive of Cunard Line Ltd. and Cunard Hotels and Resorts, is president of the Masterworks Development Corporation, a property development company in New York.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip 136,000
104 Wantagh Avenue South  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $4,000.
Great River 240,000  7 Pine Tree Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old farm ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, office, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Islip Terrace 150,000
128 Seacliff Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Massapequa 250,000
43 Beaumont Avenue,  -bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; den, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,200.
Seaford 165,000
3944 Bernice Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,700.
Williston Park 210,000
107 Capitol Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, new high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
OTHER AREAS Old Saybrook, Conn. 145,000
179 Bokum Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; eat-in kitchen, living room with fireplace, 2.2 acres; taxes $1,690.
Armonk, N.Y. 425,000
4 Dogwood Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, family room, study, sitting room, screened porch; taxes $6,441.
Edison, N.J. 118,000
25 Overlook Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; corner lot, eat-in- kitchen, washer, dryer and air-conditioner; taxes $2,032


Prisoners
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, was trundled off last week to begin a minimum of three years in an Indiana prison on a six-year sentence.
While his lawyers worked to have him freed pending appeal, his victim, Desiree Washington, told of her own emotional prison.
The 18-year-old beauty pageant contestant was at home in Rhode Island last week as Mr.
Tyson was sentenced and remanded -- he was convicted last month of raping her last year -- but she expressed her feelings in a letter to the court.
"It has been and still is my wish that he be rehabilitated," she wrote.
"I have confronted him with his problem, yet each night I live with his problem in my nightmares. Each day I struggle to recover from his problem." The judge, Patricia J. Gifford, said she hoped the case would speed the demise of the term "date rape." Rape is rape, she said.
Facing Judge Gifford for sentencing, Mr.
Tyson pulled up short of repentent.
"I'm sorry Miss Washington took it personally," he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; New Alliance Party Leader Attacks Arkansas Governor
A Harlem appearance by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas disintegrated into a raucous shouting match yesterday after Lenora B. Fulani, the New Alliance Party's candidate for President, challenged Mr.
Clinton to open up the Democratic Presidential debate process.
Mr.
Clinton was forced to suspend his remarks and eventually retreat from a room at Harlem Hospital, where he was delivering a health care speech, when Ms.
Fulani stood on a chair and led a handful of supporters in chants of "Democracy now."


Met Sparkplug Is a Class Act
To the Sports Editor:
A Mookie Wilson update is always appreciated ("Mookie Wilson Says He Will Be Fine," The Times, March 8).
But I must correct a misunderstanding, held it seems, by Mookie himself.
While few Met fans will ever forget the sixth game of the 1986 Series, and fewer still will forget Wilson's acrobatics that night, Mookie Wilson will be best remembered for embodying all that is right with baseball: spirit, guts, energy, enthusiasm and determination.


Mets Are Letting Their Silence Speak for Itself
General Manager Al Harazin, terming the decision on Friday by the Mets players to end all contact with the news media "a problem," said today that he remained convinced he is limited in options to end the standoff.
The players, responding to what they contended was the "slanderous" coverage that has attended their legal imbroglios this spring, acted together in signing a statement and pledging to sever all communications with representatives of newspapers, television and radio.


Time to Build a Job Engine
To the Editor:
America cannot survive as a world industrial power without an economic plan to deal with the global economy ("Will Aerospace Be the Next Casualty?" March 15).
During World War II, President Roosevelt created the War Production Board to meet the challenge of Nazism.
The board, staffed with industry members, built the greatest industrial machine the world had ever seen.
Now, we have lost our job engine, the manufacturing sector that for decades gave us world economic leadership.


CLASSICS WITH A KICK
Forget about equating classic with tried and true.
Timeless standards like berets, sweater sets, trench coats, blazers, white shirts and ballet slippers have been updated.
The new slim black skirts are made of stretch fabrics.
Pearl chokers are bigger, even tinted gold or pastel.
Black pumps may be set on platform soles.
Espadrilles look more like canvas oxfords.
What once seemed unusual, even exotic, is now so mainstream that it has become classic -- like western gear, leggings, petticoats, parkas and Chanel-inspired accessories.
Even a paper fan passes.
Mixing it all up is the classy way to go.


RECORD BRIEFS
Barber: 'Prayers of Kierkegaard,' 'The Lovers'
Soloists; Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Andrew Schenck.
Koch International 3-7125-2; CD.


Dawn Schefler, TV Producer, Weds
Dawn Rae Schefler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvan Schefler of New York, was married last night in New York to Dr.
Robert Forman Spiera, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Spiera of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Baruch Silverstein performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green.
Mrs.
Spiera, 30 years old, is a producer in Fort Lee, N.J., for the CNBC news program "The Real Story." She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the co-chairman of Dabney/Resnick &amp; Wagner, a New York investment banking company.


Community Service In High School
In response to Vincent Steckline's recent letter to the New Jersey editor:
To claim that volunteer work is contradicted by its being a school requirement is totally to miss the point.
Mr.
Steckline sounds like the students who claim this false contradiction, as did some in the school where I began a required community service program.


Ms. Robischon Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Robischon of Rochester, have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Anne Robischon to Robert F. Sposito Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sposito of Gates Mills, Ohio.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Robischon, 26 years old, is an associate at Dock Square Consultants Inc., sales and marketing consultants in Boston.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Rochester.


John Major at Bat
MOST OF THE TIME, John Major lives a bachelor's life in the British Prime Minister's official residence at 10 Downing Street, commuting home to spend weekends with his wife, Norma, and their two children in Cambridgeshire, 60 miles north of London.
So it is no surprise to be summoned to 10 Downing one rainy winter evening for an interview after hours.
Major's staff canceled an earlier appointment because the weather delayed his return from an out-of-town trip.
Now I am told he can see me if I can be there at 7 P.M., before he goes to a state dinner.
In the second-floor library, the Prime Minister smiles, extends his hand and asks, "Would you like a drink?"


Courtesy in the Classroom: A Lesson in Respect
THE students at Pelham Memorial High School here are probably no ruder than other American teen-agers.
Around the country, the young wear to school T-shirts with sassy sayings on them, slouch or put their feet up during classes or engage in put-downs in place of more thoughtful conversation.
But at the high school here, the adults in charge decided to draw a line between kids-will-be-kids behavior and plain impoliteness.
Not by cracking down on discipline or writing new rules but by raising questions: What is the best environment for learning?
What is the meaning of civility, responsibility and respect, and how do these quaint-sounding concepts apply to school life today?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic IssueS; Clinton on Blacks and Jews, and Himself
Gov.
Bill Clinton was scheduled to deliver what his Presidential campaign staff said would be an important speech on relations between black and Jews.
Instead, the Arkansas Governor yesterday morning talked of his own relations with blacks and his own relations with Jews.
In the context of a general message of brotherhood, Mr.
Clinton told a New York City audience of how, as a boy in Arkansas, he used to visit his grandfather's store, which had some customers "of African-American descent," and "hand out cookies to kids who came in without regard to their race."


Style Makers; Virginia L. Bush, Hat Designer
The Italian word "mazzocchio" means something that dazzles the eye.
It also refers to a type of hat with a round, well-stuffed brim, worn in Italy in the 15th century by magistrates, among others.
These hats have been portrayed in Renaissance paintings, and Virginia L. Bush has brought them back to life through her company, Mazzocchio Knitwear, in South Kent, Conn.


The Ordinary Turned to Instant Horror for All Aboard USAir's Flight 405
In the twilight hours of last Sunday, Gate B1 at La Guardia Airport was a rackety place.
Bone-weary travelers waiting for Cleveland-bound USAir Flight 405 had had their forbearance tested at the airport for up to three hours.
The stock diversions -- watching sports on restaurant televisions, reading and pacing -- had grown old.
The travelers wanted to get into the air.
"There was another flight going out after us at the same gate, so it was very crowded," said Bart Simon, the president of a hair brush company.
"There wasn't even a seat free. So I just stood. Like everyone else, I guess, I wanted to get the show on the road." 51 People on Board
Flight 405, originating in Jacksonville, Fla., landed in blustery snow at La Guardia at 7:49 P.M., an hour and six minutes late.
Fifty-eight passengers filed off the plane, collected their luggage and went off into the icy darkness.
Five others joined 42 people waiting impatiently at Gate B1 to board for the trip to Cleveland.


Thrill Is Gone
Senator Warren B. Rudman, the New Hampshire Republican who supplied the middle name of the 1985 Federal spending law, says he has had it with government.
Announcing last week that he would not seek a third term, Mr.
Rudman said that the current Senate is caught up in partisanship and posturing.
"Here we are getting zero done, staying up to midnight debating amendments that everyone knows won't become law, because someone wants to get a press release out," he said.
Mr.
Rudman, a 61-year-old lawyer and co-author of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act, knows that his colleagues from the other great states don't enjoy that sort of talk.
But, as usual, he did not seem to care.
He accused Congress and the President of fueling the rising budget deficit by being "unwilling to make the hard choices or to explain to the American people that there is no such thing as a free lunch." What with the sniping and pettiness, he said, "I just don't think I would enjoy it for six more years."


All About/Sewing; In the Gray 90's, Women Are Heading Back to the Bobbin
IN the early 1970's, the $4 billion home sewing industry unraveled.
As women left home for offices and careers, sales of patterns, fabrics, sewing machines and notions plunged, and many pundits of popular behavior began predicting the demise of a longstanding American tradition.
But while more women than ever work, home sewing is enjoying something of a renaissance.
The Simplicity Pattern Company, one of the three American pattern makers that control 95 percent of the $50 million or so market, sold 15 percent more patterns last year than in 1990, and the Singer Sewing Company, the world's largest seller of sewing machines, estimates that its sales in the United States grew 30 percent last year.


Morris Isn't Ruffled by Comparisons With Owens
As the Nets' season has moved into its final stretch drive, Billy Owens, the Golden State rookie from Syracuse, has become the standard by which many players in New Jersey uniforms are -- and probably will continue to be -- judged.
The focus of most of this comparative speculation has been the Nets' Chris Morris.
As in: Who would you rather have playing small forward for you, Chris Morris or Billy Owens?
That, apparently, was the subject of much debate behind closed doors at the Meadowlands before last year's National Basketball Association draft.
So the Nets picked point guard Kenny Anderson.


Robinson Has Surgery On Injured Thumb
Warned by a series of doctors that he could suffer permanent damage if he did not have surgery on his injured thumb, DAVID ROBINSON of the San Antonio Spurs took the doctors' advice yesterday.
He had an operation to repair a severed quarter-inch tendon near his left thumb.


A British Chef's Cooking School
One of Britain's most highly regarded chefs, Raymond Blanc, has started a cooking school called Le Petit Blanc Ecole de Cuisine at his country hotel and restaurant, Le Manoir aux Quat'Saisons in Great Milton, about eight miles from Oxford.
Courses start on Sunday evening with a briefing on the week's activities followed by a three-course dinner.
Classes take place Monday to Thursday.
On Thursday evening there is a champagne reception followed by an eight-course dinner.


Bridge
It started at the Globe theater in London four centuries ago, played Broadway four decades ago and moved to Pasadena, Calif., during the past week.
It is Shakespeare's "Taming of the Shrew," which Cole Porter adapted for his musical "Kiss Me, Kate." The latest version, Peter Rank's musical "Partnership, Partnership," played eight performances to considerable crowds at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals, for which it was written.
A group of experts ("A troupe of touring players are we"), headed by Petruchio, announce musically that they "first played in L.A." They are, of course, always true to bridge in their fashion.
And the shade of Shakespeare announces that the lords and ladies in his play are like the kings and queens who play the cards.


Putting 'Wacko Cells' to Good Use
"Someone once said I was the detached retina on the eyeball of the American theater, and I said, 'Oh, absolutely!' " "I guess," added the actor Stephen Lang, "I'm as intense as the next guy." Only maybe more so.
Consider Lou, either the craziest or wisest person on stage last year in Steve Tesich's "Speed of Darkness" on Broadway; the dangerous Lieut.
Col.
Nathan Jessep in the 1989 Broadway production of "A Few Good Men"; the pathetic outcast Harry Black in the 1990 film "Last Exit to Brooklyn," and the uncommunicative Steven Ziegenmeyer in the TV movie "Taking Back My Life," broadcast on March 15.


Ms. Hopewell Plans to Wed
Henry Chase Hopewell Jr. of Damariscotta Mills, Me., and Pamela Sturgis Hopewell of Rockport, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter BlakeLee Hopewell to B. Taylor Greene, the son of Ben W. Greene Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and Louise LaMontagne of Branford, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hopewell, 26 years old, is an account executive at Radio TV Reports, a broadcast monitoring service in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father, who is retired, owned Vinalhaven Fuel and Marine Corporation in Vinalhaven, Me.


An Icy Crash Brings Cries For Change
When snow starts to fall or rain begins to freeze, pilots begin to worry.
A dusting of snow or a thin gleam of ice on a plane can disrupt the flow of air over the wings, robbing an aircraft of lift.
Slush on a runway slows down tires and can be kicked up into the engines.


Tales from Two Cities
WEDNESDAY -- Guests filled the Park Avenue South storefront exhibition of the Art Directors Club for a cocktail reception, and live and silent auctions of posters, original photographs and art by Richard Avedon, Milton Glaser and others.
The evening benefited the club's educational fund, which provides scholarships to design students attending art schools in the New York metropolitan area.
The Girls Vacation Fund benefited from a cocktail dance at the Tavern on The Green.
The 57-year-old organization has a summer camp in the Catskills, occupying 500 acres in Windham, N.Y., and provides free vacations each summer for 300 inner-city girls.


Easley Blackwood, 89, Inventor Of a Famous Bridge Convention
Easley Blackwood, one of the most famous personalities in the history of contract bridge and the inventor of the game's best-known convention, died on Friday at his home in Indianapolis.
He was 89 years old.
He died in his sleep after a period of failing health, said his son, Easley Blackwood Jr.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
New home sales, percent change
12.9
4.8
Tuesday
Leading indicators, percent change
0.8
0.4
Consumer confidence index
46.3
48.5
Wednesday
National purchasing survey, in percent
52.4
53.5
Construction spending, percent change
0.3
0.5
Thursday
Factory orders, percent change
0.4
0.7
Nonfarm payrolls, change in thousands
164
35
Friday
Unemployment, percent
7.3
7.3
Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets  Wednesday: Seven-year-note auction announced  Thursday: Bundesbank council meets  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc)


GREEN TEENS
Nancy Marx Better's article ("Green Teens," March 8) was very realistic.
I am 16 years old and I spent two whole months last summer walking door to door in neighborhoods all over my county.
I was canvassing for donations for litigation and lobbying so that big and "bad" companies would be forced to pay their penalties for dumping their waste into the ocean and throwing away plastics instead of recycling.
The group I worked for was literally filled with young people under the age of 25.
I was very discouraged when adults and even the elderly would slam doors in my face and tell me, "You young people are just wasting our time." I was told many times that big companies will always stay the same, and that by canvassing for the environment we were wasting the taxpayers' money in a battle that could never be won by "the little people."


Business Diary/March 22-27
COMPANIES It's Hard Times at Canada's Giant Olympia &amp; York


Concern for Greece Delays U.S. Move on Yugoslav Republics
Concerned about the fragility of the Greek Government, the Bush Administration has delayed action on recognition of the successor republics of shattered Yugoslavia because of Greece's objection to an independent republic called Macedonia.
The Macedonia dispute pits one Balkan nationalism against another, that of the Greeks against that of the South Slavs who call themselves Macedonians.


Kathryn L. Kay to Marry in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Kay of White Plains have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Kathryn Carol Kay and Richard A. Gutner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gutner of Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Kay, 28 years old, is an associate group head in media at the Wells, Rich, Greene BDDP advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father was the chief executive of L. Katzenstein &amp; Company, a maker of carbon packing, in New York.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending March 14  MANHATTAN  East End Avenue 700,000
25 East End Avenue (80th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, windowed kitchen, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $2,785, 34% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  East Midtown 1.8 million
435 East 52d Street  (River House)  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 3.150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 3 maid's rooms, dining room, 50-ft. terrace, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $3,500, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Freda Green &amp; Associates)  Gramercy Park 230,000
60 Gramercy Park North  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,020, 51% tax-deductible (Broker: G.S.A. Realty)  Murray Hill 185,000
248 East 31st Street  (Grain Tree)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. condo in a renovated church; 24-hr. doorman, fireplace, whirlpool in bath, windowed kitchen; common charge $576, taxes $2,100 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side 176,000
320 West 89th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining area, 12-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $659, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale 122,000
2711 Henry Hudson Parkway  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; part-time doorman, dining room, renovated kitchen, terrace; maintenance $696, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield 100,000
959 East 231st Street  3-family, semi-attached, frame house; 1 bedroom, 1-bath, dining area in each unit; 25- by 160-ft. irregular lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 498,500
181 St.
John's Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other unit; finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  Park Slope 400,000
542 3d Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached limestone; dining room, fireplace, original oak woodwork, English basement, rear deck, 18- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher/Steven Sommers Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 273,500
30 Sherman Street  2-family, 3-story limestone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; den in each; original moldings and details, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Bayside 205,000
214-19 45th Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  East Elmhurst 230,500
23-63 94th Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick and frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining room in each; finished basement, private driveway, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Tottenville 115,000
121 Sprague Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached Colonial; dining room, full basement, 45- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $911 (Broker: Rand Properties)  Westerleigh 230,000
301 Kingsley Avenue  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached Colonial; dining room, family room, semi-finished basement, 40- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,155 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DiSimone)


Don't Take Home an Injured Bird of Prey
To the Editor:
I enjoyed the sentiment of "Hawks at Home" (editorial, March 15).
It is a thrill to spy a peregrine falcon overhead as I drive into Manhattan.
When I see a hawk in New York City, I think about the amazing adaptability of these birds and the dedicated organizations and people trying to preserve endangered species.


Since Beating, Little Change for Los Angeles Police
Sgt.
Andrew Simon found himself excited, even a little frightened, as he pulled to a sudden stop last week behind an armed man in a small white pickup truck.
The police officers who halted Rodney King, he said, must have felt much the same.
"You got a gun, man, you're dead," Sergeant Simon shouted, leaping from his car and aiming his revolver with both hands at the muscular man in a Raiders hat who slipped quickly from the cab of the truck.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WEST OF EVERYTHING The Inner Life of Westerns.
By Jane Tompkins.
Oxford University, $21.95.


Bo Should Know What Comes First
To the Sports Editor:
I have had two total hip replacements since 1983 (I was 27 years old at that time).
In 1990, I had a revision from an accidental fall.
After seven-hour surgery and an extensive bone grafting, the hip is wonderful.
Within the next few months, however, I have to repeat this revision on the other hip because the hip is nine years old and the cup is worn out.
Also, the femoral component is now shifting slightly.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MEDIEVAL MUSIC
Two men and two women calling themselves the Voice of the Turtle will sing and play the music of medieval Spanish and Portuguese Jews, known as Sephardim, at Temple Israel in Westport on Friday at 8:30 P.M.
The temple has chosen to mark the 500th anniversary of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492 with this performance.


For Broccoli to Be Persuasive, Use Imagination. And Don't Boil.
AFTER broccoli started to become a staple in the United States, the New Yorker magazine ran a cartoon in the 1970's showing a small child scowling down at his plate.
"It's broccoli, dear," his mother is saying.
The child replies, "I say it's spinach and I say the hell with it."
Nevertheless, American consumption of broccoli is said to have risen 800 percent from 1970 to 1989.
And now that medical research has indicated that broccoli contains a powerful anti-cancer agent, perhaps even President Bush will have kinder things to say about it.


Paint Rollers an Asset If the Surface Is Flat
ROLLERS are the most popular tools for painting large flat surfaces like ceilings, walls and floors.
They produce better-looking results, can cover areas more quickly than brushes and are less messy, less costly and less difficult to use than sprays.
A roller's most important feature is the cover, the woolly cylinder that carries and spreads the paint, but also shop carefully for the handle.


The Trial in Courtroom 5
It's too bad more people can't sit in Courtroom 5 of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
They would see that John Gotti is not the smooth "Dapper Don" of their television screens, but a foul-mouthed man charged with murder, racketeering and related crimes that could send him to prison for life.
They'd see that the famous Gotti smirk is really a vacant stare with a fixed smile attached to it, that the visiting celebrities who use the courthouse as if it were a television studio have as much relevance to the trial as the publicity-prone restaurateur who arranged their visits.


1155 Broadway
To the Editor:
Christopher Gray may be pleased to know that 1155 Broadway  [ "The Birthplace of the Movies," Feb. 9 ]  is famous for another reason.
It was the first home of the original Life magazine in the 1880's.
Charles Dana Gibson, the creator of the "Gibson Girl," did much of his life's work for Life.
This is still another reason to preserve this building.
CARL SILVERMAN Manhattan


Sally McSween To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. McSween of Alexandria, La., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Foster McSween to Taylor Dudley Ward, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney C. Ward of Winter Park, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss McSween, 27 years old, graduated from Louisiana State University and is an interior designer at Jed Johnson &amp; Associates in New York.
Her father, a former member of the House of Representatives, is a writer and retired lawyer.
Her mother, Sally Foster McSween, is an interior designer in Alexandria.


Data Bank/March 29, 1992


Insect Assault Threatens State's Venerable Hemlocks
THE lush, deep-green landscape of Westwoods, a 1,000-acre nature preserve in Guilford, has all the markings of a dying hemlock forest.
Along the trails are patches of felled trees and marshes lined with stands of the denuded evergreens.
Like many other sites across the state, where the Eastern hemlock abounds, signs of its increasing decline are vividly announced.
The hemlock, admired for its curved conical crown, dark-green foliage and delicate branches that often droop to the ground, appears to be following in the shadow of the chestnut and the elm.
Fungal diseases imported from Europe and Asia all but decimated the prized hardwoods earlier in this century.
Now an insect believed to have come from Japan is destroying the hemlock by depleting the tree's juices, leaving it malnourished and defenseless.
Discovered along the southern part of the state seven years ago, the woolly adelgid (pronounced ah-DEL-jid) has since been sighted in 103 of the state's 169 towns.


A Revolution Transforms India: Socialism's Out, Free Market In
George Fernandes, a Socialist member of Parliament and a former Minister of Industry, spoke nostalgically about the time he threw Coca-Cola out of India.
"When I chucked out Coca-Cola in 1977, I made the point that 90 percent of India's villages did not have safe drinking water, whereas Coke had reached every village," he recalled.
"Do we really need Coke? Do we need Pepsi?"


Why Buy Sand For Private Beaches?
Re: "The Storm Wars Redux" (March 1):
The Jersey Shore is environmentally stressed because it is seriously overdeveloped for what is not much more than a barrier island.
Now our shore politicians, our shore landowners, our shore builders and even our Governor want to spend incredible sums of money to perpetuate the mistakes.


Troika Plus One


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; When Trouble's Ahead, Clinton's Staff Is Ready
Responding to a series of potentially damaging news reports, the Presidential campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has crafted a multitiered plan to discredit and respond to accusations.
His process has transformed the classic political strategy of doing research on the opposition into a plan to beat reporters at their own game.
After surviving, with luck and persistence, tabloid accounts of marital infidelity, while his campaign struggled back in New Hampshire early in the year, Mr.
Clinton and a cadre of aides now have a system in place that has so far managed to limit each new round of damaging reports to a 36-hour cycle.


Lighting Russia's Entrepreneurial Spirit
ARE the citizens of Moscow and St.
Petersburg ready to be transformed into entrepreneurs?
The wives of two Russian diplomats say the answer is yes and are helping lay the groundwork for entrepreneurial centers across Russia that would be patterned on one in Purchase.
The wives, Natalia B. Lozinsky and Elena V. Ilitchev, know something about what it takes to be an entrepreneur because they studied how to start a business in a 10-week course at the Entrepreneurial Center at Manhattanville College in Purchase.


INSIDE
The Last Hours of USAir Flight 405
Last Sunday night USAir Flight 405 started down a snow-swept runway at La Guardia Airport.
Seconds later, it was aflame and in pieces in icy Flushing Bay.
Twenty-seven people died; 24 survived.
Authorities say ice on the wings may have aborted the takeoff.
Page 26.
Stunning Victory for Duke
A dramatic last-second basket gave Duke a 104-103 victory over Kentucky and a berth in the Final Four. (Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the end of the game.) Section 8.


For the Sweet Science on Screen, a Split Decision
Watching the bloody boxing bouts in the new movies "Gladiator" and "The Power of One," I was reminded of a screening of "Rocky IV" I attended some years ago with the trainer Eddie Futch.
Mr.
Futch, who has worked with such champions as Joe Frazier, Larry Holmes and Ken Norton, watched the fight sequences through squinted eyes, frequently holding up a hand in front of his face as if he were witnessing an auto accident.
When he got up to leave, a sportswriter asked him if he would now support a move to ban boxing.
Mr.
Futch grinned and replied, "No, but I certainly would support a movement to ban boxing
movies.
"
The suggestion has merit: it's a safe bet that almost any film featuring boxing has more blood and torn flesh than one is likely to see in a year of viewing real boxing matches.
As Willem Dafoe's character in the 1989 film "Triumph of the Spirit" observes after an especially gruesome match at Auschwitz, "Dis hiss not box-hing." No, indeed; it's the movies.


Walkout by Fans May Prove a Point
To the Sports Editor:
In "Whatever Happened to Sports?" (The Times, March 15), Dave Anderson answers: money.
His implication, I think, is that not only the sport of baseball, but the business of sport, has gotten too far ahead of itself.


A New Barcelona From the Old
DRIVEN to distraction by noise, dirt, traffic jams and general inconvenience, the people of Barcelona have wondered more than once in recent years if the price of being host to this year's Summer Olympics was perhaps too high.
But as the dust from myriad construction sites finally begins to settle just four months before the opening of the Games on July 25, a new city is coming into view and, well, perhaps it was worthwhile after all.
Catalans, it has to be said, were pretty proud of their capital city as it was -- before architects and engineers pinned it to drawing boards and began redesigning it.
In fact, in less time than it takes to open a bottle of cava, the local version of champagne, they would spell out how Barcelona was superior to Madrid -- a strong identity born of a history dating back 2,000 years, a rich tradition of architectural and artistic innovation, a people that liked to have fun but also knew how to work hard.


At the Mercy of a Madwoman
I AM ZOE HANDKE
By Eric Larsen. 216 pp. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $16.95.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: City Hall; Absence of a Hispanic Journalist On Debate Panel Prompts Dispute
A debate between the Democratic Presidential candidates planned for next week in the Bronx has prompted a prickly dispute between one of its organizers, Borough President Fernando Ferrer, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, who asked him to include a Hispanic journalist among the questioners.
Yesterday, after City Hall made public a letter from the Mayor to Mr.
Ferrer urging him to broaden the panel, Mr.
Ferrer, the city's most prominent Hispanic official and a potential Dinkins rival, issued a withering reply, dismissing Mr.
Dinkins's objections as "patently wrong and without merit."


Back to Basics? Turn to Natural Gas . . . And Really Cut Noxious Emissions
To the Editor:
"Electrify!" makes a case that replacing the direct use of other fuels with electricity can reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
In most instances, the opposite is true: replacing electricity with direct fuel use, especially natural gas, reduces such emissions, and in a very cost-effective way.


BUSH IN 'ANGUISH' ON ISRAEL TENSION
Disturbed by a letter from a prominent Jewish supporter who questioned his basic commitment to Israel, President Bush wrote a fervid reply that spoke of his "anguish" over Israeli-American tensions and acknowledged that his Administration was not handling the relationship well enough.
The exchange of letters, in which Mr.
Bush reiterated his opposition to the construction of any more Israeli settlements on the occupied West Bank, served to emphasize the difficulties the Administration has had with American Jews since the President began his battle of wills with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over the settlements.


'In Trouble' in Black and White
WAKE UP LITTLE SUSIE
Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v.
Wade.
By Rickie Solinger. 324 pp.
New York: Routledge. $25.


Spain Braces for a Summer Basque Offensive
Just one month before the opening of the World's Fair in Seville, Spain is bracing for an effort by Basque separatists to disrupt the fair and then, potentially, the Olympic Games in Barcelona.
Spain's Interior and Defense Ministries have therefore spent months preparing a complex security plan in coordination with French, Israeli and other foreign police and intelligence groups.


Open Hearing Is Held on Bombing of Pan Am Flight 103


Czechoslovakia Wins In Doubles Over U.S.
John McEnroe forgot to plaster on the alabaster sunscreen that doubles as his war paint.
Rick Leach forgot that the days when the world's best doubles team consisted of McEnroe &amp; Anybody are not days of this decade.
The result of all their forgetfulness was an overly forgiving doubles outing this afternoon in which the American twosome lost to Petr Korda and Cyril Suk, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4, and allowed the Czechoslovaks to ease their nation back into contention in a Davis Cup quarterfinal competition.


Jeanine Hughes To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Hughes of Denver have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Jeanine Marie Hughes and Thomas Patrick Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Murphy of Red Bank, N.J.
Miss Hughes, 28 years old, is an account manager with Bloomberg Financial Markets in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the chief investment officer of Great-West Life and Annuity Insurance in Englewood, Colo.


Jane Jacobs Versus the World
To the Editor:
Robert Fulford's thoughtful essay on nontraditional thinkers and authors of the 1960's, "When Jane Jacobs Took On the World" (Feb. 16), cites some excellent examples; but the inclusion of Rachel Carson as one such writer bears correction.
He says she "was not a scientist of any kind." In fact, Carson studied genetics at Johns Hopkins University and for 16 years was a biologist and editor with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
JOAN GOLDSTEIN Princeton, N.J.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Train Rides With a Smile
SOME comics specialize in slapstick.
Others in satire.
Pete Pharaoh of Massapequa has developed a new comedy form, railroad stand-up.
"During rush hour you have to move fast," he said.
"One liners are best, something right to the point and very simplistic."


Baltic Capitals Are Ports of Call
A cruise that gives passengers the opportunity to visit the capitals of the Baltic states as well as the newly opened port of Kaliningrad in the Russian Republic for from $1,900, including air fare from New York, is available with two departures this year.
The trip, starting with a flight from New York to Helsinki on June 8 and Aug. 16, is aboard the 400-passenger Finnish ship Kristina Regina.
The vessel sails from Helsinki to St.
Petersburg; Tallinn, Estonia; Riga, Latvia; Kaliningrad; Visby, Sweden, and Stockholm.
Sightseeing excursions are included in the rate, except for an optional tour to Vilnius, capital of Lithuania, which costs $150 a person, double.
On that excursion passengers will ride by bus from Riga to Vilnius, where they stay overnight, reboarding the ship at Kaliningrad.


Taking Aim at Insect Pests, Naturally
THIS is the perfect time of year to get rid of many garden insect problems safely.
With so much concern expressed about the misuse of garden chemicals, this good news can be spread.
Those who do not take advantage of this effort now will be missing a good deal.
This is the time of year when oil sprays can be used.
The sprays are widely sold at garden centers, and the directions for mixing and application are clearly indicated on the labels.
There used to be tremendous caution about the use of dormant oils, because they were formulated on a thicker basis, and many cautionary statements were issued.


House Passes Aid for Middle-Class Students
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted late Thursday to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 23 about travel in the American South misstated the circumstances under which Gov.
George C. Wallace blocked the admission of the first black students to the University of Alabama.
He prevented Vivian Malone and James Hood from attending, in 1963; Autherine Lucy was admitted to the university in 1956 and expelled after three days.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; TV Skirmish Is Sponsored By Democrats
Voters, take cover.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Governor Edmund G. Brown of California are preparing an air assault on New York, and from their new television commercials it is clear that both men intend to bring out their heavy artillery for the state's April 7 primary.


Q and A
Expo '92 by Wheelchair
Q.
Will Expo '92 in Seville bywheelchair accessible?
Is it possible to get an attendant to push a wheelchair from the parking lot to the exhibits? -- Ida K. Pfeufer, Medford, N.J.


The Alhambra Gathers the Stuff Of Paradise
Rarely in the international museum world has there been anything like the exhibition called "Al-Andalus," which opened at the Alhambra in Granada to universal acclamation 10 days ago.
Everything about it is new and, by implication, audacious.
It is the first time that the Alhambra has been adapted -- or, as some might wish to say, degraded -- for use as a series of exhibition halls.
It is the first time that the almost 800-year presence of the Muslims in Spain has been minutely documented.
And it is the first time that the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has operated on a huge scale 4,000 miles from its home base.


'No Place Seems Safe'
Fear: It's the urban concern most conspicuously missing from the Presidential campaign.
Yet even now, as the primary contest heats up in this most urban of all settings, the candidates shrink from talking about it.
Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat, is not a candidate, but last week he raised the issue with a bravery and candor that Bill Clinton, Jerry Brown -- and President Bush -- would do well to emulate.


Senior Fares
To the Editor: On a recent trip from Richmond to Denver and back via USAir, we had a series of disconcerting experiences that seemed to point to discrimination against those traveling on senior citizen coupons.
We had reserved our December flights in July.
We made our aisle seat reservations in November.
But when we picked up our tickets shortly thereafter, those seat assignments were not in the computer.
So we had new seats assigned to us.


The 10th in Paris
To the Editor: The article on the 10th Arrondissement in Paris (Travel, Jan. 5) was intriguing and informative.
This is an area I found even my French friends didn't know about.
I first discovered the Rue Paradis when I searched out the Musee de la Publicite at No. 18.
I've seen splendid poster exhibits there -- Milton Glaser, Steinlen, pre-World War I political posters, even a film on American advertising.


Corrections
The Wall Street column on the Money page last Sunday misidentified the firm that sponsored research by Prof.
Edward I. Altman of New York University on junk bond default rates in the mid-1980's.
It was Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Custom-Tailored Guidebooks
Tripbuilder, a New York-based company that helps travelers personalize their trip plans according to subjects of interest, provides information kits with map overlays for six countries: Belgium, England, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Scotland.
For each country, the company charges $29.95 (plus shipping) to customize a planner with information on 10 topics selected by the client from a list of more than 20 ($5 for each additional topic).
Topics range from Tile Hunting in Portugal to Imbiber's England to Golfer's Guide in Scotland and include up-to-date information about when attractions are open and how much they cost.
Each subject corresponds to a transparent overlay that is placed over a map of the country to locate selected sites.
By layering several overlays, the traveler can plot routes between various points.
The kit is packaged in a soft-covered looseleaf binder.


POSTINGS: Poughquag Project; Condos in Horse Country
These may not be the best of days for building new condominiums.
But one developer, Abdul Rashid, is hoping that he can defy the difficult market with a small upscale complex for retirees in the horse country between Poughkeepsie and Pawling, N.Y.
"It is unique, a very small project in a very small setting," said Mr.
Rashid, who is a retired vice president of Pepsico, where he was in charge of worldwide construction.
"It is one-floor living, so residents won't have to climb up and down."


Review/Fashion; Long, Lean Look From Young Parisians
The long, lean look swept the European collections this season.
Fitted jackets and clinging, ankle-length skirts, typically in dark colors, were essential elements of this fashion, as seen both on the runway and on fashion-forward women attending the shows.


Memories Are Sold; Farm Stays
Piece by piece, the remnants of Calumet Farm and the world's most famous horse empire went to the highest bidder at astonishing prices: $150 for a pair of stirrups, $9,000 for a silver cup, $23,000 for an oil painting of Alydar, $72,000 for the fully restored 1939 horse van, $5,000 for a 1978 tractor with a twice-rebuilt engine.
And, for the cast-iron jockey in the devil's red silks, standing watch at the threshold to the bluegrass empire in Kentucky: $5,300.
But the heart of the empire, the 847 acres of Calumet Farm itself, was spared: It went for $17 million and a pledge.
And because he spared it, Henryk deKwiatkowski of Poland, New York and the Bahamas walks down the street in Lexington these days and gets handshakes, huzzahs and high-fives at every corner.


Review/Film Festival; Unexpected Intimacies Of an Athens Summer
On the evidence of Pantelis Voulgaris's "Quiet Days in August," Athens in late summer is a deserted place.
It is populated by moody, pensive people capable of sudden intimacies that spring up under unexpected circumstances -- encounters over the telephone or on a subway car, glances through a window or across a cafe.
Mr.
Voulgaris's genteelly solemn film observes three isolated individuals -- a banker, a widow and a retired seaman -- and records the chance events that make them marginally less lonely, if only for a while.
Most of the major events in "Quiet Days in August" have the impact of a cake exchanged between neighbors, or a shy, amorous glance.
Though the film is directed with taste and intelligence, its sensitivities are mostly too aching and muted to have much effect.
Only in its later stages does the story become relatively eventful, and at that point it begins to feel forced.
The main satisfaction in watching Mr.
Voulgaris's understated film comes from the gentle elegance of his actors and the modest accuracy of his observations.


Jamaican Party Elects Successor to the Prime Minister
Jamaica's ruling People's National Party today elected Percival J. Patterson, a former Deputy Prime Minister, to succeed the departing Prime Minister, Michael N. Manley, who is retiring because of ill health.
In Jamaica's parliamentary system, which is based on the British system, Mr.
Patterson automatically becomes Prime Minister by virtue of his election as leader of the governing party.
Mr.
Patterson, a low-key moderate who was a major architect of Mr.
Manley's economic policies in recent years, is expected to continue those policies.


Hot Potatoes
THE SOCIAL POSITION OF the potato is a peculiar thing.
For years, it was considered the dowdiest of starches.
And when, in the throes of the new American Cuisine, the potato was "discovered," it was as if some poor little thing from a dirt farm had been spotted and turned into a starlet overnight.
Cute little round potatoes were topped with creme fraiche and caviar.
Shredded and deep-fried, the potato was shaped into gilded cages around seafood in luxury restaurants, potato purees were whipped with extra-virgin olive oil and studded with fresh herbs, french fries were recreated as handcrafted pommes frites.
Blue and yellow potatoes the size (and almost the price) of truffles appeared.


Mutual Funds; A Bit of Tarnish for Health-Biotech
Amid signs that the economy has finally begun to perk up, the stock market has been bobbing up and down, finishing the first quarter about where it began.
Stock mutual funds have merely broken even, with the average fund squeaking by with a gain of two-tenths of 1 percent for the quarter, as of Thursday, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc. in Summit, N.J.
Big winners were the financial services funds (up 6.9 percent), the small-company funds (4.1 percent) and science-and-technology funds (up 3.2 percent).
Hardest hit were gold funds (down 8.3 percent).
The second-worst group was health-and-biotechnology, the darling of the industry in recent years, which dropped 7.9 percent in the quarter.


Public Advocate Struggles to Keep His Department Intact
WILFREDO CARABAL LO, the state's Public Advocate and Public Defender, has embarked on an aggressive advocacy campaign in defense of two of his most important clients: himself and his department.
Since Republicans took control of the Legislature in January -- and some Republican leaders indicated that the Department of the Public Advocate was high on their list of expendable state agencies -- Mr.
Caraballo has been crisscrossing the state.
His goal: to convince officials and residents that his office, a watchdog over the operation of the government itself, is as important today as it was when it was created 18 years ago.


Tight Four-Way Race Among Cup Challengers
Four months ago, betting people would have put their money on New Zealand's chances for challenging the San Diego Yacht Club for the America's Cup.
But the odds are less favorable now that three other international yachting teams have shown the same kind of speed and performance.
"It is the first time in America's Cup competition that the top four boats are so close," said Marc Pajot, skipper for the French team.
"After the first round-robin races, we might have been afraid of the Kiwis. But now, our boats are more the same."


New Yorkers, etc.
It may boggle the mind to think that receiving a gift could be embarrassing or awkward or could require a decision.
Well, boggle away.
It happens, not often, but more frequently than might be supposed.
The plus part of the whole business is that even if a gift does engender such thoughts or feelings, it's not anything major.
On a scale of 1 to 10, it probably doesn't even rate a 1.


N.C.A.A. Hurting for Tourney Crowds
The attempt of the hockey committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association to enhance its Division I tournament along the lines of basketball has met with little box-office success so far.
Feeble crowds far below expectations turned out for the first nights of competition in the new East Regional and West Regional tournaments held at neutral sites.
These single-elimination doubleheaders replaced a format that had called for two-of-three-game series on campus rinks.


Quigley Leaving Jersey
After a 41-year career at race tracks in New Jersey, ROBERT J. QUIGLEY, the 63-year-old president of Garden State Park, has decided to strike out in a new direction: southwest.
After the Garden State thoroughbred meet, Quigley will head to Texas to establish a race track in San Antonio.
Quigley, who will be president of the new venture to be known as Retama Park, has some experience with start-up projects.


Susan Carlton Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Carlton of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Elizabeth Carlton to Lawton Mortimer Camp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Viets Camp Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
The couple, both 25 years old, are studying law at Boston University.
Miss Carlton graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a partner at the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell.
Her mother is chairman of the board of the Northern Westchester Shelter for Victims of Domestic Violence.


Sports of The Times; The Humiliation of No. 922335 Mike Tyson
ABOUT 15 miles west of Indianapolis, State Highway 40 moves through the neon shopping malls and worn, weathered homes in this town of 15,000, past the old Village movie house on Main Street and Stacey's cafe, then up a short hill.
Suddenly, a narrow metal sign appears.
"Prison Area," it warns. "Do Not Pick Up Hitchhikers."


It's Ibsen


Style Makers; Gay Ellis, Clothing Designer
The cheerful jackets that Gay Ellis designs for children and adults are inspired by the clothing of the Lapps, or Sami, a largely nomadic people living north of the Arctic Circle in Scandinavia.
"The reason Laplanders wore bright colors was in order to be seen in the storm," the 43-year-old designer explained.


It's Final: Bridgeport Loses Last Game
The University of Bridgeport had the right scene but the wrong ending for the final chapter of its basketball program.
Playing what was in all likelihood the final game in Bridgeport's 45-year history in the sport, the Knights lost to Virginia Union, 100-75, this afternoon in the championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II tournament at the Springfield Civic Center.


BOSNIA ASKING U.N. FOR PEACE FORCES
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to the United Nations today to deploy peacekeeping forces in the republic as fighting raged for a third day in the town of Bosanski Brod.
"The situation in the republic is seriously deteriorating," Ejup Ganic, a member of the republic's collective presidency, wrote in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
"Military observers should urgently come to this republic."


In Lalique's Garden of Glass: Swans, Butterflies and Nudes
Rene Lalique's design presence in New York began 80 years ago, when his frosted-glass windows were installed in Coty's town-house perfumery at 714 Fifth Avenue, near 56th Street.
Today those molded panels, aswirl with flowering vines, add a touch of period elegance to the redesigned facade of the shop, now the centerpiece of Henri Bendel's new home.
From inside the store, the windows serve as a satiny backdrop for "Objets Precieux," an exhibition of Lalique jewelry and glass on view through next Sunday.
All aspects of Lalique's oeuvre are covered in the show of 50 drawings, necklaces, vases, boxes, clocks and fashion accessories.
This capsule review of the French designer's achievements was inspired by "Rene Lalique," the critically acclaimed retrospective of 260 objects at the Musee des Arts Decoratifs in Paris.
That show ends next Sunday and will travel to the Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Travel Guides Will Challenge Harvard Series
Students at the University of California at Berkeley are writing low-budget, politically correct travel guides intended to penetrate the market that Harvard University has monopolized for the last 32 years with its "Let's Go" travel series.
Fodor's, a travel-book company owned by Random House, chose the Berkeley campus for the project because "it is the antithesis of Harvard," said Michael Spring, the editorial director at Fodor's.


Police Pursue Drug Motive in Queens Slaying of 5
Detectives investigating the killings of five people in a Queens house early on Thursday focused yesterday on the possibility that one of the victims, Michael Hines, was involved in drug dealing, said a police official familiar with the investigation, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
In addition, investigators continued to search for Mr.
Hines's cousin, Etheridge Pierce, 17 years old, who was seen carrying two duffel bags from the house in Cambria Heights about 11 A.M., roughly eight hours after neighbors heard about 30 shots being fired inside, the police said.
None of the neighbors called the police, they said, and the bodies were not discovered until almost 9 P.M.


A Logo of the Past On the Screen Of the Present
Everyone says Robert A. M. Stern's new office tower here "looks like Boston." The phrase is subtler than it sounds.
It defines a paradoxical, very contemporary kind of architectural success.
The tower, 222 Berkeley Street, is the first tall building ever designed by this New York architect, long known for lavish houses.
Twenty floors of office space ascend above two floors of shops and lobbies on a prominent site in the Back Bay neighborhood.
An instant landmark is a 10-foot-tall bronze teddy bear -- not Stern's -- that sits on the sidewalk like a huge embalmed panhandler, signaling the presence of a toy store inside.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic IssueS; Clinton on Blacks and Jews, and Himself
Gov.
Bill Clinton was scheduled to deliver what his Presidential campaign staff said would be an important speech on relations between black and Jews.
Instead, the Arkansas Governor yesterday morning talked of his own relations with blacks and his own relations with Jews.
In the context of a general message of brotherhood, Mr.
Clinton told a New York City audience of how, as a boy in Arkansas, he used to visit his grandfather's store, which had some customers "of African-American descent," and "hand out cookies to kids who came in without regard to their race."


Dick Darman's Spending Ways
According to Washington budget lore, Richard Darman's extraordinary talents and pragmatic approach have restored the Office of Management and Budget's credibility, which was allegedly bruised under the ideological tenure of Jim Miller, its director during President Reagan's second term.
But if the numbers in O.M.B.'s recently released historical tables are accurate, Mr.
Darman's reign has been an unmitigated disaster.
By every conceivable measure -- Federal spending, budget deficits, economic assumptions -- he has presided over fiscal calamity.
It appears that his energies have instead gone toward preserving his inflated reputation.
Self-proclaimed Washington budget experts still dismiss Mr.
Miller as a lightweight, yet he accomplished what he set out to do: control the growth of domestic spending and reduce the deficit.
The budget deficit declined by $59 billion between 1985 and 1989 under Mr.
Miller (years are fiscal years, starting Oct. 1 of the previous calendar year).
That compares with an jump of $246.2 billion in just three years under Mr.
Darman.
And the deposit insurance bailout cannot be blamed for the discrepancy.
Excluding deposit insurance spending, the deficit fell by $83 billion under Mr.
Miller, but climbed $188.1 billion under Mr.
Darman.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Treading a Mosaic of Nerve Endings
Gov.
Bill Clinton wanted to spend last night at the circus.
It apparently never occurred to him that New York's savvy gay leaders can have their fun without politicians.
Eager to win their support, he asked to speak at the annual fund-raising performance of the circus for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Madison Square Garden.
Leaders of the AIDS charity told him he could stop by if he wanted to, but they weren't about to let him speak.
Chastened, the Arkansas Governor quickly developed a scheduling conflict and could not attend.


United Way Backlash Would Punish Needy
To the Editor:
Those in the social services fear a backlash in the wake of William Aramony's resignation as president of United Way of America.


Philadelphian With AIDS Tells of Sex With Many Boys
A man who has AIDS has told the authorities that he paid for sex with several hundred male teen-agers over the last several years, the Philadelphia District Attorney said today.
The man was arrested earlier this week on several charges, including the statutory rape of a boy under 16 years old.
The District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, refused to give the man's name, citing a Pennsylvania law that she said prohibited the release of names and other information that would tend to identify people stricken with AIDS.


Some Gains Seen in Environmental Talks, but Big Divisions Remain
Delegates from the 160 countries planning to attend the Rio de Janeiro environmental conference in June are edging toward agreement on a sweeping plan for making economic progress ecologically sustainable, but remain deeply divided over how to pay for a global cleanup.
As a five-week preparatory meeting for the Rio conference enters its final week here on Monday, rich and poor countries disagree not only over how to pay for higher environmental standards but who should accept moral responsibility for problems like global warming and pollution.


Wirtz Is Joining Forces at the Bargaining Table
In the kingdom of hockey, William Wirtz is a nobleman.
He owns the Chicago Blackhawks, one of the league's oldest and most prosperous teams.
He is the chairman of the National Hockey League Board of Governors, the ruling body of the business.
Along with the league president, John Ziegler, he is the co-chairman of the N.H.L.
Owners Council, the bargaining committee that is trying to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the Players Association before a strike deadline of noon tomorrow.


Gay-Bashing, Villainy and the Oscars
Political movies and sexual or psychological thrillers depend on a specific scenario: there must be a decent American hero (usually a man) who is juxtaposed against the forces of evil.
In Hollywood, evil is represented by crackpots and Communists, invaders from Mexico or even Mars, teen-age hoods, Arabs, Cuban conspirators or, more recently, lesbians and gay men.
In other words, there must be a villain.
Since the death of Communism, homosexual villains are fast gaining on drug dealers and investors from Japan as the new bad guys.
Granted there are absurd and sinister gay men and lesbians in real life, just as there are evil heterosexuals.
But homosexual rights groups point out that, in Hollywood movies, heterosexuals are never defined as evil or irrelevant simply
because of
their sexuality.
Whether they act nobly or ignominiously, other aspects of their personalities are brought to bear.
Gay men and lesbians, on the other hand, are consistently characterized solely in terms of their homosexuality -- when they are depicted at all.
What's more, in American movies homosexuality seems invariably to signal that a character is either sinister or irrelevant.


All Is In Order
To the Editor:
With regard to Allan Kozinn's article about BAM Opera, "Sobered, BAM Still Thinks Big"  [ March 15 ] , indeed, we have had our missteps, but we are definitely not in disarray.
It has been a learning experience (producing and presenting large-scale opera), but there have been no disasters, and we are truly figuring out how to make BAM Opera work.
Yes, we do need help from the companies invited to participate, but it is a partnership arrangement, and BAM is definitely a financial participant.


Sunday Dinner; After the Museums, Places to Soothe Feet and Appetites
Museum-hopping on the Upper East Side is a favorite Sunday pastime for both visitors to New York and residents.
More restaurants than ever are open on Sunday in this neighborhood.
Here are three to consider.
Le Refuge
166 East 82d Street; (212) 861-4505 -- This beguiling French restaurant serves an agreeable mix of updated French home cooking by the chef and owner, Pierre Saint-Denis.


Merril C. Schapiro Engaged to Craig G. Biscone
Mr. and Mrs.
Mervin B. Schapiro of Massapequa, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Merril C. Schapiro and Craig G. Biscone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Biscone of New Hyde Park, L.I.


Alexandra Aldridge to Marry in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Aldridge Jr. of Haverford, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Amindra Aldridge, to Anthony Richard Mancini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Mancini Jr. of Wynnewood, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Aldridge, 30 years old, graduated from Duke University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a program manager at the Vanguard Group in Valley Forge, Pa.
Her father is a senior partner at the Philadelphia law firm of Stradley, Ronon, Stevens &amp; Young.
Her mother, Alexandra Q. Aldridge, is the vice president for development for the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


Springsteen: An Old-Fashioned Rocker in a New Era
Bruce Springsteen isn't budging.
It has been five years between albums for rock's symbol of the hard-working, soft-hearted regular guy, five years of other bands' splotchy guitar din, digital samples, booming dance beats and chameleonic images, a time of rage and rhythm and nihilistic fun.
Little of that has rubbed off on Springsteen's two new albums, "Human Touch" (designated his 10th album, largely recorded in 1989-1990) and "Lucky Town" (his 11th album, recorded in 1991).
Springsteen deliberately -- everything he does seems deliberate -- stands clear of the noise and ambiguity of 1990's rock.
He has something to protect: his likability as the last sincere superstar.
Springsteen has sold millions of albums and posed for his share of magazine covers and video clips; he takes his shirt off and strokes a woman in an artfully shadowed bedroom in the clip for "Human Touch." Yet he can still come across as someone outside show business, a rare rock musician who sees his profession not as media manipulation but as writing basic, four-minute, four-chord songs.


Debbie Allen Chips Away At the Glass Ceiling
Debbie Allen had one of the most formative experiences of her life when, at 16, after 11 years of training, she auditioned for the North Carolina School of the Arts as a ballet student.
When she was asked to demonstrate steps for the other auditioners, the young black dancer assumed she was a shoo-in.
But she was turned down and advised to pursue jazz or modern dance; her body was not right for ballet, she was told; it was a familiar observation for black dancers.
Her mother met her at the airport back home in Houston.
"I can't believe you failed," she told her already wounded daughter.
Harsh words, but Ms.
Allen looks back on them as inspiring.
"She wouldn't allow me to feel self-pity," she said of her mother, Vivian Ayers, a writer and a stern supporter of Ms.
Allen and her sister, the actress Phylicia Rashad.
"She made me feel it was up to me."


Indiana Get Best of Bedraggled Bruins
The game seemed out of hand late in the first half, but it was the long walk from the court to the dressing room that might have indicated precisely how difficult things had become for U.C.L.A.
Fatigued and fading fast, the Bruins moved slowly up the ramp inside the Pit, the arena at the University of New Mexico where they were engaged in the West Regional final against Indiana today.
Their faces were drawn, their steps were deliberate, their hope almost gone.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Denies He Exempted Himself From an Ethics Law
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas denied yesterday that he had acted to exempt himself and his wife, Hillary, from the provisions of a state law requiring disclosure of certain personal financial matters.
Mr.
Clinton said that he sponsored the original ethics legislation that would have placed disclosure requirements on the Governor and that he agreed to the weaker bill in 1988 only to enhance its chance of passage.


Israel Passport
To the Editor: The item on using United States passports in Israel ("U.S. to Cancel Israel-Only Passports," Feb. 16) says that it is possible to have stamps placed on documents other than the passport to avoid problems elsewhere.
This was not my experience.
On Nov. 2, 1991, I visited Israel using my one U.S. and only passport.
American Express, who planned my itinerary, and others warned me to not let Israeli immigration stamp my passport.
My round-the-world trip required me to continue to Dubai, which would then deny my entry.
I wasn't interested in Dubai, but any other routing to New Delhi would require hundreds of dollars and additional miles.


Traffic Alert
George Washington Bridge: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is advising drivers to avoid the bridge today because construction has closed the New Jersey-bound and New York-bound lanes on the lower level.
The lower level is to remain closed until 6 A.M. tomorrow.


Noted With Pleasure
The Generous Future
Each generation, by reimagining the future, helps to make it possible, as the architectural critic Thomas Hine notes in this excerpt from "Facing Tomorrow: What the Future Has Been, What the Future Can Be" (Knopf).


BUSH IN 'ANGUISH' ON ISRAEL TENSION
Disturbed by a letter from a prominent Jewish supporter who questioned his basic commitment to Israel, President Bush wrote a fervid reply that spoke of his "anguish" over Israeli-American tensions and acknowledged that his Administration was not handling the relationship well enough.
The exchange of letters, in which Mr.
Bush reiterated his opposition to the construction of any more Israeli settlements on the occupied West Bank, served to emphasize the difficulties the Administration has had with American Jews since the President began his battle of wills with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over the settlements.


Hungarian Dances
To the Editor: Readers of Alexandra Shelley's article, "Keeping Budapest Hopping" (Travel, Jan. 19), may be interested to know that it is not necessary to travel to Hungary to attend a Hungarian Tanchaz.
Tanchazs are held approximately once a month at Hungarian House in Manhattan (213 East 82d Street).
For information, contact Roger Cooper at (516) 741-5109 or Kalman Magyar at (201) 836-4869.
ROGER COOPER, JUDITH OLSON Mineola, L.I.


RECORD BRIEFS
Jim Carroll: 'Praying Mantis'
Giant/Reprise 24435; CD and cassette.


Julie B. Owens To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
George French Bowie Owens Jr. of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Bowie Owens to Craig Alan Ream, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn Charles Ream of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Owens, 23 years old, as is her fiance, is a receptionist at Broudy Printing Inc. in Pittsburgh.
Her father retired as chairman of Johnson &amp; Higgins of Pennsylvania, a Pittsburgh insurance brokerage.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; TV Skirmish Is Sponsored By Democrats
Voters, take cover.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Governor Edmund G. Brown of California are preparing an air assault on New York, and from their new television commercials it is clear that both men intend to bring out their heavy artillery for the state's April 7 primary.


Auburn Fight Over Gay Group Shifts to U.S. Court
Auburn University, caught in the middle of an uproar over chartering a homosexual student group on campus, has sued both sides of the dispute.
Auburn's board of trustees voted unanimously on Monday to take the action.
Among parties named as defendants in the suit, filed in Federal District Court in Montgomery, are the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation, the Alabama Attorney General and the Rutherford Institute of Alabama, a Christian legal defense organization.


Corrections
A report in the Deals and Discounts column on March 15 misstated the cost of a seven-night stay in a deluxe room, offered in conjunction with a discounted air fare, at the Frenchman's Reef Beach Resort on St.
Thomas.
The price is $2,065 for a room accommodating one or two people.


Revisiting 'Evita,' A Grand Contradiction
"EVITA" is a grand contradiction.
Beginning with a funeral and ending with a death scene, the musical foreshadows doom throughout.
Its alluring antiheroine, the second wife of Juan Peron, President of Argentina, is corrupt, hypocritical and megalomaniacal, "Easily the most unpleasant character I've written about," Andrew Lloyd Webber, the show's composer, said just before the 1979 Broadway opening.
And even with an abstract setting and cynical veneer, "Evita" was described by Harold Prince, who directed it, as "an unabashedly emotional piece" that moved people.


Cross-Channel Car-Train Pass
A new pass allowing unlimited rail travel and a 3-day car rental within a 15-day period in both Britain and France is offered by Rail Europe, the European railroads' booking agency.
The BritFrance Rail Drive Pass provides travelers with eight days of travel in the period.
The two components of the pass, which can be taken in either or both of the countries, are five days of train travel and three days of unlimited-mileage Avis rental (including local tax and drop-off within the country of rental).
The program also includes a round-trip Channel crossing on the Hovercraft or catamaran between Dover and Boulogne.
The package with first-class rail and a car costs $399 a person; with second-class rail it is $315 a person, both prices based on two people traveling together.
A handling fee of $10 is added for each order.
More information: (800) 438-7245.


Taking Aim at Insect Pests, Naturally
THIS is the perfect time of year to get rid of many garden insect problems safely.
With so much concern expressed about the misuse of garden chemicals, this good news can be spread.
Those who do not take advantage of this effort now will be missing a good deal.
This is the time of year when oil sprays can be used.
The sprays are widely sold at garden centers, and the directions for mixing and application are clearly indicated on the labels.
There used to be tremendous caution about the use of dormant oils, because they were formulated on a thicker basis, and many cautionary statements were issued.


The Executive Life; A Forthright Manager, A  [ Expletive ]  Trial
A few years back, a profile by Tom Wolfe in Esquire of Silicon Valley pioneer Robert Noyce described how, in the early 60's, the employees of Fairchild Semiconductor, one of several companies he founded, gathered at the windows to gawk at a limousine and driver.
Limos are no longer an oddity in Silicon Valley, but in this down-to-earth culture any symbol of social stratification still causes squemishness.
That is evident in the periodic failed attempts to establish here that bastion of East Coast urban life, the private club.
"The high-tech community doesn't have much use for things like this," said Paul Franson of the public relations firm of Hagerty &amp; Associates in San Jose.
"They don't go out to fancy lunches. You're lucky to have a sandwich at your desk."


Christopher Winters to Wed Leigh Shemitz
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Shemitz of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leigh Shemitz to Christopher V. Winters, a son of Ann V. Winters of Greenwich, Conn., and William T. Winters of Sewickley, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Shemitz, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University and is studying for a master's degree in environmental science at Yale University.
Mr.
Winters, 29, graduated from Middlebury College and is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
He teaches English as a second language at Morris High School in the Bronx.
He and Ms.
Shemitz served in the Peace Corps in Mali.


The Musical 'Evita' in Second Go-Round in Darien
"EVITA" is a grand contradiction.
Beginning with a funeral and ending with a death scene, the musical foreshadows doom throughout.
Its alluring antiheroine, the second wife of Juan Peron, President of Argentina, is corrupt, hypocritical and megalomaniacal, "Easily the most unpleasant character I've written about," Andrew Lloyd Webber, the show's composer, said just before the 1979 Broadway opening.
And even with an abstract setting and cynical veneer, "Evita" was described by Harold Prince, who directed it, as "an unabashedly emotional piece" that moved people.


Children's Books
ANIMAL FABLES FROM AESOP
Adapted and illustrated by Barbara McClintock.
Unpaged.
Boston: David R. Godine. $17.95. (All ages)
AESOP &amp; COMPANY
With Scenes From His Legendary Life.
By Barbara Bader.
Illustrated by Arthur Geisert. 64 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


Amy I. Nick Plans to Marry
September wedding plans for Amy Ilyssa Nick and Neil Elson Bader, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Bader of New York, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Larry Nick of New York and Boca Raton, Fla., and Judith Beiner of Boca Raton.
Ms.
Nick, 26 years old, is a production associate at NBC Sports.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of Damon Andrews &amp; Company, an investment concern in New York.
Her stepfather, Stephen Beiner, is a lawyer in Boca Raton.
Her mother teaches English and journalism at Spanish River High School in Boca Raton.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Sharon Nick, runs Crayons Childcare, a day-care center in Davie, Fla.


Dr. Leora Lanzkowsky, Radiologist, Is to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Lanzkowsky of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Leora Lanzkowsky to Dr.
Alan Sloan Diamond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Diamond of Vancouver, B.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Lanzkowsky, 28 years old, and her fiance are residents in radiology at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, where her father is a staff chief.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received an M.D. from New York University.


U.S. Alert On Israel
Americans visiting East Jerusalem should exercise caution at all times and contact the United States Consulate General in the city for the latest information about conditions there, according to a travel advisory on Israel issued by the State Department.
In a separate advisory on Guatemala, the department warns of violent crime and cites public buses as frequent targets for armed robbers.


CABLE TV BATTLING PHONE COMPANIES
Armed with technological sizzle and wires that run by 9 of 10 homes in America, the nation's biggest cable television companies are investing hundreds of millions of dollars in an aggressive bid to compete against the local telephone industry.
In the last year, 30 cable television companies have obtained Federal licenses to build experimental wireless telephone networks, which for the most part will use the existing cable networks to link cellular telephones through tiny radio relay stations scattered throughout a city.
On a different front, some large cable companies have been buying small companies that compete head-to-head with local telephone companies by providing high-speed communications to big corporate customers.


Philadelphia AIDS Fear Called Exaggerated
Since city officials called a news conference on Friday to warn that a local man with AIDS had paid hundreds of teen-age boys for sex acts, more than 500 people have called AIDS phone lines, many voicing fears that they may have been been infected from contact with him.
But experts said today that such fears appeared to be exaggerated.
The man, identified as Edward I. Savitz, has been accused of deviant sexual behavior with two minors.
On Friday, the District Attorney said he "may have enaged for several years in both oral and anal sexual contact with as many as several hundred young males."


The 'Longest of Long Shots' Is Suddenly a Contender
Where did Jerry Brown come from?
What does he stand for?
Where, if anywhere, is he going?
What's going on around here, anyway?
It is an improbable political year, and not only in the United States.
In France, the party structure seems to be fracturing, with the left the big loser.
In Britain, the left, meaning the Labor party, seems within reach of a parliamentary majority, which many doubted that it would ever again approach.
In the first months of the post-cold war era, electoral politics everywhere is full of doubt and contradiction as voters grope for a way forward.


Selling Out?; Pushed and Pulled, Environment Inc. Is on the Defensive
At stake in the Senate last week were six million acres of the nation's last virgin forests, a green arc of pine sweeping across most of western Montana.
In less time than it takes lawmakers to eat lunch, the Senate voted overwhelmingly to make at least one million acres of that wilderness eligible to be cut to the ground.
In the finger-pointing afterward, national environmental groups were criticized for being too complacent.
The Wilderness Society and the National Audubon Society did not actively oppose the bill until the last few weeks, said Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate.
The National Wildlife Federation, the country's largest environmental group, announced that it had no opinion on the legislation, which still faces consideration in the House.


Bringing Up Baby, Three at a Time
MARK HART returned home after a five-day business trip to find 30 women sitting around his living room in Rockville Centre discussing diapers, bottles and preschools.
"When I told my business associate there was a triplets' meeting going on at my house tonight, he couldn't believe it," Mr.
Hart said.


Ms. Fee to Wed Bruce Kaskey
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Fee 3d of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Margaret Fee to Bruce D. Kaskey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon C. Kaskey of Savannah, Ga.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fee, 24 years old, is a sales manager for Nestle Food in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Reliable Automatic Sprinkler Company in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Her mother, Barbara Fee, is a real-estate broker with Cleveland Van Wert of Scarsdale.


Gotti Defense Denounces 'Glorified Frame-Up'
In a two-pronged attack, the lawyers for John Gotti and his co-defendant yesterday disputed the prosecution's interpretation of taped conversations and denounced the testimony of Salvatore Gravano, the Mafia turncoat who was the chief witness in the Federal racketeering-murder trial in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Gotti's lawyer, Albert J. Krieger, repeatedly ridiculed Mr.
Gravano's testimony that he helped Mr.
Gotti plan and supervise the murder of Paul Castellano, reputed to be the boss of the Gambino crime family, who was shot down in front of Sparks Steak House in 1985.


Outwaiting Time on the Dordogne
THE LOST UPLAND
By W. S. Merwin. 307 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Community Service In High School
A letter to the New Jersey editor from Vincent Steckline regarding community service was published on March 8.
Mr.
Steckline, a member of the science department at Ridgefield Memorial High School, wrote in criticism of our program requiring 50 hours of community service for graduation.
In his professional assignments, he has nothing to do with the program.
As principal of the high school, I proposed the requirement to the Board of Education and feel it necessary to clarify some of the statements in the letter.
Our seniors take a semester course of approximately 70 hours in community service, of which only 50 hours is required in the field.
It is offered during the last period of the day, allowing them to complete the required hours during that time.


Family Politics
Josh Kornbluth is the author of a one-man comedy, "Red Diaper Baby," in which he also performs.
The play, about a family of Jewish Communists, is directed by Joshua Mostel and opens Wednesday at the Second Stage Theater. (Susan Cook/"Red Diaper Baby")


House Passes Aid for Middle-Class Students
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted late Thursday to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


Sensing Anger, Albany Lurches In on Deadline
Call it ineptitude or intransigence, inertia or high principle, but for seven long years, New York State's leaders consistently failed to enact the state budget on time.
But the tide finally turned this year.
Facing the collective wrath of disgusted bond-rating companies, fed-up constituents and a vengeful Governor who vowed to make budget tardiness a major issue in the elections in November, the state government was able to surpass everyone's expectations and actually reach a budget agreement shortly after 9 P.M. yesterday -- 75 hours before the April 1 deadline.
If the agreement holds, it will be a real Albany oddity, the first on-time budget since 1984.


Conservative Branch Rejects Proposal to Allow Gay Rabbis
The committee that sets religious standards for the Conservative movement of Judaism rejected a proposal last week that would have allowed homosexuals to serve as rabbis in the movement's 800 synagogues.
The proposal, submitted by a California rabbi, stirred strong emotions in the movement, which sees the Bible as authoritative but believes that Jewish law can change as societal standards change.
It received only one vote when the law committee met Wednesday at the Jewish Theological Seminary in upper Manhattan.
Six votes were required for the proposal to become official policy.


ALBANY'S LEADERS ANNOUNCE ACCORD ON STATE'S BUDGET
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the leaders of the New York State Legislature announced tonight that they had reached an accord on a roughly $31 billion spending plan for the fiscal year that begins on Wednesday.
The agreement appeared to end the colossal five-month fight over the budget, which Governor Cuomo said was the obstacle that kept him from running for President.


BOSNIA ASKING U.N. FOR PEACE FORCES
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to the United Nations today to deploy peacekeeping forces in the republic as fighting raged for a third day in the town of Bosanski Brod.
"The situation in the republic is seriously deteriorating," Ejup Ganic, a member of the republic's collective presidency, wrote in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
"Military observers should urgently come to this republic."


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: Here is a story on the plus side of the often maligned service record of Trans World Airlines.
My wife and I traveled to Europe last October to visit children, grandchildren and Dutch relatives, for which we had "nonendorsable/nontransferable" tickets, returning from Amsterdam, Schiphol Airport, on Nov. 7, on an 11:30 A.M.
T.W.A. flight to New York.
We left by car at 8:30 A.M., in plenty of time, from a small town no more than a 40-minute ride away.
Unfortunately, just after we reached the main highway an accident resulted in a 30-kilometer backup, in which we were caught for three hours, missing our flight. .


It's 1992, and No One Is Leading Europe's March to Unity
After nearly three years of epochal change and grand visions of the future, the European Community, much like the United States, is bogged down in the mundane realities of recession and parochial politics.
What Europe seems to lack is a leader articulating a clear vision of where the community is going and what its ultimate purpose is, now that the certainties of the cold war have been replaced by uncertainty and economic chaos in the countries that used to make up the Soviet Union.


For Broccoli to Be Persuasive, Use Imagination. And Don't Boil.
AFTER broccoli started to become a staple in the United States, the New Yorker magazine ran a cartoon in the 1970's showing a small child scowling down at his plate.
"It's broccoli, dear," his mother is saying.
The child replies, "I say it's spinach and I say the hell with it."
Nevertheless, American consumption of broccoli is said to have risen 800 percent from 1970 to 1989.
And now that medical research has indicated that broccoli contains a powerful anti-cancer agent, perhaps even President Bush will have kinder things to say about it.


Sunday Outing; Peace and Antiques In Modern Woodstock
This town is famous for the 1969 rock festival that was not actually held there. (The festival took place 50 miles away in Bethel. ) And a part of Woodstock does seem out of the 60's, with shops selling tie-dye clothing, peace buttons, and flower-power T-shirts.
But the town's main streets -- Mill Hill Road, Tinker Street and Rock City Road -- are lined with sophisticated clothing stores, upscale art galleries and boutiques and international eateries set in small converted old houses.
Craft shops and galleries, most locally owned, feature the work of top artists and craftspeople, many of them transplanted New Yorkers.


BOSNIA ASKING U.N. FOR PEACE FORCES
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to the United Nations today to deploy peacekeeping forces in the republic as fighting raged for a third day in the town of Bosanski Brod.
"The situation in the republic is seriously deteriorating," Ejup Ganic, a member of the republic's collective presidency, wrote in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
"Military observers should urgently come to this republic."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Denies He Exempted Himself From an Ethics Law
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas denied yesterday that he had acted to exempt himself and his wife, Hillary, from the provisions of a state law requiring disclosure of certain personal financial matters.
Mr.
Clinton said that he sponsored the original ethics legislation that would have placed disclosure requirements on the Governor and that he agreed to the weaker bill in 1988 only to enhance its chance of passage.


DOES SHE SPEAK FOR TODAY'S WOMEN?
I was surprised to read that NOW is considered "too radical" by many women who today identify themselves as feminists.
Back in the watershed years of the late 60's, many of us who were active in the nascent movement considered NOW important but too conservative, too careful, too worried about offending.
To expect the structures and privileges of the patriarchy to fade away as women quietly assume equality for themselves is to live in an ahistoric world.
And to give credence to that empty phrase "post-feminist" is to misread not only the last 20 years, but the past 200, ever since Mary Wollstonecraft, at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, protested male hegemony.


Gold Recovers Some Lost Ground
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
132.97
133.85
140.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6405
1.6714
1.6970
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1888
1.1973
1.1588
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7445
1.7130
1.7480
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$342.20
$338.25
$356.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ms. Rosenberg to Marry P. S. Cane
Dr. and Mrs.
Sol Rosenberg of Wynnewood, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susanne Rosenberg, to Peter S. Cane, the son of Amy Distler Cane of Huntington, L.I., and the late Wallace Cane.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rosenberg is a doctoral candidate in English literature at Rutgers.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a periodontist in private practice in Philadelphia.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Could Baker's Grip on Tiller Right Bush Campaign Drift?
George Bush, Jim Baker and Pat Buchanan are in a rowboat that sinks. Who gets saved?
The answer to the joke, now making the rounds in Washington, is: Israel.


Hostel for Zulu Workers Is a Center for Snipers
His startled face frozen in death, the sniper's victim lay bleeding this afternoon into the garbage-littered dirt.
The fatal bullet that ripped through his blue coveralls appeared fired from an open window of the nearby migrant workers' hostel.
Policemen in camouflaged fatigues hugged the surrounding shacks and glanced about for the sniper before they scooped the body onto a metal stretcher.


Concern for Greece Delays U.S. Move on Yugoslav Republics
Concerned about the fragility of the Greek Government, the Bush Administration has delayed action on recognition of the successor republics of shattered Yugoslavia because of Greece's objection to an independent republic called Macedonia.
The Macedonia dispute pits one Balkan nationalism against another, that of the Greeks against that of the South Slavs who call themselves Macedonians.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Treading a Mosaic of Nerve Endings
Gov.
Bill Clinton wanted to spend last night at the circus.
It apparently never occurred to him that New York's savvy gay leaders can have their fun without politicians.
Eager to win their support, he asked to speak at the annual fund-raising performance of the circus for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Madison Square Garden.
Leaders of the AIDS charity told him he could stop by if he wanted to, but they weren't about to let him speak.
Chastened, the Arkansas Governor quickly developed a scheduling conflict and could not attend.


Faldo Leads but Competition Looms
Armored by a cocoon of concentration against what has been a grating nemesis, Nick Faldo continued to smoothly make his way around the sharp edges of the T.P.C.
Stadium Course to take a one-stroke lead into Sunday's final round of the Players Championship.


James Webb, Who Led Moon Program, Dies at 85
James Edwin Webb, whose leadership of America's space agency in the 1960's was credited with winning the race to put a man on the moon, died Friday at Georgetown Hospital in Washington.
He was 85 years old and lived in Washington.
He apparently died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Really Cool Cars
IT LOOKS LIKE A FUTURISTIC SHOW CAR: SILVER, with swooping aerodynamic lines.
Just another sporty "concept" car, you think, until you get behind the wheel.
Then comes a moment of disorientation.
There's no gearshift, you learn, because there's no clutch and no transmission.
Just two small electric motors, one for each of the front wheels.
A long hump down the center floor of the car looks rather like the one in old sports cars; but instead of a driveshaft there's a line of 32 lead-acid batteries under it.


Beep-Beep


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A Restoration Aims to Perk Up Hartford
THE architectural centerpiece of Connecticut is about to be rejuvenated in ample time for its 200th birthday in 1996.
The Old State House at the heart of downtown Hartford, the oldest legislative building in the country, the state's first capitol, an erstwhile City Hall and frequent candidate for demolition, has served as a museum and exhibition hall since 1979.
Topped with a gold-leafed dome, it sits on an acre and a half of prime real estate called State House Square, the same site where in 1639 the first written constitution in America was signed in a plain wooden meeting house.
The handsome Federal-style building designed by Charles Bulfinch of Boston was completed in 1796.


Review/Piano; Rachmaninoff Evening By Santiago Rodriguez
When great pianists compose, they are often struggling against their own gifts.
Being able to do anything on their instrument, they do, the process taking on a life of its own.
Rachmaninoff waged such a war.
Sometimes he subdued his enormous facility and allowed his musical gifts to speak; sometimes facility assumed a musical purpose of its own; sometimes Rachmaninoff suffered defeat at the hands of his own great talents.
Santiago Rodriguez's all-Rachmaninoff program at the 92d Street Y on Wednesday night, the first of three such recitals this spring, recorded both the profits and the losses of a creative career.
It read at times like a morality tale: the pitfalls of excess, the virtue of renunciation.
One listened and remembered Liszt's "Nuages Gris," whose skeletal simplicity stands as an act of repentance for all the Don Juan fantasies of a profligate youth.


Lenten Season of Song and Readings
FOR the 18th consecutive year the choir of South Congregational Church in Hartford is presenting a program fusing Lenten music and readings.
This year the narrations are taken from Milton's "Paradise Lost" and "Paradise Regained," and the music ranges from Renaissance motets to Mendelssohn, Verdi, Stravinsky and Leonard Bernstein.
Richard Donohue conducts the choir, soloists and an instrumental ensemble in the program, which will be presented this afternoon at 4 in Covenant Congregational Church in Cromwell, and next Sunday at that same hour in South Congregational Church on Main Street in Hartford. (For information call 249-8627.)
Another Lenten recital in Hartford, next Sunday at 4 P.M. at St.
Justin Church, will present the organist Peter Niedmann, a graduate of the University of Connecticut and director of music at the Church of Christ Congregational in Newington.
The music listed is by Bach, Mendelssohn and the English master Hubert Parry, along with some of Mr.
Niedmann's own improvisations (246-6897).


Culture Wars
To the Editor:
Frank Kermode takes advantage of his role as reviewer (Feb. 23) to advance his own position in the cultural wars.
His weapons are familiar: the conflation, misrepresentation and obliteration of contrary views, plus a posture of disinterestedness.
A "noisy crowd of antihomophobes, antiracists and antiwhites" is how he describes and dismisses, presumably disinterestedly, the contributors to "the Gless-Herrnstein  [
sic
]  collection" -- that is, "The Politics of Liberal Education," which I edited with Darryl J. Gless. They could also be described, no less disinterestedly, as a group of distinguished scholars and educators concerned with illuminating current educational reforms.


Laura Brown, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Brown of Great Neck, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Laura Michelle Brown, and David Paul Vexler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Vexler of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Miss Brown, 24 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is studying law at New York University.
Her father is the vice president for taxes of Philip Morris in New York.
Her mother, Anita Brown, is a travel agent at Jeffrey's World of Travel in Great Neck.


Miss Barney Is a Bride
Alexandra Washington Barney, a daughter of Mrs.
James L. Neff of New York and Robert Weir Barney of Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday in New York to Brian Jonathan Cowley, a son of Rosemarie Cowley of New Canaan, Conn., and Robert Cowley of West Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Mrs.
Cowley, 32 years old, is an account manager in the advertising sales department of Ladies' Home Journal.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was an international political risk analyst for Mobil Oil in New York.


Jill Weinstein to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Ephraim Weinstein of Englewood, N.J., have announced 1993 wedding plans for their daughter Jill Weinstein and Alan Sonnenklar, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Sonnenklar of East Hills, L.I.
The couple, both 23 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Ms.
Weinstein has a master's degree in psychology from Boston University, where her fiance is studying law, and is a psychologist at the Psychological Center in Lawrence, Mass.


The Executive Computer; A Visionary Tries to Tie the World Together
When the battery in Mark Eppley's portable computer unexpectedly died on a flight from Germany, according to computer lore, he disassembled the machine on the plane and invented Battery Watch, a software fuel gauge for batteries, on the spot.
Since then, his has been a voice computer executives listen to.
Never mind that a conversation with Mr.
Eppley leaves the impression that his brain is working far faster than his mouth, sort of like a powerful engine racing while a car is stuck in traffic.


New World Symphony


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ELEVATING THE GAME Black Men and Basketball. By Nelson George. HarperCollins, $20.


TIES OF AFFECTION
When I read in Craig Nova's About Men column "Ties of Affection" (March 1) that his daughter asked him which kind of love is best, I was reminded of a proverb I first read some 12 years ago in Graham Greene's novel "The Power and the Glory": "The best smell is bread, the best savour salt, the best love that of children."  DONNA LEE
Rosedale, Queens


Devils Wipe Away The Frown
Less than a week ago, the Devils brought an eight-game winless streak and a collective frown into Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
But today, after defeating Quebec, 5-2, before 11,339 spectators, the Devils were all smiles.
New Jersey (37-28-11) had not only completed a sweep of a three-game homestand, but also set a team record for points with 85, breaking the mark of 83 set in the 1987-88 season.


Not Much to Decide by the New York Primary
To the Editor:
Though I live in New York and am a registered Democrat, I have been effectively disenfranchised from selecting the party's nominee for President.
Under our system, residents of New York State will not participate in the process until April 7.


RECORD BRIEFS
Sibelius: Symphony No. 1, 'Karelia Suite,' 'Finlandia'
Oslo Philharmonic conducted by Mariss Jansons. EMI Classics CDC 54273; CD.


Philadelphian With AIDS Tells of Sex With Many Boys
A man who has AIDS has told the authorities that he paid for sex with several hundred male teen-agers over the last several years, the Philadelphia District Attorney said today.
The man was arrested earlier this week on several charges, including the statutory rape of a boy under 16 years old.
The District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, refused to give the man's name, citing a Pennsylvania law that she said prohibited the release of names and other information that would tend to identify people stricken with AIDS.


Blunt Strongman Deals Behind Scenes in Japan
The people who rise to the top in Japanese politics are generally masters of wary understatement, subtle maneuvering and waiting one's turn.
But Ichiro Ozawa has proven that blunt words, zest for confrontation and impatience can also work wonders.
These days, Mr.
Ozawa -- the undisputed young strongman of the ruling establishment -- is upstaging Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa himself.
He argues that a hotly debated Government proposal to send Japanese military forces abroad under United Nations auspices does not, in fact, go far enough.


To the Mat
Konishiki, a 576-pound champion sumo wrestler, throws other people's weight around.
Last Sunday, the Samoa-born American, who has been competing for about a decade, won the Emperor's Cup, the Superbowl of sumo, for the third time.
The feat would seem to make the big wrestler eligible for elevation to the sport's grand championship rank, yokozuna, but sumo officials are mulling it over very carefully.
The designation acknowledges not just a fleeting tournament title, but a great career combined with a subtle aura of sumo spirit known as hinkaku.
And many Japanese, including unreserved admirers of Konishiki's prowess, simply deny that a foreign-born wrestler can achieve hinkaku, even if, like Konishiki, he speaks Japanese, has a Japanese wife and reportedly has applied for citizenship.
Born Salevaa Astinoe, the 28-year-old Konishiki has taken no public part in the debate.
Sooner or later he will either get the designation, or not.
"After it happens, I'll think about it," he said.


Philadelphian With AIDS Tells of Sex With Many Boys
A man who has AIDS has told the authorities that he paid for sex with several hundred male teen-agers over the last several years, the Philadelphia District Attorney said today.
The man was arrested earlier this week on several charges, including the statutory rape of a boy under 16 years old.
The District Attorney, Lynne Abraham, refused to give the man's name, citing a Pennsylvania law that she said prohibited the release of names and other information that would tend to identify people stricken with AIDS.


Hotel Spa Opens In Versailles
The Trianon Palace, a hotel built a few minutes' walk from the Palace of Versailles in 1910 and named for one of Marie Antoinette's favorite retreats, has reopened after nine months of renovation.
Situated in a seven-acre park, the Trianon Palace, and the newly built Trianon Hotel next door, housing an international business center, each have about 100 guest rooms and suites, as well as access to a new health spa complexnearby.
Guests can play tennis, horseback ride, swim, bike, play golf, stroll through the gardens, or dine at Les Trois Marches, a restaurant in the Trianon Palace with two Michelin stars.
Dinner costs around $100 a person (calculating the dollar at 5.30 francs), not including wine or tip.


How a 'Bunch of Amateurs' Learned to Fight City Hall
IN a church basement here on Washington Street is a scale model of the City of Hoboken -- its churches, stores, streets and houses reproduced in painstaking detail.
Depicted along the eastern boundary, where the city meets the Hudson River, is a tree-lined waterfront park that stretches from one end of town to the other.
The model represents the collective vision of an eclectic mix of Hoboken residents -- artists, writers, homemakers, truck drivers, lawyers, business people -- that calls itself the Coalition for a Better Waterfront.
It also represents the group's alternative to an official city plan to develop 32 acres of the city's most precious real estate.


For Memphis State, Use of Local Talent Elevates City's Game
You can take Memphis State out of Memphis, but do not try taking the Memphis out of Memphis State.
When the Tigers (23-10) battle Cincinnati (28-4) in the Midwest Regional final here at Kemper Arena on Sunday to decide which team advances to the Final Four, Memphis State will feature four starters who are from Memphis.
Nine of the 14 players on its roster are from that city, and three others are from cities within 100 miles.


At Home Abroad; A Close-Run Thing
It is a Hobbesian election campaign here: nasty, brutish and short.
It has produced acres of invective and little by way of affirmative reason to vote for anyone.
But at least it will be over a week from Thursday, when Britain votes.
Or will it?
The polls are so close that the election could produce a hung Parliament, one in which neither Labor nor the Conservatives have a majority.
If neither can then form a stable government with the help of minor parties, the British might have to vote again.


House Passes Aid for Middle-Class Students
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted late Thursday to provide the middle class with greater access to educational aid while also helping needy students by boosting maximum annual grants to $4,500 from $2,400.
Passage of the measure is a response to a widespread perception among lawmakers that they need to distribute more benefits to the middle class, especially in an election year.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that access to colleges and trade schools must be expanded to make the country more productive and competitive on world markets.


Mets' Perfect Solution For Imperfect Shoulder
It is one of the more anonymous acts of choreography in a baseball game.
A line drive screams through the gap in left-center and suddenly the formation of infielders takes shape with instinctive ease.
The shortstop races to his relay post in short-left field, and the second baseman glides into position behind the shortstop as the trailer for the potential play at the plate.
It is a defensive dance enacted on hundreds of occasions by major league clubs.
The Mets, though, plan not to perform it once in 1992.
Their modest revolution, though, isn't premised on a belief that they won't give up a single extra-base hit.
It has been prompted by fear -- the suspicion that shortstop Kevin Elster, with his imperfect shoulder, can't make the required throw as the relay man.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic IssueS; Clinton on Blacks and Jews, and Himself
Gov.
Bill Clinton was scheduled to deliver what his Presidential campaign staff said would be an important speech on relations between black and Jews.
Instead, the Arkansas Governor yesterday morning talked of his own relations with blacks and his own relations with Jews.
In the context of a general message of brotherhood, Mr.
Clinton told a New York City audience of how, as a boy in Arkansas, he used to visit his grandfather's store, which had some customers "of African-American descent," and "hand out cookies to kids who came in without regard to their race."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 29, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
9
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
3
6
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
4
47
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
5
6
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
6
2
THE SHERBROOKE BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A tangled romance in which a man marries the sister of his intended bride.
7
1
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides attempts to write about the world of horse racing.
8
1
CHAINS OF COMMAND, by W. A. McCay and E. L. Flood. (Pocket, $4.99.) "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is caught in a conflict between extraterrestrial humans and a birdlike race.
9
4
EYES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) A serial killer in the Twin Cities.
10
1
PERFECT PARTNERS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.50.) The romance of a woman who inherits a giant business and the man who teaches her how to run it.
11
4
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Ivy, $5.99.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
12
19
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
13
5
THE DRUID OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Continuing the story of life in the fantasy land of Shannara.
14
10
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
15
5
THE OLD CONTEMPTIBLES, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A Scotland Yardsman finds himself a suspect in the death of a widow.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
2
45
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
2
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of a California entrepreneur.
4
37
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
5 *
6
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
6
438
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
9
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
8
14
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
9
3
PREDATOR, by Jack Olsen. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The story of a serial rapist in Washington State.
10
122
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
33
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
81
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
62
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
30
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Inquiry on House Post Office Looks at Blocking of Police
A Federal grand jury examining criminal wrongdoing at the House post office has focused on a one-month period last summer when top House administrators intervened to keep the United States Capitol police from investigating possible embezzlements there.
During this period, according to documents and interviews with people involved, House officials refused to let the Capitol police interview postal employees, demanded access to confidential investigative information and eventually succeeded in transferring the case to the Postal Inspection Service, the investigative arm of the United States Postal Service.


May Wedding For Ms. Senter
Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Senter of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Stacey Tara Senter and Dr.
Andrew Mark Goldbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold K. Goldbaum of New York.
Ms.
Senter, 25 years old, is an account executive at the Donna Karan clothing and accessories design company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of the Automatic Group, a diversified home services company in Hempstead, L.I.
Her mother, Donna Senter, is an art consultant in Old Westbury.


When Children Can't Afford Parents
Last fall, the American Association of Retired Persons issued a bulletin on a phenomenon they labeled "Granny Dumping" -- the abandonment of frail elderly people by their adult children.
At the time, the report caused barely a ripple.
But last week a face was given to the statistics, that of 82-year-old John Kingery, and it stirred sympathy and outrage across the county.
Holding a bag of diapers and with a note pinned to his chest, Mr.
Kingery was found in his wheelchair at a dog-racing track near Couer d'Alene, Idaho, last Saturday.
He suffers from Alzheimer's disease and cannot remember his name.
He was identified by administrators from a nursing home in Portland, Ore., where he had lived for 18 months before being abruptly removed, against his doctor's wishes, by his daughter.
While police continued to investigate the Kingery case, experts cited a demographic time bomb that they said could produce many similar cases in the next half-century.


Lisbeth Levine Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Levine of Cranbury, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Lisbeth Levine, and Scott Evan Saef, a son of Dr.
Edward Saef of Carlisle, Mass., and Toby Saef of Concord, Mass.
Ms.
Levine, 28 years old, is the fashion editor of The Chicago Sun-Times.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is an independent marketing consultant in Cranbury.


Albany Cancellation Hits Quebec Power Project
New York State's cancellation of a $12 billion, 20-year contract to buy power from Quebec has struck perhaps a fatal blow to one of the biggest and most controversial efforts to exploit the Canadian province's vast water resources for energy.
The provincially owned Hydro-Quebec utility insisted today that its northern expansion project in the Cree Indian country to the east of Hudson Bay will still go forward.
But the loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars anticipated from Albany annually will almost certainly strain the giant utility's finances as well as bring a damaging reduction in its credit rating.


A Spymaster Wrestles With the Politics of Intelligence
When Robert M. Gates talks, people listen.
But it can be risky for the nation's top spymaster to go public.
Since he took over as Director of Central Intelligence four months ago, Mr.
Gates has made five public appearances before Congressional committees, lacing his bleak world view with tantalizing bits of secret information -- intelligence with the bark off, as he likes to call it.


Rooms in Prague
To the Editor: We had read in The Times about obtaining room reservations through Top Tour, Rybna 3, Prague, Czechoslovakia ("A Touch of Home on Dlouha Street," Travel, July 14).
We wrote them and did obtain through them a room in an apartment for our visit in October.
The room was lovely, and we found Top Tour to be both efficient and friendly.
Their computer printout provided us with not only the name, address and phone number of the apartment's owner, but also the tram line number and the name of the nearest tram stop.


Cuttings; Planting a Garden That Can Follow You Into the House
There's almost nothing as satisfying as a garden of flowers for cutting.
Oh, O.K., tomatoes and basil.
But save a little space for pure beauty.
Cut flowers -- even the simplest annuals -- give so much pleasure.
Just a humble vase of zinnias on the kitchen counter can help the work-weary make dinner for the kids.
Not to mention an old-fashioned arrangement of lacy bishop flowers, cosmos and tithonia catching the morning light on the porch.


Back to Basics? Turn to Natural Gas . . .
To the Editor:
"Talk About a Slogan for the Back-to-Basics 90's: Electrify!" (Technology, March 8) cites an example that debunks the "ecowatts" theory -- a high-efficiency natural-gas glass melter.
Many many more could have been cited.
The glass furnace will be 20 percent more efficient than conventional glass melters and 40 percent less expensive than electric equipment.
It will also lower emissions of carbon dioxide -- all by direct use of natural gas.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Denies He Exempted Himself From an Ethics Law
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas denied yesterday that he had acted to exempt himself and his wife, Hillary, from the provisions of a state law requiring disclosure of certain personal financial matters.
Mr.
Clinton said that he sponsored the original ethics legislation that would have placed disclosure requirements on the Governor and that he agreed to the weaker bill in 1988 only to enhance its chance of passage.


How Half Hollow Hills Redistricts Schools
I am writing with reference to "A Test for Neighborhood Schools"  [ March 8 ] .
I would first like to point out that in no way, shape or form does the Half Hollow Hills School District promote or even entertain the notion of a neighborhood school system.
One look at our district map, and that is self-evident.
Secondly, one of our school board members, Mrs.
Ilene Herz, stated last year during a public Get to Know Your Candidate forum that "a neighborhood school is a nice concept, but it doesn't work in the real world."


Mary Haziski to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Hazinski of Holmdel, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Angela Hazinski, and Christopher John Hawke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger J. Hawke of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
Miss Hazinski, 26 years old, and her fiance, also 26, are studying law at Fordham University.
Miss Hazinski graduated from the College of William and Mary, Mr.
Hawke from Amherst College.


Equality Needed On Sports Pages
To the Sports Editor:
I am writing in response to William C. Rhoden's "Discarding High-Heeled Sneakers" The Times, Feb. 8). Rhoden bemoans the fact that women are viewed as "trinkets and accoutrements" in male-dominated professional sports. He also mentions Title IX, whose purpose was to make collegiate sports for women equitable to those of men.


CAMPUS LIFE: Swarthmore; Students Visit Hong Kong Camps For Vietnamese
Instead of tanning on beaches and playing volleyball, seven students from Swarthmore, Bryn Mawr and Haverford Colleges spent their spring break visiting Vietnamese refugee camps in Hong Kong.
The all-expense-paid trip was this year's Peace Studies mission, a program that "enables students to do an in-depth study of an area of the world where there are tensions and then gain first-hand experience there," said one of the two professors who made the trip, Jen Wu, who is an associate dean and lecturer in human development at Bryn Mawr College.


Dawn Borodin Wed
Dawn Melissa Borodin, the daughter of Harold Borodin of La Plata, Md., and Florine Borodin of West Hartford, Conn., was married last night in Oceanside, L.I., to David Richard Chaskin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Chaskin of Weston, Conn.
Rabbi Norton Shargel performed the ceremony at Temple Avodah.


Sports of The Times; 3-Point Shot Has Caused Blitz of Ads
HOW I came to hate Bob Seger: While waiting for the Duke-Kentucky game to come around, I was trying to watch basketball on television, but it wasn't easy.
Every 1.2 seconds, somebody would foul somebody else, the players would trot to the bench, and they -- the great "they" who run sports -- would switch to a commercial for pickup trucks, featuring Seger singing "Like a Rock."


A Parent's Worst Fear
STRONGER THAN DEATH
By Sue Chance. 161 pp. New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


BEST SELLERS: March 29, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
3
7
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
3
2
5
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.
4 *
4
3
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
5
5
6
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
6
11
2
PROBE, by Margaret Wander Bonanno. (Pocket, $18.95.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise confronts a force that threatens galactic peace.
7
6
14
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
8
7
25
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
9
8
3
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $21.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
10
14
3
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A man tries to relieve the frustrations of his lifetime by participating in a solo sailing race.
11
9
3
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire developer in rustic mountain country.
12
10
7
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party, attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children, reveals family strains and love.
13 *
12
10
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
14
101
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
1
TRIAL BY FIRE, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The United States Army in a war against Mexico, a conflict marked by revolutionary forces, drug lords and bungled intelligence.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
9
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and other people's struggles to achieve self-esteem.
2
2
4
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
3
3
19
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
5
2
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
5
4
24
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
6
8
5
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces his heritage through three generations, from Italy to Ocean City, N.J.
7
6
17
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
8
9
5
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) A Scottsdale, Ariz., attorney argues that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
9
10
4
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic, $21.) An economist argues that in the past 20 years Americans' leisure time has greatly diminished, with foreboding consequences.
10 *
7
13
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
11
19
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
12 *
12
11
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) The case for C.I.A. involvement in the death of J.F.K.
13
15
28
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
14
14
3
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN, by Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) A political philosopher considers where two powerful historical forces are now leading us.
15 *
11
7
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America now faces.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
4
17
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
3
3
12
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
2
17
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
5
8
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
PATRICK WHITE: A Life, by David Marr. (Knopf, $30.) A beautifully constructed account, integrating letters, interviews and narrative, of the difficult and often nasty novelist who in 1973 became the only Australian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.
HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives, by Alan Bullock. (Knopf, $35.) Borrowing a trick from Plutarch, Lord Bullock sets forth the two dictators' lives and careers chronologically, showing who did what first and to whom; often enough, it was the Fuhrer who learned tricks pioneered by his neighbor to the East.
POSTCARDS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $22.95.) This lovely novel, which makes real the history of America from World War II to the day before yesterday, turns on a murderer's exile, and the decline of the family and the landscape he left behind in Vermont.
A FULL SERVICE BANK: How BCCI Stole Billions Around the World, by James Ring Adams and Douglas Frantz. (Pocket Books, $22.) A penetrating treatment of the underlying forces in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal and of the detective work by several nations that ran the thieves to earth.
FORTUNATE LIVES, by Robb Forman Dew. (Morrow, $20.) This quiet -- virtually silent -- novel depends on the characters and the musings of a family during the summer before their son departs.
OVER THE EARTH I COME: The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862, by Duane Schultz. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $21.95.) A taut, capable narrative of the abominable doings by both sides that set the tone for America's post-Civil War expansion.
ELTON JOHN, by Philip Norman. (Harmony, $22.50.) An eloquent, analytical and well-researched examination of the spectacle who is rock's most devoted scholar and brilliant emulator.


Taking Aim at Insect Pests, Naturally
THIS is the perfect time of year to get rid of many garden insect problems safely.
With so much concern expressed about the misuse of garden chemicals, this good news can be spread.
Those who do not take advantage of this effort now will be missing a good deal.
This is the time of year when oil sprays can be used.
The sprays are widely sold at garden centers, and the directions for mixing and application are clearly indicated on the labels.
There used to be tremendous caution about the use of dormant oils, because they were formulated on a thicker basis, and many cautionary statements were issued.


Silvia Gutierrez to Marry in May
Angel Gutierrez Escudero and Carmen Hidalgo de Quintana of Madrid have announced the engagement of their daughter, Silvia Gutierrez, to Alejandro Rivas-Micoud, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jose P. Rivas-Micoud of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Gutierrez, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Madrid and is a market analyst at the Spanish Embassy in Tokyo.
Her father, a Spanish diplomat, was until recently the attache of the Spanish delegation to the European Economic Community in Brussels.


Review/Fashion; The Avant-Garde Calls the Hippest Tune
To look like a hip young Parisian next fall, you'll want to wear a sleek black leather jacket over a transparent black T-shirt and a long tight black skirt.
That's what many of the avant-garde French designers have suggested.
The fashion groupies attending their shows in the past two weeks have already adopted at least parts of the uniform.
Their outfits are finished off with heavy black shoes or boots and, this being France, a cigarette.


Teachers Should Face Reality of Cutbacks
The position taken by the teachers and the teachers' union in "School Boards Face Hostility as Teachers Seek Raises"  [ Feb. 2 ]  is really off the mark.
Taxpayers are not asking teachers to subsidize the place where the teachers work.
We are asking teachers to admit reality.
The reality is that after having suffered massive cuts in state aid, the school-district budgets simply do not have the money to increase employee salaries.
Unfortunately, some school boards seem to be as blind to this reality as their teachers and other employees.
In those school districts the teachers and other employees have signed new contracts which have included wage increases.
Wage increases which the cash-strapped school boards then have to make up by laying off personnel, eliminating needed programs, raising class sizes and, of course, raising property taxes, which are already astronomical.
The net result of this will be that the recessionary cycle will be fueled by the laying off of thousands of teachers and other school employees.
HEIDI REICHEL Huntington


Revisiting 'Evita,' A Grand Contradiction
"EVITA" is a grand contradiction.
Beginning with a funeral and ending with a death scene, the musical foreshadows doom throughout.
Its alluring antiheroine, the second wife of Juan Peron, President of Argentina, is corrupt, hypocritical and megalomaniacal, "Easily the most unpleasant character I've written about," Andrew Lloyd Webber, the show's composer, said just before the 1979 Broadway opening.
And even with an abstract setting and cynical veneer, "Evita" was described by Harold Prince, who directed it, as "an unabashedly emotional piece" that moved people.


Mexico Trade Treaty Threatens U.S. Jobs
To the Editor:
"Trading Trade for Votes" (editorial, March 16) lauds the Mexican free trade agreement the Bush Administration is negotiating, for its so-called benefits to both sides of the Rio Grande River.
You state that "100,000 U.S. workers, mainly in auto and apparel, are expected to lose their jobs," and callously write them off.
The loss of jobs will be much greater than your estimate.


Stronger Regulation of International Banks Urged
An advisory group formed after the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has recommended, in a report to be issued today, a series of state and Federal changes to tighten the regulation of foreign banks with operations in the United States.
The report, by the New York State Banking Superintendent's Advisory Committee on Transnational Banking Institutions, made 70 recommendations, including calls for more bank examiners and more exchanges of information among regulators.


Corrections
An article on page 28 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the actress Rosie Perez includes an erroneous date provided by a press agent for the opening of "Night on Earth." The film will open in New York on April 24 and nationwide on May 8.


Teaching the Young How to Think
Re: "Early Start for Gifted Inner-City Children," the Feb. 23 article about our program to serve minority gifted children in Newark:
Educators and parents may also be interested to know that our program is based on the young thinker model, described in the book "Educating the Young Thinker: Strategies for Cognitive Growth" by Carol Copple, Irving Sigel and Ruth Saunders (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1984).


Indiana Efficiency Made It No Contest
Altitude aside, the lingering feeling about the West Regional, which concluded Saturday afternoon, was this: Indiana may not be the most talented basketball team in the country, but it certainly is the most prepared.
Four months after a season-opening loss to U.C.L.A., the Hoosiers -- unable to win the Big Ten championship and surely without much momentum as the national tournament began this month -- recovered with a resounding triumph over the Bruins that sent them into this weekend's Final Four at Minneapolis.
They'll play Duke there on Saturday.


Travel Slows at Local Airports
Constrained by the recession and the economic effects of the Persian Gulf war, the total number of travelers who passed through the region's three main airports declined sharply last year, according to a report released yesterday by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The overall number of passengers who used the three airports -- Kennedy International, La Guardia and Newark International -- fell 8.7 percent, from 74.8 million in 1990 to 68.3 million last year, the Port Authority said.
The decline erased the slight increase of 0.5 percent that the airports had posted in 1990, compared with 1989.


'88 Welfare Act Is Falling Short, Researchers Say
When Congress passed a much-celebrated welfare law in 1988, its supporters, including Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, said it would bring revolutionary changes to the system.
But the first major study of its implementation says the program's accomplishments fall far short of radical change.
While the law has succeeded in expanding services, the report found, it is failing to convert welfare from a system that permits long-term dependency to one that stresses skills, jobs and financial independence.


A Final Clear-Cut, and Goodbye to Logging
Loggers don't say "timmmmmmber," when a 200-foot Douglas fir comes crashing down, severed by chain saw from its centuries-old anchor to the ground.
They never did, as far as anyone on the Olympic Peninsula can remember.
Instead, after the pop and snap of wood fiber crumbling into the arms of gravity, Gary Phillips takes a deep breath.
"Smell that?" says Mr.
Phillips, a third-generation logger who is cutting his last stand of timber.
"That's the smell of dying trees."


Shadow Adds Sports Updates
Heads are rolling left and right these days in the cost-conscious radio business.
In recent months, JOHN KENNELLY of WNEW lost his spot commenting on sports, and STEVE MALZBERG , a regular on WABC, was dropped.
There are rumors of impending cuts on the all-news radio stations, WCBS and WINS.
"Sports guys are always the first to go," Malzberg said, "which leaves the newsperson to read the local scores, robbing the true sports fan of a full sports report."


Brush Fire Halts Traffic In New Jersey
A wind-swept fire roared through hundreds of acres of open marshland near the Meadowlands Sports Complex today, backing up traffic 15 miles on the northern stretches of the New Jersey Turnpike.
Billowing black smoke and flaming 8-foot marsh reeds on both sides of the turnpike caused the authorities to close the turnpike's 10-mile western spur for about five hours as a safety precaution.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Many of the world's largest banks lent billions of dollars to Olympia &amp; York, even though the real estate developer refused to disclose all of its financial obligations and would not let the banks review its books.
Now it is being pummeled by $18.5 billion of debt, depressed property values and disastrous investments.
Its banks are nervously lining up to see what their losses may be.  [ Page A1. ]  An emergency loan will enable work to continue on the Canary Wharf development in London only for the next month or so.  [ D4. ]


Transit Vote Shows Split In Union
Lou Corradi thinks of himself as a loyal union man, the son of a transit worker and a longtime supporter of Sonny Hall, the president of the transit workers' union.
But Mr.
Corradi could not even wait to bring his D train to a complete halt at the end of its run in Coney Island the other day before beginning a broad denunciation of his union and the tentative three-year contract that union leaders had negotiated with management.
"The workers are disgusted," Mr. Corradi said. "This really struck a chord."


Officer Is Wounded By Partner's Bullet
A police officer struggling with a suspected car thief in Queens was shot in the leg early this morning by her partner, but she was not seriously wounded, the police said.
The shooting occurred at 12:15 A.M. across from the Rego Park Nursing Home at 111-26 Corona Avenue in Corona after a high-speed chase that began when the officer, Laura Ventura, and her partner, Brian Bonilla, spotted a burned-out headlight in the suspect's car, the police said.


FOLEY SAYS INQUIRY WAS NOT IMPEDED
Speaker Thomas S. Foley today denied that improper attempts had been made by senior House administrators to prevent the United States Capitol police from investigating possible embezzlement at the House post office.
"We cooperated in every way with the investigation of the post office," said Mr.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, in an appearance on the CBS News program "Face the Nation." "It's nonsense to suggest that there was any cover-up."


Foreign Affairs; The Russian Sinkhole
As the U.S. foreign policy establishment stampedes toward a megabillion-dollar comprehensive "aid" program for the ex-Soviet Union, consider the following facts:
*
These states have 44 nuclear power plants, including 15 of the Chernobyl style, many of which are in terrible shape and could spring radioactive leaks.
One near St.
Petersburg leaked two weeks ago.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Clinton Admits Experiment With Marijuana in 1960's
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said yesterday that he experimented with marijuana while he was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in the late 1960's, but that he had never used any other illegal drug.
"I've never broken a state law," he said.
"But when I was in England I experimented with marijuana a time or two, and I didn't like it. I didn't inhale it, and never tried it again."


Machine Tool Orders Up 6.4% in February
Orders for American-made machine tools rose 6.4 percent last month from January's level, in another sign of renewed economic growth, according to a report to be released today by an industry trade group.
The trade group, the Association for Manufacturing Technology, calculated February's orders at $231.4 million, up from $217.4 million in January.
The amount of February orders was down 5.6 percent, however, from the $245.2 million of February 1991.


Strike Looms Today After Talks Recess
No agreement was reached and no further negotiations were scheduled as of late last night in the impasse between National Hockey League team owners and the N.H.L.
Players Association.
The union has scheduled a strike for noon today.
No N.H.L. games are scheduled for today.
Bob Goodenow, executive director for the players association, has scheduled an 8 A.M. conference call with player representatives and members of the bargaining committee, apparently to decide whether the union will go through with the walkout.


How to Turn Our Guns Into Their Butter
To the Editor:
In "How to Lose the Cold War" (Op-Ed, March 10), Daniel Schorr cites Richard M. Nixon's warning of a "new despotism" in the former Soviet Union that would spread rapidly.
What better way to save the "cold war victory" than for President Bush and Congress to start a new Marshall Plan for the former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe and to meet United Nations peacekeeping costs.
To underwrite these bold initiatives for true national security, $10 billion can be transferred from the proposed House of Representatives defense budget of $287.2 billion for fiscal year 1993, to be combined with equal contributions by Japan and the European Community.
Such a program would generate exports, lift the world economy out of recession and create lasting jobs for our defense workers and the troops who would come home.


Budget Office Retreats on Work Health
Under pressure from Congress, the Administration's budget office retreated last week from its demand that new occupational-health regulations be delayed to see if their cost would impoverish workers, thereby making them sicker rather than healthier.
Instead of sending the regulations back to the Labor Department for an analysis of that issue, the Office of Management and Budget said it would be satisfied if the department asked for public comment on the question.


Books of The Times; 19th-Century Paris And the Art of Its Era
Olympia  Paris in the Age of Manet  By Otto Friedrich  Illustrated. 329 pages.
HarperCollins. $28.
What browser through books on modern painting has not been stunned upon first seeing a reproduction of Edouard Manet's "Olympia," the portrait by the 19th-century French artist of the ivory-colored nude with the dark-skinned attendant and the black cat at her feet?


Kentucky And Duke: As Good As It Gets
As President Bush left his home this morning for a Sunday walk around Lafayette Park, his unsolicited question echoed the ones asked by all the others who have ever been captivated by a basketball, two hoops and the wondrous things that can happen in between.
"Did you see the ending of the Duke game?" the President asked.


Essay; China's Silent Upheaval
"The word is racing gleefully through Beijing intellectual circles," reported The New York Times's Nicholas Kristof early this year, "that an impeccably reliable American political forecaster, renowned for his clairvoyance, has declared that there will be immense changes in China in 1992."
This mysterious Nostradamus (a prophet without honor in his own country) has already been proven partly right.


From Trenton to Montauk, Local Officials Are Buying Local
In a mini-trade war, New York City, New Jersey and Long Island are engaged in a bitter exchange of purchasing policies that favor local suppliers for government contracts.
The policies are intended to protect jobs and buttress local economies, all mired in recession.
They give preference to resident businesses, even if their bids are as much as 10 percent higher than competing proposals from other, nonresident companies.


William Hanway, 67, Newspaper Executive
D.
William Hanway, a retired newspaper executive, died on Saturday at his home in Hypoluxo, Fla.
He was 67 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Gilmore Brings Cheer to Michigan State's N.C.A.A. Title Quest
Mike Gilmore displayed a self-conscious smile when the contingent of Michigan State fans cheered and clapped as he entered the Holiday Inn lobby here 15 minutes after midnight this morning.
The diffident 24-year-old Gilmore was the hero of the moment for what he had just accomplished in the building next door, the Civic Center, in the last 20 minutes of the Spartans' remarkable hockey victory over Maine.
The event was the last game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament's East Regional.


Corrections
An article in the New Jersey Weekly yesterday about a waterfront development plan for Hoboken omitted an element of the plan advocated by the city.
It includes an "up front" payment of $3.25 million from the Port Authority.


Warnaco Cuts Debt Payments
The Warnaco Group Inc. has used a secondary public offering to reduce its interest and preferred dividend expenses by $30 million a year, according to Linda J. Wachner, chairman and chief executive of the apparel company.
Proceeds from the sale on Thursday of five million shares of common stock for $34.50 a share will be used to redeem all of Warnaco's preferred shares and retire or repurchase the majority of its high-yield debt.


Washington at Work; Cloak and Dagger Retired, Ex-Chief Of C.I.A. Remains Hard to Predict
Which is the real William Egan Colby, "the traditional grey man, so inconspicuous that he can never catch the waiter's eye in a restaurant," as the former spymaster described himself in his 1978 memoir, "Honorable Men: My Life in the C.I.A.", or the romantic who drives a red Fiat Pininfarina around Washington as if he were in vehicular combat in Rome?
Is he the onetime secret agent who for years assiduously cultivated a manner as colorless as his translucent eyeglasses, or the free spirit who tangoes with his wife in the living room of their Georgetown town house?


Dance in Review
Second Avenue Dance Company  Fifth Floor Theater 111 Second Avenue (near Seventh Street) Manhattan Through tonight
Every spring, the Second Avenue Dance Company presents young dancers in their last year of training at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts in works by students and guest choreographers.
What made the group's program on Thursday night at the university's Fifth Floor Theater so pleasant was its overall professionalism.


La Paz Journal; Bolivia Is Helping Its Battered Wives to Stand Up
The women gather every day outside the Federal Court building here, about 25 a day, and after weekends and festivals as many as 50.
Mostly they are Aymaras, members of the Andean people known for their ability to live at high altitudes and for the distinctive way the women dress, bowler hats perched on long dark hair, puffed skirts and colorful shawls that usually hold sleeping infants.
At the court building, many have swollen eyes.
Some are bleeding from the sides of their mouths.
Others have large purple bruises on their cheeks and cuts on their foreheads.


Review/Theater; Two Generations (and Cultures) at War
"I wish I could tell you that he won my heart in that final chapter, but he did not," a successful novelist named Charlie (Tony Shalhoub) says of his aged father in the waning moments of "Conversations With My Father." That line, at once brutally honest and clinically detached, seems to sum up just what is impressive and what is lacking in Herb Gardner's richly atmospheric new memory play at the Royale Theater.
In Eddie Ross, the immigrant Canal Street bartender played by Judd Hirsch, Mr.
Gardner has created, without apologies, a most disagreeable Jewish patriarch.
An angry, remote and abusive man who always lives "at the top of his voice and the edge of his nerves," Eddie is found yelling at a baby in his first scene and, a few joyous moments aside, rarely stops barking at all comers for two acts (and his 30 years of stage time) to follow.
The sour realism of this portrait is not only uncompromising but is also a brave and unexpected feat from a writer whose "I'm Not Rappaport" offered the most adorable of cantankerous Jewish codgers, also played by Mr.
Hirsch.


High-Tech TV So Near, Yet So Far Away
When Hollywood contemplates the future of entertainment technology, the optimists see a world of profit and delight.
But skeptics see an expensive future that is difficult to make a reality.
James A. Chiddix, senior vice president for engineering and technology for the American Television and Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest cable operator, notes that it took 40 years to bring cable to more than 90 percent of American households.


Peppered With Mines, Awash in Civil War, It Still Is Home for Cambodians
Nearly 370,000 Cambodian refugees living in border camps in Thailand are preparing to return home to a nation that seems ill-prepared to receive them.
On Monday, the first 600 refugees are to be placed on United Nations buses and driven across the border into Cambodia, for many the first trip home since Vietnam installed a revolutionary government 13 years ago.


Bridge
A long-shot team won the Vanderbilt knockout team championships at 2 this morning at the American Contract Bridge League's spring nationals here.
Andy Goodman of San Francisco, John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., John Schermer of Seattle and Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., thoroughly deserve their success, for they defeated higher-ranked squads on four consecutive days.
They were originally seeded 14th in the field of 92 teams, and they won the final by 39 imps against a group of players who had all won world titles: Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va., Peter Boyd of Silver Spring, Md., Kit Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., Neil Silverman of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif.


CHRONICLE
When Bryant Park, behind the New York Public Library in midtown Manhattan, reopens next month, the Josephine Shaw Lowell fountain, which had faced sale or extinction, will be rehabilitated.
The pink granite fountain, built in 1912 in tribute to the pioneer social worker, had suffered years of corrosion, vandalism and neglect.
With the city budget shrinking, the fountain was put up for sale two years ago, but there were no buyers.


To Participants in Plan B: Expect Silent Treatment
The National Football League's Plan B free-agency period will end at midnight Wednesday, probably as quietly as it began.
Few name players have been made available, let alone signed, and many teams have introduced a strategy of staying silent to keep prospective signees and departees in the dark.


Executive Panel At Walter Thompson
J.
Walter Thompson Chicago has formed an executive committee under J. Steve Davis, executive vice president and general manager.


Obviously Also-Ran: He Talks About Real Issues
People are angry.
Perhaps they are angrier, even, than they were four years ago. . . .
The most disturbing point most of those we spoke with made was that they had no faith at all in the system -- the government and the private wielders of power -- as a protector or a provider.
"The State of the Cities" by Senator Fred R. Harris and Mayor John V. Lindsay (Praeger, 1972).


Exhibition Evokes Past Jewish Life And Grips Its German Viewers
Since it opened in January, a huge exhibition called "Judische Lebenswelten" ("Patterns of Jewish Life") has lured Germans in enormous numbers to a comprehensive panoply of Jewish artifacts, paintings, photographs, videos and relics that seeks to accomplish nothing less than an overview of the entire world history of Judaism.
The response has been remarkable in its intensity, in the curiosity aroused and the controversy provoked.
The first Sunday the exhibition was open to the public in the Martin-Gropius-Bau, the building had to be closed because of overcrowding.
The gigantic catalogue -- seemingly comparable in heft to the many leather-bound illuminated medieval texts on display -- quickly sold out and had to be reprinted.
Nearly 200,000 visitors have seen the exhibition, which is on the borderline between the eastern and western parts of the city, with perhaps that many more expected over the Easter holidays (the exhibition closes April 26).


An Oscar Scorecard


Foreign Affairs; The Russian Sinkhole
As the U.S. foreign policy establishment stampedes toward a megabillion-dollar comprehensive "aid" program for the ex-Soviet Union, consider the following facts:
*
These states have 44 nuclear power plants, including 15 of the Chernobyl style, many of which are in terrible shape and could spring radioactive leaks.
One near St.
Petersburg leaked two weeks ago.


Plug Is Pulled on Heathkits, Ending a Do-It-Yourself Era
Before there were nerds, before there was a Silicon Valley, there were Heathkits, which let tens of thousands of ambitious amateurs and aspiring engineers build their own radios, televisions and other electronic equipment.
But this month, after 45 years in the business, the Heath Company is closing out the last of its kits to concentrate on faster-selling home-improvement products and educational materials.
Heath's kit sales have steadily declined since 1981, victims of reduced leisure time, declining prices that make it cheaper to buy fancy radios and electronic equipment than to build them, and the seduction of technically oriented consumers by personal computers.


Review/Jazz; Nonstop Improvisation With a Big-Band Backup
Betty Carter is a jazz singer who has long been fascinated with exploring the outer limits of vocal improvisation within formal musical settings.
And on Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall, in a concert presented as part of the Jazz at Lincoln Center series, she took on one of the more daunting challenges for an improvisational singer by performing relatively free-style vocals with a big band augmented with strings.
For Ms.
Carter, whose groups have helped nurture the talents of many younger instrumentalists, this also meant giving individual musicians a fair amount of room in which to stretch out.
Adding to the challenge was a theme announced in the concert's subtitle, "The Music Never Stops." During the intermissionless 90-minute event, the singer and her musicians attempted to keep the music continuous, right down to Ms.
Carter's singing the introductions and segues to most of the selections.
Although she did pause once or twice to make remarks, the music was for the most part unbroken.
The idea of musical continuity gave the evening a natural sense of thematic ebb and flow, with songs about goodbyes forming an expressive nucleus.


How to Turn Our Guns Into Their Butter; Habit of Belligerence
To the Editor:
In "America Only" (editorial, March 10), you ask: "why on earth does the Administration allow the Defense Department alone to define the terms of the national debate on U.S. strategy after the cold war?" And, further, why don't the State Department and the National Security Council also weigh in?
A large part of the answer is that all three institutions operate as a well-oiled foreign policy machine that emphasizes military power over economic and cultural influence.
As a career diplomat and economist member of the Secretary of State's policy planning and coordination staff during the false detente of the early 1970's, I raised that issue to fellow diplomats.
Young diplomats sick of rationalizing Vietnam to disbelieving industrial democracies were then more worried about losing Europe than Indochina.


Canary Wharf Stopgap Loan
An emergency loan obtained earlier this month by Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. will enable work on the giant Canary Wharf real estate development project to continue only for the next month or so, the head of the project says.
In an interview on Saturday, Michael Dennis, chief executive of Olympia &amp; York/Canary Wharf Ltd., said: "We will keep proceeding as far as we can on the money committed to us. It should take us well through the next month."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Brown Rally Draws Tie-Dyed Crowd
Aron Kay fired his first pie in anger in the Vietnam War.
From the 1960's through early 1980, when he "retired" after "pieing" McGeorge Bundy during a speech at City College, Mr.
Kay roamed the nation lofting cream-fill confections at national figures like Phyllis Schlafly, William F. Buckley Jr. and former Mayor Abe Beame of New York.


Brush Fire in the Meadowlands Forces Section of New Jersey Turnpike to Close


ISRAELIS SAY KOHL HAS INSULTED JEWS
Senior Israeli officials strongly criticized Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany today for having welcomed President Kurt Waldheim of Austria.
And the Foreign Minister said later that the German's comments about leaders of Jewish organizations were "repugnant."
Mr.
Kohl's meeting with Mr.
Waldheim on Friday in Munich drew considerable attention here, underscoring once again the unending delicacy of relations between Israel and Germany.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; Book Lists Dwindling As Publishers Cut Fat
Publishers are trimming the fat these days and not just by ordering plain pasta with chopped tomatoes when they have lunch at the Four Seasons.
They are looking at their bottom lines and at the array of proposals and manuscripts being offered to them, and, with a sense of restraint forgotten in the acquisitive 80's, they are learning to say, "No, thank you."
As a result, lists are leaner at most publishing houses, with fewer titles being printed.
Publishers say they are looking with greater discretion at book outlines, turning away things they probably would have accepted a few years ago.
Important Changes
This appetite control prompted important changes at three publishing houses in the last few months.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  KURDS STARE DOWN TURKEY
After some of the worst fighting since the Kurdish insurgency began in 1984, southeastern Turkey seems to be on the edge of full-scale revolt.
Scores have been killed, but neither the Kurds nor the Government seems willing to yield.
A1  RETURN TO A GRIM CAMBODIA
Nearly 370,000 Cambodian refugees in border camps in Thailand are preparing to return home on United Nations buses.
Relief workers warn that land mines, disease, shortages and threats from the Khmer Rouge may force them to halt the repatriation almost as soon as it begins.
A3  BUSH IS POISED TO AID RUSSIA
President Bush is expected to announce his much-debated program of aid for the former Soviet republics this week, perhaps as early as Tuesday.
The issue has become embroiled in the 1992 campaign.
A3  ABUSED WOMEN IN THE ANDES
La Paz Journal: At a federal courthouse, women arrive with swollen eyes and bruises to seek the modest protection of the state.
A4  ZAIRIANS BLAME U.S.
As their country faces economic ruin and increasing violence, Zairians feel a marked surge in hostility toward Washington for its longtime support of President Mobutu's autocratic rule.
A5  SAUDI KING RULES OUT VOTE
King Fahd has ruled out free elections for Saudi Arabia, saying Western democratic practices are not suited to traditional Arab societies of the Persian Gulf.
A6  ANGRY ISRAELI RESIGNS
Foreign Minister David Levy, brooding about his faction's decline within Israel's governing party, said he was stepping down.
Even if he stays in the party, he has left it divided before an election campaign.
A6
Israelis assail Germany's leader for welcoming Kurt Waldheim.  A6  THE EAST GERMAN VISE
A dissident of the former East Germany will lead an investigation of its 40-year Communist dictatorship and how it held on to power.
A7  FEELING TRAPPED IN PALERMO
Italy holds national elections next month, but few in Sicily expect fundamental change to reach easily into the Mafia's heartland.
A7  Another humiliating election day for France's governing Socialists.
A7  National A8-15  WELFARE PLAN'S SMALL CHANGE
A 1988 law to improve the nation's welfare system has not achieved the major change that its supporters hoped for, a report found.
A1  BIG FEARS FOR BANKS
Many large banks that lent billions of dollars to Olympia &amp; York, which is burdened by debt, are waiting to see what losses they will suffer.
A1  BROWN'S RECORD OF REVERSALS
Former Governor Brown explained his shifts on issues like health insurance and campaign contributions by saying: "You learn from mistakes." But even his backers said his shifts had been more frequent than those of most other politicians.
A1  CLINTON SAYS HE TRIED MARIJUANA
Governor Clinton said he experimented with marijuana while he was a Rhodes Scholar in the late 1960's, but said he had never used any other illegal drug.
A15
Brown denied any role in promoting a questionable anti-AIDS drug.  A14
Campaigning at an organic market, Fifth Avenue and Zabar's.  A15
The Democratic campaign came to Vermont, at last.  A14
Jests and jabs at the annual Gridiron dinner.  A13  ROMER'S PLAIN TALK PAYS OFF
Gov.
Roy Romer of Colorado, a Democrat who has been mentioned as a Vice Presidential candidate, has found political success "by absolutely telling it straight," even if it annoys the President.
A8  THAWING OF A COLD WARRIOR
William Colby, the former spymaster who was branded a war criminal on antiwar posters, has emerged as a leading advocate of deep military budget cuts and an adviser to Eastern European intelligence services trying to adjust to democracy.
A10  A WAY OF LIFE FELLED
A small logging company in Washington State is making its final clear-cut as environmental concerns and changes in the logging industry put it out of business.
A1  BUDGET OFFICE BACKS DOWN
Under pressure from Congress, the Administration retreated from its demand that new occupational-health rules be delayed to see if their cost would impoverish workers.
A8
Foley denied trying to cover up the House post office scandal.  A13  GOODBYE, HEATHKIT
After 45 years in the business, the Heath Company will no longer make its not-so-easy-to-assemble Heathkit electronics equipment.
Since 1981, declining prices have made it cheaper to buy fancy radios and electronic equipment than to build them.
A1  A man with AIDS was arrested again on sex-abuse charges.
A12  The space agency added a day to the Atlantis flight.
A8  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DINKINS PROTESTS BUDGET PLAN
Mayor Dinkins assaulted the Albany Legislature on the budget accord crafted by the state's leaders, denouncing parts of the plan as overly harmful to the city and urging state lawmakers to revise it.
A1 Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Family touch for Torborg.
C4  Young joins Mets' rotation.
C4  Howe makes trip to Montana.
C4  Basketball: The unforgettable East final.
C1  Michigan beats Ohio St.
C1 Cincinnati tops Memphis St.
C1  Column: Berkow on college basketball.
C7  Figure Skating: Another world title for Yamaguchi.
C9  Hockey: Possibility of strike today still looms.
C3  Devils' 3-game streak snapped.
C3  Tennis: Agassi advances U.S.
Davis Cup team.
C2  Obituaries B9  Peter Sanmartino, founder of Fairleigh-Dickinson  Earl Spencer, father of Diana, Princess of Wales  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Berlin is gripped by an exhibition on Jewish life.
C11  An Oscar scorecard.
C11  Theater: "Conversations With My Father." C11  Music: Betty Carter.
C13 Word and Image: Punch going out of business.
C16  "Olympia," by Otto Friedrich, on Manet and his times.
C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Icy on global warming.
The truth on Libya.
Republicans, soft on guns.
David Unger: Jerry Brown.
LettersA16  Leslie H. Gelb: The Russian sinkhole.
A17  William Safire: China's silent upheaval.
A17  Our do-nothing government.
A17  James Brady: Straight talk about children and guns.
A17


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Do Basketball Players Crack a College Book?
QUESTION: What is the difference, on court, between college basketball players and professional basketball players?
Answer: Not much. That is, after you've made your adjustments for age and experience.


Some Predict Era of Low Inflation
Although last week's report on gross domestic product showed that inflation has been extraordinarily low lately, most economists expect prices to revive along with the economy.
Earlier this month, for example, the Blue Chip consensus of 50 forecasters predicted that the nation's price level would rise about 4 percent a year -- twice the rate of the last nine months -- for the rest of the decade.


Torborg Runs Business With a Family Touch
Lou Piniella wanted to know, as did Yogi Berra, Mark Connor, Frank Robinson.
Friends of Jeff Torborg all, these members of baseball's extended family have voiced questions with a common theme as they follow from a distance the trials and tribulations of the Mets: How is Torborg holding up as legal problems, scandal and controversy buffet the National League team?
In their questions there is more than spoken concerns, but implied sympathy for a manager who, new to the team, has apparently inherited the loose ends of some thorny off-field, social and legal issues.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Ameron Inc Del Unocal Corp TUESDAY  Delmarva Pwr &amp; Light Pep Boys Manny Moe &amp; Jack WEDNESDAY  Houston Inds Mercantile Stores Murphy Oil Corp Nat City Corp(Cleve) Nevada Pwr Co THURSDAY  Amax Inc American Wtr Wks Inc General Pub Utils Corp Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Orange &amp; Rockland Utils PNC Finl Corp Sun Inc United Water Res Inc FRIDAY  Flowers Inds U S West Inc


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Brown Firm on What He Believes, But What He Believes Often Shifts
Listen to the voices of Edmund G. Brown Jr. over the years: Limits on campaign contributions are "a violation of free speech." National health insurance is out of the question, an invitation to "runaway inflation." Economic growth cannot be maintained forever; Americans must accept "an era of limits."
If those positions sound the opposite of what the former California Governor is pitching on the campaign trail these days, it is because they are.
The Jerry Brown running for President in 1992 is at odds on crucial issues and campaign themes with the Jerry Brown who ran for President in 1976, the Jerry Brown who tried again in 1980 and even the Jerry Brown of just a year ago.


Elaine Wohlmuth, a Lawyer, Is Wed
Elaine Rachel Wohlmuth, a lawyer for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in New York, and Dr.
Jeffrey Perry, a resident at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Manfred Gans officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Accounts
*
Wyeth Ayerst Laboratories, Philadelphia, a division of American Home Products, to Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello, New York, for its estimated $10 million oral contraceptives account, previously at Vicom/FCB, New York.
A print campaign is expected to begin in September. *
Procter &amp; Gamble France, Paris, to Euro RSCG, Paris, for its Bonux laundry detergents account, previously at Grey Advertising, Paris.
Billings were not disclosed.


Walter J. Skower, 72, A Retired Police Chief
Walter J. Skower, who was the police chief of Enfield, Conn., for 32 years and one of the longest serving chiefs in the state, died on Friday at St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
He was 72 years old and lived in Enfield.
He died of a circulatory ailment, a family spokesman said.


CHRONICLE
During a program tonight on human rights in China, at the New York Academy of Sciences, A. M. ROSENTHAL will receive the 1992 Heinz R. Pagels Human Rights of Scientists Award.
The award was created in 1986 in honor of Dr.
Pagels, a physicist and former director of the New York Academy of Sciences and president of the International League for Human Rights, who died in a mountaineering accident in Aspen, Colo., in 1988.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm sorry you had to drop out, but I wouldn't have voted for you anyway. I wouldn't vote for anyone who looks better in a bathing suit than I do." -- GOV.
ANN W. RICHARDS of Texas, to former Senator Paul E. Tsongas.  [ A13:2. ]


Naneen Becker Is a Bride
Naneen Shari Becker, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley S. Becker of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Kenneth Russ Levine, a son of Joan B. Levine of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and the late Miles I. Levine.
Rabbi Paul Siegel officiated at the Lotos Club.


Mafia Signals Defiance With a Palermo Killing
Italians vote next month in a national election that offers them the first real opportunity in more than four decades to change a style of government widely perceived as corrupt.
That, at least, is the theory among commentators, writers and even some politicians on Italy's mainland.
Here, where the Mafia holds sway, the calculations are different.
Ever since Sicily's leading power broker was shot dead by the Mafia this month, the organized crime families of this island have shown that whatever happens elsewhere, there will be no such reversal here of the way business is transacted.


Dance in Review
Whistleblower  The Kitchen
No one cares enough about the central figure in Rebekah Windmiller's "Whistleblower," presented on Saturday night.
Her family seems emotionally unavailable to her and possibly abusive.
Her love life is lousy.
She certainly hasn't much use for any of those dimly realized characters.
And out of that slim pretext (about seven minutes of usable material, it would seem), Ms.
Windmiller has fashioned two hours of bloodless complaint.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; New Questions for Brown Over Role in Drug Company
Defending his record on AIDS, Edmund G. Brown Jr. said today that he played no role in a biomedical company's decision to promote a drug as an AIDS treatment that the Government said was falsely marketed.
From December 1987 until December of last year, Mr.
Brown held a $20,000-a-year directorship with a subsidiary of ICN Pharmaceuticals, an Orange County, Calif., company.


Girl, 2, Dies in Brooklyn Home As Fire Engulfs Her Bedroom
A 2-year-old girl was killed yesterday afternoon when fire engulfed her bed in a Brooklyn apartment, the authorities said.
The cause of the blaze was under investigation last night, but neighbors said the victim's sister had been playing with a cigarette lighter and accidentally started the fire.
The victim, Denika Bracero, was engulfed in flames as her mother, Lulu Bracero, and the girl's two sisters watched in horror said a neighbor, Hector Melendez.


An On-Time Budget; An Early Start and Angry Voters Help Cure Albany's Tardy Ways
In trying to find a silver lining in the cumulus of New York's budget crisis, state leaders consoled themselves with the notion that hard times would allow them to change government in fundamental ways that were politically unfeasible in brighter days.
The tentative budget deal reached on Saturday night by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders showed the premise to be true on one important count but false on others.


Devils Have No Heart for Jab Action
The Devils were pushed around and banged against the boards a great deal by the Flyers here this afternoon, offering little resistance, except from Scott Stevens, their rugged defenseman.
Stevens was the only one to stand up to the pugilistic Flyers, who ended the Devils' winning streak at three games with a 5-4 triumph at the Spectrum and are just 1 point out of fifth place in the Patrick Division behind the Islanders.


Corrections
A front-page chart last Monday with an article about the Federal budget misstated projections made last year by the Office of Management and Budget.
At the time, the office projected deficits of $280.9 billion in 1992, $201.5 billion in 1993, $61.8 billion in 1994, and $2.9 billion in 1995, and a surplus of $19.9 billion in 1996.


Quality Time for Quality Schools; In Budget Crunch, New York Parents Aid Public Education
At a time of deepening budget cuts, parents in New York City are deciding that if the beleaguered public schools are to work for their children, parents have to work for the schools.
So they are patrolling hallways, raising thousands of dollars at benefits and cornering politicians to help make public schools places where they can entrust their children.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Surprise! (Michigan) Surprise! (Cincinnati); Freshmen Score 73 Points
On Saturday, Jalen Rose, Michigan's freshman guard, was asked when he and the other four freshman starters for the Wolverines realized that they were a Final Four-caliber team.
Rose recoiled, his face breaking into a semi-scowl.
"We realized from Day 1 that we were a Final Four team," Rose said defiantly.
"You guys are just now realizing that we're a Final Four team."


Dance in Review
University Dance Company  Triplex Theater
Ohio State University has long been known for the choreographers it has produced, among them Senta Driver, Demetrius Klein, Bebe Miller and Dianne McIntyre.
If it is true, as has been said, that the most individualistic dancers make the best choreographers, then a fine new crop is on its way, to judge by the New York debut of the Columbus-based University Dance Company on Friday night.


Iraqi Loan Payments
The Federal Government has paid $360.7 million to a Persian Gulf bank partly owned by the Iraqi Government for loans Baghdad left unpaid after it had invaded Kuwait, an article in The Los Angeles Times said on Sunday.
The paper said it had documents showing the Bush Administration had made restitution to the bank despite its Iraqi ownership and a Presidential order forbidding all direct or indirect business with Baghdad.


Beth Talansky Marries Gary Hopen
Dr.
Beth Ellen Talansky, an assistant professor of embryology at Cornell University Medical College in New York, and Dr.
Gary Robert Hopen, an ophthalmologic surgeon in Hollywood, Fla., were married yesterday in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi David Lehrfield officiated at Temple Beth El.


Columbia Coach Has It Wired
Sometimes, Dr.
ALADAR KOGLER admits, his student-athletes at Columbia University "don't know what I'm doing."
Kogler uses biofeedback gadgets, and runs sessions "to study mind control."


Dora Present Weds Michael Lewin
Dora Present, a financial analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, was married yesterday to Michael Lewin, a concert pianist and professor of piano at the Boston Conservatory.
Rabbi Abraham Weitzman officiated at the James Burden Mansion in New York.


People
*
Jamie Seltzer, one of two senior vice presidents and creative directors at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, is leaving the agency to direct commercials.
She will also work on creative projects for shops including Korey, Kay.
Ms.
Seltzer will be affiliated with the Power and Light Picture Co., New York. *
John Noble was named executive vice president and creative director at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., Irvine, Calif.
He spent most of his career at DDB Needham Worldwide before opening his own agency, John Noble Advertising, in San Francisco.


Videotape's Growing Rival: Pay-Per-View TV
With the start-up of Quantum, Time Warner's 150-channel cable television system in Queens, the home-video industry is focusing much more intensely on a question that it has faced for years: Will the advent of vastly expanded cable systems and other technologies mean the end of the videocassette and the video store?
The answer to that, several analysts say, is no, at least for now and perhaps never for the strongest video stores.
"By the mid-90's, the stores will have to confront more competition from pay-per-view for hit titles, but it's certainly not a killer for the video business," said Craig Bibb, an entertainment industry analyst at Paine Webber.


German Panel to Scrutinize East's Rule and Repression
A leading dissident in the former East Germany, Rainer Eppelmann, has been named to head a new legislative commission that will conduct a sweeping investigation of the 40-year Communist dictatorship.
Members of Mr.
Eppelmann's commission will travel throughout Germany, review vast numbers of Government and private documents, and issue a report detailing the methods the East German Communists used to remain in power.


David Levy to Resign


New Insights Into Swimming
Why does MATT BIONDI swim faster than TOM JAGER ?
The answer may be a longer stroke.
A computer-aided study of 500 swimmers who competed at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, suggests the length of stroke, as much as the frequency, determines who's best.
This could revolutionize the way competitive swimming is coached, where emphasis has been on stroke rate.
"What we found is that the faster a swimmer performed, the longer his or her swimming strokes were, to a significant degree," said Dr.
RICHARD C. NELSON, a professor of biomechanics in Penn State's College of Health and Human Development.


U.S. Reaping Zairians' Anger Toward Mobutu
Ever since Mobutu Sese Seko came to power nearly 30 years ago, Zaire has been regarded as one of Washington's best friends in Africa.
But now, with the country facing economic ruin and increasing violence, there has been a marked surge in hostility toward Washington for its longtime support of President Mobutu's autocratic rule.
Students and intellectuals have long denounced the United States as a repressive force in Zairian politics, accusing Washington of pressing a cold-war ideology that has helped prop up the Mobutu dictatorship.
But amid the growing political turmoil, even Zairians who reject such views are taking a more critical view of the United States.


Agassi Fulfills Hero's Role for U.S.
For the second time in his checkered career, Andre Agassi was asked to come to his country's rescue and unravel a deadlocked Davis Cup contest.
And once again, he wound up waving an American flag and completing a victory lap by the end of the day.
Last year, Agassi played the anchorman in a 3-2 semifinal defeat of Germany.
Today, in a plot tailor-made for the drama-loving Las Vegas patriot, Agassi turned a 2-2 Davis Cup stalemate into a 3-2 victory for the United States, ending a roller-coaster quarterfinal against Czechoslovakia.


Governor of Colorado Finds Success By 'Telling It Straight,' Even to Bush
In the Dust Bowl town of Holly, just a speck on the map of the harsh Colorado plains, people learn early that life can hit hard.
The ones who survive learn how to hit back.
When the town's most famous native son, Gov.
Roy Romer, went to the White House for a meeting last month, he brought some of Holly with him.
He listened dutifully as President Bush delivered his budget proposals to the nation's governors.


Court Officer Killed As Son, 3, Looks On
A New York State civil court officer was shot to death last night on a Brooklyn street, apparently by her estranged boyfriend, who then shot and critically wounded himself as their 3-year-old son looked on, the police said.


Seeking the Truth About Libya
There's bitter comedy in the spectacle of Libya's Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi piously claiming the protection of world law to stave off U.N. sanctions.
This is the renegade who has armed terrorist groups, whose gunmen have shot up embassies and slain opponents in exile.
Even so, valid doubts remain about indicting Libya alone as the culprit in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
The Bush Administration has yet to explain its abrupt retreat from initial claims that the Lockerbie bombing was the vengeful work of Ahmed Jabril, a Palestinian under Syrian control.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Surprise! (Michigan) Surprise! (Cincinnati); Big Bearcat Machine Excels
When Cincinnati and Memphis State meet to play basketball, it might as well be in a dark alley, the players say.
The game becomes a street fight, an up-and-down, bump-and-grind, full-court affair where only the strongest survive.
Well, Memphis State got roughed up. Again.


Immigrants Left Homeless After Transient Hotel Blaze
Nineteen people were injured, 13 of them firefighters, and more than 150 people left homeless yesterday morning in a wind-whipped, five-alarm fire at a transient hotel in midtown Manhattan, fire officials said.
The firefighters sustained burns and smoke inhalation while fighting the two-hour fire at the Hotel Mansfield Hall, at 226 West 50th Street near the theater district.
Most were treated at the scene, while four firefighters went to the burn unit of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and two to Bellevue Hospital, said Deputy Commissioner Tom Kelly, a Fire Department spokesman.
All were treated and released.


Senate Republicans, Soft on Guns
By sabotaging a crime bill agreed to by a joint House-Senate committee, Senate Republicans have left themselves facing the election empty-handed.
So what do they propose in place of legislative meat?
Scraps: a new bill that resurrects offensive language eliminated by the conferees but omits the most important provision -- a waiting period between purchase and delivery of a handgun.
The conference bill also included worthwhile provisions for more than $3 billion in Federal aid to state and local law enforcement, including correctional "boot camps" and drug treatment in prisons.
And it established a Police Corps scholarship program for college students.


Red Wings Toy With Listless Islanders
Steve Yzerman scored twice and Brad McCrimmon picked up three assists as the Detroit Red Wings clinched the Norris Division title with a 6-2 victory over the Islanders today.
Detroit has a 9-point lead over second-place Chicago, which can pick up a maximum of 8 points the rest of the season, provided the regular season isn't interrupted by a players strike scheduled to begin on Monday at noon.


Hurd Willett, 89, an Early Leader In Long-Range Weather Forecasts
Hurd C. Willett, a meteorologist who was a leading developer in the forecasting of long-range weather trends, died Thursday at the Suburban Manor Nursing Home in West Concord, Mass.
He was 89 years old and lived in Littleton, Mass.
He died after suffering a stroke, a family spokesman said.


Peter Sammartino, 87, Is Dead; Was Fairleigh Dickinson Founder
Peter Sammartino, the founder of Fairleigh Dickinson University and an early leader in the restoration of Ellis Island, was found shot to death yesterday with his wife, Sylvia, at their home in Rutherford, N.J., in what the police said was a murder-suicide.
He was 87 years old and his wife was 88.
The couple had been in failing health.
The Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said Mrs.
Sammartino had Alzheimer's disease and Dr.
Sammartino had undergone surgery to remove a kidney.


How to Turn Our Guns Into Their Butter; Seeking New Enemies
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Strategy Plan Calls for Insuring No Rivals Develop" (front page, March 8):
Dwight Eisenhower, a military man, left us a warning against the military-industrial complex, which exploits world tensions for its own ends.
Now the demise of the Russian bear has diminished tensions, so scenarios are invented to sustain them.


Yamaguchi Caps Her Year With World Title
Kristi Yamaguchi, the Olympic champion, today became the first American woman to win consecutive world championships since Peggy Fleming in 1968, but the United States failed to repeat its unprecedented medals sweep of a year ago.
Nancy Kerrigan, the Olympic bronze medalist, added a silver medal to the bronze she won in last year's world championships.
But Tonya Harding-Gillooly, the world runner-up in 1991, dropped to sixth with a mediocre free skate punctuated by a fall on a triple axel.


Big Gains for European Stocks, but Not in Dollars
Hefty gains in European stock markets in the first quarter were virtually wiped out, for American investors, by a corresponding rally in the dollar.
Since Jan. 1, several markets in Europe have outpaced the United States market and appeared to offer global investors an attractive alternative to domestic stocks.
But an investor happily calculating impressive earnings in a foreign denomination saw them evaporate when converted back into dollars.


The Rule of Law
To the Editor:
Henry Siegman (letter, March 5) acknowledges that my summary of the legal status of the West Bank "makes sense," yet maintains that "legal arguments are largely irrelevant to the political realities that Israel and the Israelis face" and that "the legal status of the territories could not be more beside the point."
If individuals or nations should arbitrarily decide that the rule of law is not applicable to conflicting claims, where are we, and what have we got to work with?
The answer can only be unrestrained human ferocity, abetted by axes, knives, pitchforks, Scuds.
Woe to the soul professing the moral life -- or to the soul of a nation -- that finds the rule of law irrelevant or beside the point.
CYNTHIA OZICK New Rochelle, N.Y., March 5, 1992


Trail Blazers Are Knicks' Latest Victim
The Knicks ended a perfect three-game West Coast trip tonight with their most satisfying victory.
Winning for just the second time in their last 12 games at Portland, New York defeated the Trail Blazers, 107-96, at Memorial Coliseum.
It was the Knicks' seventh consecutive triumph, their longest winning streak of the season.
And it kept New York (46-25) 41/2 games in front of the Boston Celtics in the Atlantic Division with only 11 games left to play.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Vermont; 'Uncommitted' in Unpredictable State
This was once the nation's staid state taciturn, thrifty, rural, Yankee, Republican, a place where cows and sugar maples far outnumbered people and life was, above all else, predictable.
That was before the hordes of refugees from the sprawling, mauling urban combat zones of New York, Boston and Philadelphia discovered Vermont, bringing with them liberal, progressive ideas that have muddled much of what used to be a sure thing in the Green Mountain State.


Cost of Agreement on State Budget Is Expected to Be High for New York City
The tentative state budget agreement could cost New York City as much as $375 million, shifting the bill for tens of millions of dollars in social and health-care programs to the city and adding precariously to its burdens as it tries to balance its own budget for the coming year, city officials said yesterday.
Last night, city budget aides were still struggling to piece together the probable effects of the tentative agreement.
But they said it appeared all but certain that the city would have to pay a greater share for a range of programs the state requires, from energy assistance for the indigent to reimbursements for foster-care services for children.


Market Place; Phone Company Growing Rapidly
IN Monroe, La., is a little-known company worth more than $1 billion -- Century Telephone Enterprises Inc., a rarity in the telephone business.
Last year, Century's profits rose 20 percent, in an industry where earnings gains in the single digits are considered a good performance.
Some analysts expect the company's annual earnings growth to exceed 25 percent for the rest of the decade.
"This is a growth company disguised as a telephone company," said John P. Reddan, a media and communications analyst at Moran &amp; Associates in Greenwich, Conn.
Century has consistently performed better than analysts' estimates, Mr.
Reddan noted.


Review/Jazz; Freedom and Physicality From Charles Gayle's Trio
Charles Gayle labors mightily over his music.
He raises his tenor saxophone up past his shoulders and pours out sustained, rending screeches; he crouches, as if under its weight, to play low notes and speeding, involuted runs.
With David Pleasant rumbling across his drum kit and Vattel Cherry plucking continuous lines or bowing nasal tremolo notes, Mr.
Gayle's trio plays free jazz that has an overwhelming physicality.


KURDS IN TURKEY SEEM TO BE NEARING FULL-SCALE REVOLT
Southeastern Turkey, swept by some of the worst fighting between Turkish troops and Kurdish guerrillas since the rebels' insurgency began in 1984, seems to be on the edge of full-scale rebellion.
Neither side appears willing to yield.
After clashes in recent days that reportedly left scores of people dead and wounded, the Turkish Government, despite censure from powerful benefactors like Germany, has imposed curfews in half a dozen towns, shipped in elite counterinsurgency battalions, arrested several hundred people and moved aggressively to track down Kurdish rebel positions.


Questions of Drug Use
Bill Clinton said he experimented with marijuana "a couple of times" in England in the 1960's, while Edmund G. Brown Jr. said he had never broken a state, Federal or international law on drug use.
Page A15.


Miscellany
*
Continental Airlines, Houston, named Marblehead Communications Inc., Boston, as publisher of Profiles, its in-flight magazine, effective with the June issue.
Marblehead will replace East/West Network, which closed last month. *
Ketchum Advertising U.S.A., New York, and Gregory &amp; Clyburne Inc., Stamford, Conn., formed an affiliation to handle corporate image and brand advertising projects.


On Oscar Night, TV Spots Have Cinematic Ambitions
The marketers whose commercials will appear during tonight's telecast of the 64th annual Academy Awards on ABC are borrowing some strategies from the Hollywood studios whose films are vying for Oscars.
To attract attention, many of their spots will be premieres or will exploit star power.
It was the "theatricality" of Oscar night that persuaded Ian Schrager, chairman and chief executive of the Morgans Hotel Group in New York, to choose this evening to introduce three commercials for his Paramount Hotel.
"We think the hotel epitomizes hotel as theater," he said.
"And we wanted to try to do the same with the advertising."


Howe Leaves To Face Charges
Opening Day for the Yankees is next week, but pitcher Steve Howe departed spring training with his family today and returned home to Montana for a more important date with Federal officials.
Howe, whose baseball future is in peril because he faces two Federal misdemeanor cocaine charges, has to attend a pretrial hearing in Missoula, Mont., on Monday.
In recent days, he has expressed optimism about his impending trials and said he was not worried, and never has been, because he is innocent.
The 34-year-old reliever claims drug-enforcement agents set him up.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  New-Home Sales . . .
Feb.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Feb.
Consumer Confidence . . .
March Farm Prices . . .
March  Wednesday  Construction Spending . . .
Feb.
Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
March  Thursday  Factory Orders . . .
Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Unemployment . . .
March Auto Sales . . .
March


Levy Says He Is Resigning As Israel's Foreign Minister
Foreign Minister David Levy, brooding for weeks about his faction's decline within the governing Likud Party and under pressure from angry supporters to do something about it, announced tonight that he was resigning.
Mr.
Levy, the most openly enthusiastic supporter of the Arab-Israeli peace process in the hard-line Israeli Government, did not say he would also leave Likud, which he said he still loved and considered his home.


DINKINS DENOUNCES DETAILS OF ACCORD ON ALBANY BUDGET
As details emerged today about local-aid cuts and new fees in the budget agreement reached by state leaders late Saturday, Mayor David N. Dinkins denounced the plan as too harmful to New York City and urged lawmakers to revise it.
The Mayor's protests came as Senate and Assembly leaders of both major parties began drafting the bill intended to be New York State's first on-time budget in eight years.
The 1992-93 fiscal year starts on Wednesday, with April 1 the legal -- if seldom observed -- deadline for the budget.


The Slow-Motion Suicide of the World's Once Greatest City
To the Editor:
You editorialize March 3 that I am turning New York into the Willie Horton of 1992 by suggesting that "New York and other large cities are responsible for their own dire fiscal straits because they are indifferent to rapacious unions."
That's true, but so was the Willie Horton advertisement.
Willie Horton was furloughed from prison while serving a life sentence for a brutal murder.
He did rape and torture a Maryland couple.
Gov.
Michael Dukakis did fail to act even when his destructive policy was brought to his attention.
In fact, he opposed efforts to reform the policy.
And New York is indifferent to rapacious unions.


World Economies


Keebler and Lauder Win as Marketers
The Keebler Company and Origins Natural Resources, a cosmetics line made by the Estee Lauder Companies, have been named marketers of the year by the American Marketing Association.
Keebler, based in Elmhurst, Ill., was chosen for overall marketing success and an ability to create new products like Pizzarias salty snacks and Munch'ems crackers.
And Origins, based in New York, was cited for reflecting the environmental concerns of the 1990's; the Origins line uses natural ingredients and recycled packaging.


Editorial Notebook; Jerry Brown, Peronist
It's June 1973, the year before Jerry Brown was first elected Governor of California.
Argentina's repackaged populist legend, Juan Peron, returns to Buenos Aires in triumph.
As his plane approaches, more than a million impassioned supporters line the expressway.
They constitute an impossibly broad coalition: countercultural revolutionaries, blue-collar workers, Catholic mystics, hard-core fascists.
Just how impossibly broad seemed clear minutes later when gunfire erupted and Peronists, united only by their hero's stirring oratory, started shooting Peronists.
Even so, the coalition endured; a few months later, Peron was elected President.


Scandal, Mayhem; So, What's New?
DAN GUTMAN usually writes about computers.
But several years ago, he was prowling under the stands at Yankee Stadium when he came across an impromptu news conference with GEORGE STEINBRENNER.
"And it occurred to me," Gutman recalled, "that I was close enough to have yelled at George Steinbrenner. That got me thinking about crazy things that can happen in baseball."


Summations Near an End In Gotti Racketeering Trial
With summations expected to end today, the racketeering-murder trial of John Gotti is entering its last phase in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Judge I. Leo Glasser will instruct the jury on the laws governing the case after the summations, and then the closely guarded jurors will begin deliberations as soon as tomorrow.


Icy Words on Global Warming
Words matter, words wound.
Asked last week whether he planned to attend the "Earth Summit" in Rio de Janeiro in June, Mr.
Bush replied that "running for the Presidency" might keep him at home.
Asked whether he would sign a treaty limiting the emission of gases that contribute to the threat of global warming, the President said not if it threatens American jobs.
It's true that stricter controls on fossil fuels could affect economic growth.
But Mr.
Bush's comments conveyed a parochial indifference and dismayed a universe of friends -- developing countries seeking Western assistance, European allies willing to take risks for a cleaner environment and the 105 heads of state who will attend the conference.


The Good Word From Mets? It's Young
Anthony Young's fastball has always had explosive movement.
It sinks, it sails.
It darts and detours.
"Tremendous movement," said Mel Stottlemyre, the pitching coach for the Mets.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CRASH MAY FORCE NEW ICE RULES
If the National Transportation Safety Board determines that ice on the wing caused the crash of USAir Flight 405 last week, it could prompt fundamental changes in how aircraft are inspected before takeoff, how they are de-iced and even how they are dispatched to the runway.
Despite the potential danger of even thin sheets of ice, there is no universal rule on how it should be detected and removed.
B3.
FLIGHTS TO LOCAL AIRPORTS IN DECLINE
The total number of travelers who passed through the region's three main airports declined sharply last year, a decrease caused by the recession and the economic effects of the Persian Gulf war, according to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The overall number of passengers who used the three airports -- Kennedy International, La Guardia and Newark International -- fell 8.7 percent, from 74.8 million in 1990 to 68.3 million last year.
B5.
FIRE RIPS THROUGH TRANSIENT HOTEL


Bush Inches Toward Announcing How Much Help to Give to Russia
President Bush is expected to announce his much-debated program of aid for the former Soviet republics this week, perhaps as early as Tuesday, Administration officials said today.
The officials said that the program, which has become embroiled in the 1992 election campaign, was virtually finished but that White House advisers were debating the political merits of presenting it at a news conference or in a televised address.


La Guardia Plane Crash May Toughen Inspections
If the National Transportation Safety Board determines that ice on the wing caused the crash of USAir Flight 405 last week, it could prompt fundamental changes in how aircraft are inspected before takeoff, how they are de-iced and even how they are dispatched to the runway.
The Federal Aviation Administration has a simple rule on icing now: The pilot is responsible for checking for it, and is not to takeoff until "all critical components of the aircraft are free of adhering snow, frost or other ice formations."


Love Collects by Staying Cool and Calm
While those around him seemed strangled by tension, Davis Love 3d showed a new level of boldness and poise under pressure today to seize the prestigious Players Championship by four shots.
Beginning the day three shots behind leader Nick Faldo, Love fired an aggressive five-under-par 67, the lowest round of the day on the TPC Stadium Course, for a 72-hole total of 15-under-par 273 to easily outdistance the second-place foursome of Tom Watson, Ian Baker-Finch, Phil Blackmar and Faldo.


Opposition Develops to Proposal For Building-Permit Extensions
A move by New Jersey developers to gain blanket extensions of building permits for projects that were delayed by the recession has run into opposition from environmentalists and municipalities in the state.
At hearings of the Assembly Community Affairs committee on Monday, representatives of the New Jersey League of Municipalities are planning to argue that the automatic extensions being sought by the builders usurp local powers and reward only a small group.


Cambodian Refugees Prepare to Return to Their Homeland


Brothers-in-Laws In Competition
Research has uncovered the under-reported fact that only two sets of brothers-in-law are active in professional sports these days.
The best-known pair is JERRY PATE and BRUCE LIETZKE, both outstanding golfers.
But bowling has its own stars in STEVE COOKand MIKE AULBY, and they will make a rare New York-area appearance Wednesday when the Professional Bowlers Association tour brings them to Sayville Bowl on Long Island for a $130,000 tournament.


Saudi King Rules Out Free Elections
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, in an interview published today, has ruled out free elections for his country, saying Western democratic practices are not suited to traditional Arab societies of the Persian Gulf.
The King, who described Islam as the only acceptable ideology for his country, said Saudi Arabia was nevertheless opposed to militant Muslim fundamentalist movements.


Rachel Adelson, A Writer, Weds
Rachel Katya Adelson, a writer and communications consultant in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Alan Jay Breznick, a reporter for Crain's New York Business, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at Scarsdale Synagogue-Tremont Temple.


New Campaigns
*
ESPN, Bristol, Conn., is introducing a campaign that lauds the cable network's expertise in sports programming.
Television commercials, print advertisements and billboards, created by ESPN's new agency, Lois U.S.A., New York, carry the theme "In your face." They feature athletes like the baseball players Bobby Bonilla and Roger Clemens, the football quarterback Dan Marino and the golfer Greg Norman. *
To help improve its brand image, the Kinney Shoe Corporation is introducing a campaign that focuses on style and omits the company's logo.
In each of the print advertisements, created by Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston, a colorful close-up of fashionable shoes is accompanied by an explanation for the missing logo: "because there are some people who still don't think of Kinney as a place to buy fashionable leather shoes." Each ad ends with the tagline "Hey, fashion is where you find it."


Tokyo Stocks Rise a Bit
Stock prices were only slightly higher in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 32.32 points, or less than two-tenths of 1 percent, to 19,669.31.
On Friday, the index lost 248.50 points.


Faith Stevelman Weds Todd Kahn
Faith Stevelman and Todd Kahn, associates at the New York law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, were married yesterday in New York.
Rabbi David Woznica officiated at the Helmsley Palace.


Dynamic Duo; It's Trout Season
As long as JACK NICKLAUS is around, LEE TREVINO doesn't have it easy, even after all these years.
Trevino has won six major tournaments, and in four of those, Nicklaus was second. (Nicklaus has won 18 majors.) The pair hook up again Thursday on the Senior PGA Tour -- not in a major tournament, but in the Tradition at Desert Mountain in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Nicklaus has won it the last two years.
The best Trevino could do was a tie for 24th and a tie for 33d. . . .
The trout-fishing season in New York State opens Wednesday, and even two baseball diehards from the Bronx, HERB STEIN and JIM McLAUGHLIN, will eschew the national pastime to cast their lot upon the waters at Junction Pool.
That's a famous spot in Sullivan County where the Beaverkill and Willowemoc rivers converge.
Stein and McLaughlin are scouts for the Minnesota Twins and the California Angels, respectively.


Straight Talk About Children and Guns
Eleven years ago today, I was shot in the head by a gunman intent on killing my boss, President Ronald Reagan.
Most people don't consider the possibility of becoming a victim of gun violence.
Most people believe "this will never happen to me." So did Jim Brady, once.
But after I was shot, my 5-year-old son, Scott picked up a loaded handgun in a friend's truck and almost became a victim.
Then I realized that no one is immune from this epidemic.
The recent shooting of two young students at a Brooklyn high school shocked the nation.
But sadly, they weren't the only children who were victims of gun violence that week.
Kids all over the country are living in a society where guns are readily available and gun violence is on the rise -- on the streets, in their neighborhoods and more and more often in their schools.


MacLeod Back at Garden For the Other Final Four
John MacLeod is back home in Indiana, where as a boy he was taught by nuns and cheered for Notre Dame.
But there is also a New York side -- albeit brief -- and MacLeod is juggling the two worlds these days as coach of the Fighting Irish team that plays in tonight's National Invitation Tournament semifinals at Madison Square Garden.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Amcast Industrial Corp., 1.7 million shares. Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
Arrow Electronics Inc., 3.3 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Benchmark Electronics Inc., 1.3 million shares. Stephens Inc.
Ben Franklin Stores Inc., 2 million shares. Whale Security.
Boston Pacific Medical Inc., 600,000 units (each unit equals one share and one redeemable warrant).
Culverwell &amp; Co.
Braun's Fashions Corp., 1.875 million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
Brazilian Equity Fund Inc., 4 million shares. Paine Webber Inc.
Capital Multimedia Corp., 300,000 units (one unit equals three shares and one serial A warrant).
Noble Investment Co.
Chicago and Northwestern Holdings Corp., 8.75 million shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Chipsoft Inc., 3.3 million shares. Roberston, Stephens &amp; Co.
Damon Corp., 3 million shares. Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Ero Inc., 3 million shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Eskimo Pie Corp., 2.9 million shares. Wheat, First Securities Inc.
First Union Corp., 7 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
First USA Inc., 6 million shares. Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Fossil Inc., 1.8 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Fred Meyer Inc., 4 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
GPM Gas Corp., 18.36 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Genderm Corp., 2.6 million shares. Prudential Securities Inc.
Genpharm International Inc., 2.5 million shares. Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., 5 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
ICOS Corp., 3 million shares. Paine Webber.
ICU Medical Inc., 1.3 million shares. Sutro &amp; Co. .
Idexx Laboratories, 1.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Integrated Health Services Inc., 2.5 million shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Intercargo Corp., 1.45 million shares. Kemper Securities.
Interventional Technology Inc., 2 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Kopin Corp., 1.8 million shares. Tucker Anthony Inc.
Longhorn Steaks Inc., 1.7 million shares. J. C. Bradford &amp; Co.
M-Wave Inc., 1 million shares. Kemper Securities.
Mirage Resorts Inc., 4 million shares. Salomon Brothers Inc.
Mohawk Industries Inc., 2.7 million shares. First Boston Corp.
NCI Building Systems Inc., 1.75 million shares. Rauscher Pierce Refsnes Inc.
Network General Corp., 2.2 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
North American Mortgage Co., 1.91 million shares. Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Option Care Inc., 3.25 million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Regency Health Services Inc., 2.4 million shares. Paine Webber.
Republic Bancorp Inc., 2.9 million shares. Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc.
Seragen Inc., 3 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Shawmut National Corp., 9 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Sullivan Dental Products Inc., 700,000 shares. Robert W. Baird Co.
Sybron Chemical Industries, 1.8 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Tanox Biosystems Inc., 1.75 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Thermo Cardiosystems Inc., 1.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Uniroyal Chemical Co. (formerly UCC Investors Holding), 26.7 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Willamette Industries, 1.75 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Xircom, 3 million shares. Morgan Stanley.  (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


So Far, Smooth Sailing
When Kevin Mitchell walked into the Seattle Mariners' clubhouse at 7:30 one morning last week, he found virtually no one else there.
"Junior lied to me," Mitchell said about 45 minutes later, sitting at his locker.
"He came over last night, and I asked him what time we had to be here today. I wasn't here yesterday. He said I had to be here at 7:30. I said, 'Do we have a "B" game?' He just walked out the door."


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury plans to hold its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
It will offer one-year bills on Thursday.
Late in the day on Friday, three-month bills traded at 3.99 percent, and six-month bills at 4.12 percent.


Budget Plan Will Raise Costs for Health Coverage, Private Insurers Say
Health insurance executives said yesterday that millions of New Yorkers would ultimately have to pay more for coverage from commercial carriers if the Legislature approved its leaders' budget pact.
At the same time, state officials said the budget agreement alone would not be enough to prevent a rate increase for 1.5 million customers of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nonprofit insurer of last resort around New York City, Albany and the mid-Hudson Valley.


BANKS FEAR LOSSES AS BUILDER REELS
Many of the largest banks in North America, Europe and Asia lent billions of dollars to Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest private real estate company, even though it refused to disclose all its financial obligations and would not let the banks review its books.
Now the company, owned by the Reichmann family of Toronto, is being pummeled by $18.5 billion in debt, depressed property markets and a series of disastrous investments, and the banks are nervously lining up to see what their losses are likely to be.


Congress Makes Easy Target at Gridiron
Imitating Johnny Carson, President Bush held an envelope to his brow and gave his answer to the question sealed inside.
His answer was, "Wheel of Fortune, 'McLaughlin Group' and Mario Cuomo."


Consumers' Guide to Gun Culture
So you want to buy a 1950's-vintage Czechoslovak semiautomatic rifle with bayonet (a "rare find" and only $249.95 wholesale)?
Or a used Smith &amp; Wesson .357 magnum revolver ("good condition," $168.50)?
Or maybe a working replica of the classic 1875 Remington Army revolver ($289.00)?
You can always try your local gun shop.
But as any gun fancier knows, for the best selection and good prices, the place to look is Shotgun News.


INSIDE
Finally, Down to Four
The field for college basketball's Final Four was completed as Cincinnati and Michigan won to join Duke and Indiana for national semifinal games that will be played in Minneapolis on Saturday.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Pitching In at School
Now more than ever in New York City, parents are stepping in to give the schools what the city cannot.
But because more affluent parents can give the most, the contributions raise troubling questions.
Page B1.
Thawing of a Cold Warrior
William Colby, once a general among cold warriors, now advocates a 50 percent cut in the military budget and advises Eastern European intelligence agencies.
Page A10.
Fewer Bucks, Fewer Books
With an eye on the bottom line, publishers say they are turning away proposals they would probably have accepted a few years ago.
Page D1.


A New Face In Cosmetics
In contrast to cosmetics companies that sign superstar fashion models as advertising spokeswomen, Halston Borghese International Inc. decided to step outside the modeling world and sign a relatively unknown woman, Emmanuelle Beart, to be its advertising star.
When a cosmetic company signs an unknown face to sell its products, the hope is that it has discovered the next cosmetics advertising sensation, as Elizabeth Arden did with the Swedish model Vendela.
Ms.
Beart, a French actress, began her film career in 1985; she was recently nominated for a Cesar Award in France.


New Rival For Intel's Key Chip
Competitive pressure on the Intel Corporation will intensify this week as yet another company announces a chip that it claims is compatible with Intel's corporate treasure, its advanced microprocessors.
Word of the new challenge, from the Cyrix Corporation of Richardson, Tex., caused Intel's stock to fall almost $10 last week, culminating in a $3.50 drop on Friday, to $55.25, when Intel was the most heavily traded over-the-counter issue.


In Hoboken, Debate Over Waterfront Plan Heats Up as Vote Looms
This city is in the throes of a pre-election blitz.
Campaigners are meeting commuters at the bus, train and ferry depots.
Pamphleteers are canvassing the rows of tightly packed houses.
There are posters and buttons, fund-raisers and rallies, and plenty of debates.
At issue here for the second time in less than two years is the future of Hoboken's historic waterfront.
On Tuesday, voters in the mile-square city of 33,400 will decide whether to enter a waterfront redevelopment agreement with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The previous referendum on the question was narrowly defeated in July 1990.
This time, those on both sides say the contest is a dead heat.


Struggling for Youth While Dying in Old Age
The bleak news that Punch would print its last issue next week, after more than 150 years of continuous publication, came as no surprise to most.
The circulation of England's most famous satirical review had plummeted in recent years to only 33,000, and critics ritually complained that as a humor magazine, it suffered a serious flaw: it wasn't very funny anymore.
But even if Punch had lost most of its readers, the news of its impending demise induced a sudden flood of mourners.
In letters, columns and commentaries over the last few days, hundreds have come forward to lament the passing of one of Britain's enduring cultural icons.


Wordperfect Executive Is Forced Out
The executive in charge of day-to-day operations at the Wordperfect Corporation, which makes the nation's best-selling word processing software, has been forced to resign.
Some industry analysts suggest that W. E. (Pete) Peterson, who had been Wordperfect's executive vice president, is the first victim of the company's bruising battle to fend off an increasingly popular word processing package from the Microsoft Corporation.


Has a Mapmaker Lost Its True Path?
The nation's map fraternity is astir.
Usually imperturbable, even during such topographic unpleasantness as the Persian Gulf war, when it seemed as if everyone wanted maps, the geographers, cartographers and librarians whose professional lives are defined by the reassuring inviolability of latitude and longitude now find themselves unsettled by the prospect of losing one of their beacons, an exacting workshop called the General Drafting Company.


Real Overdraft Scandal Is in White House
To the Editor:
The carefully plotted uproar over the House of Representatives bank overdraft situation (front page, March 15) is clearly timed to obscure real issues and designed as simplistic smear tactics to win easy political points during the election season.
The overdraft facility has been around since the mid-1800's, used by all, and one can guess, by all in proportion to their numbers in Congress.
Even were this not quite so, one conclusion could be that Democrats, historically far poorer than Republicans, need credit more than they.
Why is overdrafting, after all these years, suddenly an issue now?
In all these years, why have the Republicans not righteously clamored for tighter banking rules?
Why do they suddenly wish to impose on Congress the kinds of regulations they wish to see removed from the national banking system?
Why?
Electoral politics, at their worst.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No. 159 for Navratilova  Martina Navratilova defeated France's Nathalie Tauziat, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday to win the United States Women's Hardcourts tournament in San Antonio for her 159th career singles title.
Navratilova broke Chris Evert's all-time tennis singles title record of 157 when she won her 158th at the Virginia Slims of Chicago on Feb. 16.
It was the Navratilova of old yesterday, serving and volleying her opponent with precision.
She never lost a set in her four matches this week.
Navratilova won a $45,000 check for the singles victory, plus a new car. (AP) N.B.A.
Celtics Win 6th Straight  Larry Bird scored 11 of his 20 points in the first period last night as the Boston Celtics opened a 19-point lead and breezed to their sixth consecutive victory, a 117-93 romp over the Atlanta Hawks in Boston.
Kevin Gamble led the Celtics with 22 points and was joined in double figures by Dee Brown with 15, Reggie Lewis with 14, Kevin McHale with 13 and Robert Parish with 10. (AP) Lakers 117, 76ers 88: Vlade Divac's career-high 32 points led the Los Angeles Lakers to a home-court rout of Philadelphia.
The Lakers have won four straight with a lineup altered by the injuries to Sam Perkins and James Worthy.
A.
C.
Green and Elden Campbell have replaced the two injured forwards.
Green had 11 points and Campbell 9. (AP) Pistons 107, Spurs 103: Darrell Walker's driving layup with 1 minute 10 seconds left broke a tie and led Detroit to a victory over San Antonio in Auburn Hills, Mich.
The victory ended Detroit's four-game losing streak and saddled San Antonio with its fourth straight loss. (AP) Kings 112, Timberwolves 86: Wayman Tisdale scored 22 points and Mitch Richmond added 19 as Sacramento handed Minnesota its 16th straight loss and its worst loss at home.
The defeat was the 60th of the season for the Timberwolves, who have won only 11, and none since Feb. 26.
Minnesota is one game away from the longest losing streak in the National Basketball Association this season, which is held by Orlando. (AP) N.H.L.
Capitals Beat Canucks  Mike Ridley, Callie Johnansson and Paul MacDermid scored in the opening 9 minutes 7 seconds as Washington roared out to a 3-0 lead en route to its 7-4 victory over Vancouver in Landover, Md.
Dimitri Khristich scored twice for the Capitals. (AP) Jets 6, Sharks 5: Ed Olczyk scored with 1:37 remaining as Winnipeg rallied from a three-goal deficit to beat San Jose on the Jets' home ice.
A victory and a tie in the Jets' next three games would guarantee Winnipeg a playoff berth. (AP) Blackhawks 5, Maple Leafs 1: Chicago clinched home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs with the victory over Toronto in Chicago.
Jeremy Roenick had a goal and two assists for Chicago, becoming only the fourth Blackhawk to score 100 points in a season.
He joins Bobby Hull, Steve Larmer and Denis Savard. (AP)
Kings 2, Oilers 2: Joe Murphy scored with 10:19 left in the third period to give host Edmonton the tie with Los Angeles. (AP)
Whalers 2, Sabres 2: Hartford goalie Frank Pietrangelo made 48 saves, a half-dozen of them oustanding, but let in a short-handed goal by Buffalo's Dave Hannan with 7:43 left that allowed the Sabres to tie the Whalers in Buffalo. (AP) YACHT RACING  Victory to New Zealand  With a light-to-moderate breeze and flat seas, Rod Davis and his New Zealand America's Cup team beat Chris Dickson, skipper of the Japanese boat, Nippon, by 1 minute 43 seconds in the challengers' semifinals.
In yesterday's match between Italy and France, Ville de Paris lost to Il Moro di Venezia by 84 seconds.
"The thing we have learned today is that Il Moro has improved," said Bruno Trouble, a former French America's Cup skipper and spokesman for the Louis Vuitton challenger race organizers.
As the Japanese crew prepared to leave the dock this morning, Dickson noticed a diver in the water near the Nippon yacht.
Since the keel shapes of most America's Cup yachts are secret, Dickson ordered a chase boat to pick up the intruder.
He turned out to be Yvon Kergreis, a finance executive from the French yachting syndicate.
The Japanese called in the San Diego police, who cited Kergreis for swimming in an area off-limits to bathers.
The French apologized later, claiming that Kergreis was acting on his own.
Emili Miuri, a spokeswoman for the Japanese, said her team would dismiss the incident.
The America's Cup defense teams received notice last night that a technical protest by Bill Koch's syndicate does not change the results of the race Saturday in which Stars &amp; Stripes beat Koch's new yacht, Kanza.
GOLF  Floyd Wins in Japan  Raymond Floyd won the Senior Grand Slam Championship at Kurimotomachi, Japan, yesterday by seven shots in his debut on Japan's senior tour.
He highlighted his final round with his second eagle of the tournament.
The 49-year-old Floyd, who will qualify for the PGA Senior Tour later this year when he turns 50, closed with a six-under-par 66 for a 54-hole total of 197.
His eagle came on the on the 491-yard, par-5 16th hole. (AP) LACROSSE  Syracuse Beats Loyola  Syracuse ended Loyola's unbeaten streak by defeating the Greyhounds from Baltimore, 13-5, yesterday in the final match of the Fleet Lacrosse Invitational tournament at Brown Stadium in Providence, R.I.
DOG SHOW  Springer Spaniel Is Best  An English springer spaniel, Ch.
Salilyn's Condor, who answers to the name of Robert, led a field of 1,409 dogs at the 44th All Breed Show of the Riverhead Kennel Club at Nassau Coliseum.


New York's Greek-Americans Celebrate Their Heritage


Science Contest Mixes Trauma With Reward
To the Editor:
In "Science Contest Teaches Hard Lessons" (letter, March 9), John Lowenthal suggests that the frustrations experienced by losers in the Westinghouse competition constitute "an essential part of the training" for a science professional.
He compares the experiences of the young contestants to his own as a programmer, on many occasions when software he wrote was not put into production.
But Mr.
Lowenthal was an adult when his programs were discarded by his employers.
While he was frustrated at the wasted effort, he probably never doubted his own competence or the value of his skills.


Review/Pop; Getting Funny About Rock
At Tramps on Friday night, Webb Wilder and the Beatnecks tried to be zany.
Wearing a purple suit, a hat and dorky glasses, Mr.
Wilder played hackneyed blues guitar, sang in a pseudo-lounge voice and sputtered around the stage like an oversize wind-up toy.
He shrugged his shoulders, wobbled his legs and struck cliche heavy-metal poses.
He twirled his hat between his fingers several times.
He sang jokey songs from his most recent album, "Doo Dad" (Zoo), about landlords, hoodoo witches and guys who hit the big time.
It was like the revenge of the nerd-rocker from hell.


Hugh McDaid, 53; Fought Sweatshops And Worker Abuse
Hugh McDaid, director of the special task force in the State Department of Labor that polices child labor and other sweatshop conditions in the New York garment industry, died on Friday at the Barbara Cheung Memorial Hospice in Metuchen, N.J.
He was 53 years old and lived in Harrison, N.J.
He died of cancer, a department spokesman said.


What's Behind Suicides In Bergen County Jail?
To the Editor:
What is disturbing about the high suicide rate for the Bergen County Jail in Hackensack (news article, Feb. 29) is the apparent failure of precautions instituted in 1988 that involved training for county correction officers in spotting suicide-prone inmates and in preventing suicides or attempts at suicide.
Selected inmates were given 20 hours of training as suicide observation aides to spot and deter potential suicides.
The combined program of increased training for correction officers and inmate observation aides resulted in no suicides in the jails from Jan. 1, 1988, to April 28, 1991, the date of the first of the four recent suicides.


Hard-Liners in Iran Protest Limits on Their Candidates
Iranian hard-liners have accused their opponents of planning a purge after dozens of hard-line candidates were barred from contesting parliamentary elections set for April 10.
In a speech in Teheran, Mehdi Karrubi, Parliament speaker, voiced "grave concern" at the rejection of many "distinguished personalities," the Iranian press agency said today.


Dime Savings Bank Reports Large Losses for Last Year
The Dime Savings Bank of New York yesterday reported big losses for the fourth quarter and year, mainly because of a large increase in the amount it had to set aside to cover losses from an aggressive lending policy in the late 1980's.
As a result of the losses, the Manhattan-based bank said it did not meet regulatory capital standards in two of three financial categories and said it would file a plan in April detailing how it would meet the capital requirements by the end of 1994.


New York TV Deal For Disney
The Walt Disney Company agreed today to swap its television station in Los Angeles for a 45 percent stake in the company that owns WWOR-TV, Channel 9, in the metropolitan New York market.
Under the terms of the deal, Disney will sell KCAL-TV, Channel 9, to Pinelands Inc., the owner of WWOR, in return for 45 percent of the stock in Pinelands.
Disney is thus giving up full ownership of one station, but will end up with large stakes in two stations.


An Industrial Comeback Story: U.S. Is Competing Again in Steel
The American steel industry, long a symbol of decay in industrial America, has undergone a transformation in the last decade that has drastically sharpened the industry's competitive position.
Now, after the Government has provided a decade of protection from imported steel, the Bush Administration has decided not to extend quotas on imported steel that expire today.
The move reflects the industry's improved condition and the Administration's preference for using existing laws to fight what it sees as unfair trade practices.


Olajuwon Set to Play But Rule May Stop Him
Houston center HAKEEM OLAJUWON is ready to play and the Rockets want him back, but league rules may prevent his return in time for tonight's important home game against the Los Angeles Lakers.
Olajuwon, suspended on March 23 for refusing to suit up after a team doctor cleared him as fit to play, declared his left hamstring healed yesterday and returned to practice.


Experts Assail Bush On Abortion Ruling
Lawmakers were told that contrary to the Bush Administration's recent assertion that doctors may discuss abortion in federally financed clinics, a new rule aimed at banning abortion counseling does apply to them.
At a hearing before a House panel, doctors and lawyers said the rules made no distinction between doctors and other professionals.
But they said that in any event the Administration's position carries no legal weight.
The testimony suggested that the Administration's effort to straddle the politically delicate issue may not have succeeded.
Article, page A18.


BUSH REFINES PLAN TO BOLSTER RUSSIA
President Bush plans to package Administration proposals for aiding Russia and other former Soviet republics in one free-standing bill in hopes of overcoming Congressional qualms about approving foreign aid in an election year, Administration officials said today.
President Bush told reporters on Sunday that he would have "something to say" about the aid this week.
Administration officials said today that they were waiting for Congress to act on Tuesday to extend the temporary foreign-aid funding before they put forward the proposals for Russian assistance, which they want to be considered separately.


At Cincinnati, Happy Days Are Here Again
Every way that Anthony Buford turned on the University of Cincinnati campus this afternoon, there was a handshake, a pat on the back, a good word.
Buford, Cincinnati's versatile, play-making guard, was standing in the campus bookstore when another well-wisher offered his thoughts on what Cincinnati's inclusion among the Final Four meant to him and to others.
"I've got $500 seats, right on the floor," the fan and fellow student said.
"I won't miss a minute of this. You guys have put Cincinnati basketball back on the map. This is going to be one big party in Minneapolis -- and here at home." 'Something Special' for Collection
Buford smiled.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; As Entertainment, This Campaign Is Not So Bad
Watching the New York primary campaign unfold on television recently has been like watching one of those awkward movies in which the leading actor seems to be performing a part from the wrong film.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas arrived in New York last week playing the role of an out-of-towner who comes to big city, is treated like a hick, but still manages to charm the metropolis.
The script that has actually been produced, however, goes more like this: Governor of small state comes to big city, is heckled, loses his cool and finally admits to having smoked marijuana.


Business and Health; States Press U.S. On Insurance Plan
DOZENS of states, tired of waiting for Washington to grapple with health-care problems, are working on innovative programs to extend coverage to at least some of the 37 million Americans without insurance.
But the state programs will face delays and legal setbacks, insurance and health-care experts say, unless Congress agrees to open loopholes in a politically sacrosanct Federal law.
Although this particular Federal-state conflict over medical insurance has had little public attention, it is a hot issue for policy makers in California, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Oregon, Washington and other states.
Gov.
Lawton Chiles announced a Florida health plan last week and told Congressional leaders that it would require both money and waivers from Federal Medicaid and benefits laws.


Technical Helps Notre Dame Win in N.I.T.
Rick Majerus, the volatile Utah coach, shook the scorer's table.
Clipboards flew, Majerus was called for a technical foul with 9.7 seconds remaining, and Notre Dame escaped with a 58-55 victory last night in a raucous Madison Square Garden.
When all the finger-pointing, shouting, confusion and free throw-shooting was over, the Irish had advanced to the final of the National Invitation Tournament.
On Wednesday, they will face Virginia, a team that benefited from an emotional pregame plea by one of its players before defeating Florida, 62-56.


What If They Had a Derby and Nobody. . . .
"At this time of year," D. Wayne Lukas was saying, "if you're not thinking Derby, you shouldn't be in this business."
Well, they're thinking Derby, all right.
But they may be wondering why they're in this business.
With less than five weeks to go before the 118th running of the Kentucky Derby, it's beginning to look as if nobody can win it this year.
Maybe not even Arazi, the runaway favorite, who has had two knee operations but no races in the last five months.
And he won't race until a week from today -- if the rain lets up -- when he tests his knees and credentials in the Prix Omnium at St.
Cloud near Paris.


Albany Races Its Budget Deadline
Despite a last-minute furor over school aid, leaders in Albany might still make their deadline with a harsh but plausible New York State budget.
Could they do better?
Yes.
But the draft agreement relies on fewer gimmicks than usual and avoids huge tax increases that would hurt during a recession.
And it could come in under the wire for the first time since 1984.
Frantic efforts to make last-minute changes before tomorrow's deadline have created chaos in Albany.
If more time would produce a better budget, a delay would surely be warranted.
But there's no reason to believe that waiting would improve the substance of the budget.
Though flawed, an on-time budget might give a weary public some confidence in the ability of public officials to do their jobs.
And local governments and school districts wouldn't have to borrow, at high interest rates, to make up for missing state aid.


A Hands-On Approach to Nature
CONSERVATION biologists are coming to realize that the common practice of letting nature work its course in a preserve often guarantees the ecosystem's decline.
One reason is that even apparently pristine reserves have been widely infiltrated by non-native plants, animals and microbes introduced by humans.
Unrestrained by their natural predators or pathogens, these exotic species often crowd out the reserve's native species.


Review/Television; News Debut Accentuates Human Side
To judge by the debut of "Dateline NBC," the network's latest entry in the prime-time news-magazine stakes, the producers are putting their money on hard-edged reports with soft centers.
Tonight's three stories, at 10 P.M., ooze human interest.
The strongest segment, presented by Jane Pauley, tells of 17-year-old Jason Kingsley and 20-year-old Mitchell Levitz, who have defied the odds against children born with Down syndrome.
NBC News first reported on them 13 years ago when they were in an innovative program known as early intervention, which Ms.
Pauley says "helped change our expectations for children with Down syndrome."


Ethnic Issue Worries the Israelis Who Believe Levy Will Quit
Israel's dominant Likud Party found itself mired in crisis today and staring at possible election setbacks after Foreign Minister David Levy's announcement that he intends to leave the Government.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir sought to make the best of a bad situation, calling the internal dissension "a joke" and insisting, despite ample evidence to the contrary, that he had no differences with his Foreign Minister.


Cadaret Playing Second Fiddle Again
He is so dependable that he is often expendable.
Greg Cadaret can pitch in various roles for the Yankees, and he continued to discover today that his dependability can often breed serious disappointment.
Cadaret was apparently in the starting rotation last week, and the left-hander made his first spring-training start today, but now it seems that Scott Kamieniecki could be ready to pitch when the season opens, and the Yankees are ecstatic.
The right-hander had surgery in October to repair a disk in his neck, has made excellent progress, and Manager Buck Showalter appears to be leaning toward starting him.
Cadaret is not thrilled.


2 Giants Among 4 Sued
The National Football League Players Association is suing four members who signed their licensing rights to a company controlled by owners.
The lawsuit, filed late Friday in Superior Court in Hackensack, N.J., names BART OATES and ERIC MOORE of the Giants, NEIL O'DONNELL of the Pittsburgh Steelers and MIKE GOLIC of the Philadelphia Eagles.


Mets Urged To Break Silence
Silence continues to reign in the Mets' clubhouse.
Patience, though, may be wearing thin in the front office.
Al Harazin, the team's general manager, said today that he had been working behind the scenes over the last 24 hours to achieve an end to a boycott of the news media being enforced by the players.


Theresa Ann Campo Pearson: Baby Girl
In the photograph she looked like any other newborn, topped by one of those funny little caps infants so often wear and clutching her grandmother's finger.
But Theresa Ann Campo Pearson's cap was not for warmth -- it covered the place where her skull should have been -- and her grip was a reflex.
Theresa Ann, born with only a brain stem, experienced nothing in her brief lifetime.
Not even pain.
Laura Campo and Justin Pearson knew their daughter would be born without a brain cortex, but decided to proceed with the pregnancy anyway.
Her organs, they figured, could be given to other infants.
That's why they wanted her declared brain-dead while part of her brain still functioned.
Wait too long, and her declining condition would compromise those organs' viability.


Fidelity May Sell Stake in Lonrho
The Fidelity Management and Research Company, a Boston-based investment group, said it was considering whether to sell its 10 percent stake in Britain's Lonrho P.L.C., in light of a deal between the British conglomerate and Libyan interests.


Settlement at Loyola
Loyola Marymount University announced yesterday that it would pay $545,000 to settle a wrongful death lawsuit brought by the mother of Hank Gathers, the basketball star who attended the school.
BRUCE FAGEL, the attorney for LUCILLE GATHERS, said that the money probably would be divided between his client and Gathers's son, AARON CRUMP.


Battling a Hidden Foe With Words
THERE are so many visible tragedies to assault the eyes, the minds and sometimes the sympathies of America's crowded cities -- the addicted, the abused, the diseased, the homeless, the parentless, the violent.
They're everywhere, it seems, in the hallways, the crack houses, the shelters and the shadows.
The numbers and scale of pain and suffering can seem overwhelming to the nonaddicted and the nonabused in their fairly peaceful, fairly healthy homes.
The problems are visible in part because the troubled souls often cross numerous official jurisdictions, which sure don't solve the problems.
But they try, and those efforts provide fodder for countless newspaper stories that many of us don't read because they're just too depressing.


Foreign-Chip Lag in Japan
The foreign share of the Japanese semiconductor market grew only a tiny bit in the fourth quarter of 1991, prompting a warning to Japan by the United States trade representative and increasing the likelihood that the American industry will push for sanctions against Japanese companies.
United States and Japanese Government officials reported today that the share of Japan's semiconductor market held by American and other non-Japanese companies was 14.4 percent in the fourth quarter, up only slightly from 14.3 percent in the third quarter.
That makes it exceedingly unlikely that a 20 percent share, the goal of a semiconductor trade agreement, will be reached by the end of this year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Jackson's Moves in New York Appear to Aid Brown
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson has injected himself into New York's Presidential primary campaign in ways that politicians say have helped the candidacy of Edmund G. Brown Jr., regardless of whether that was Mr.
Jackson's goal.
Mr.
Jackson said yesterday that he was dissatisfied with the response of both candidates to urban issues, but insisted that he had not been promoting one over the other.
He added, though, that Mr.
Brown "is running a crusade, not a campaign," and that some of Mr.
Brown's criticisms of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas were "beginning to have some effect" with blacks.


Pittsburgh Brewing Selects Kirshenbaum
The Pittsburgh Brewing Company announced yesterday that it had named Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York as the victor in a review that included four other shops.
Also participating were Blattner Brunner Inc. in Pittsburgh; W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore; Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York, and Werner Chepelsky &amp; Partners in Pittsburgh.
Billings, though not disclosed, have been estimated at $6 million.


U.S. to Delay Rerouting Of Flights
Residents of northern New Jersey and Staten Island who have been fighting to change air-traffic patterns near the region's airports to reduce noise will not see any route changes for at least a year, the Federal Aviation Administration says.
Norbert A. Owens, the agency's Deputy Associate Administrator for Air Traffic, said at a hearing of a Congressional subcommittee today that an environmental impact study scheduled for completion in May 1991 would not be finished until the end of 1992.


David Carroll Memorial
Karen Akers, Barbara Cook, Linda Lavin, Liliane Montevecchi, Tommy Tune, Eli Wallach and others are to take part in a memorial for the actor David Carroll tomorrow at 11 A.M. at the Gershwin Theater, 222 West 51st Street.
Mr.
Carroll, who appeared on Broadway in shows including "Grand Hotel," "Chess" and "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers," died on March 11 at age 41.


Big Law and Auditing Firms To Pay Millions in S.&amp; L. Suit
Ernst &amp; Young, the nation's second- largest accounting firm, and Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, the third-largest law firm, agreed yesterday to pay millions of dollars to settle claims that they had helped Charles H. Keating Jr. defraud roughly 23,000 investors in the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its parent company, the American Continental Corporation.
The two firms, neither of which admitted guilt, joined a growing list of professionals in making the multimillion-dollar settlements.


Lawyers End Summations In Gotti Case With Anger
Summations in the John Gotti trial ended with a furor yesterday when United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney suggested that the jurors might be frightened after having heard the evidence about "a murderous and treacherous crime family."
Angry defense lawyers leaped to their feet to object, and Judge I. Leo Glasser sustained their objection to the remark in the racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Leueen MacGrath, 77, an Actress And Co-Author of 'Silk Stockings'
Leueen MacGrath, an actress and playwright who co-wrote the 1955 Broadway musical "Silk Stockings" with her third husband, George S. Kaufman, died on Friday at her home in London.
She was 77 years old.
Her stepdaughter, Anne Kaufman Schneider, said Miss MacGrath died after complications of a stroke last November.


Review/Music; Giving Voice to the Spirit of Schubert and Spring
Had Elly Ameling stopped after her first Schubert song on Sunday, the message of the entire afternoon at Alice Tully Hall still would have been complete.
"Im Fruhling," indeed, is Schubert's universe in a drop of water.
By the second line, harmonic avenues are promised that this song's simple beginning gave no hint of.
By verse 2, what advertises itself as strophic repetition has become a series of melodic alterations, each promising its own divergent path.
In verse 5, plaintive major-key hopefulness turns suddenly to despairing minor.
Schubert's pictures are never quite as he first describes them to us.
Innocence is not so innocent; pleasure, on second glance, is dangerously close to pain.
Schubert probably did not know the poems of William Blake, but the two are kindred spirits.


Hartford Life In Bailout Deal
The Hartford Life Insurance Company will assume the policies of the troubled Fidelity Bankers Life Insurance Company, Virginia's insurance commissioner said today.
Under the plan, Hartford will assume all of Fidelity's annuities and insurance policies, said Commissioner Steven T. Foster, the court-appointed receiver for Fidelity Bankers.
He said policyholders would not lose any money.


U.N. Starts Cambodia Refugee Return
Sok Nang introduced his four children today to the homeland they have never known, Cambodia.
On the first day of a United Nations effort to repatriate nearly 370,000 Cambodian refugees, Mr.
Sok Nang and his young family boarded one in a convoy of buses in Thailand this morning and crossed over the dusty frontier road into Cambodia, 13 years after Mr.
Sok Nang fled to Thailand to escape the civil war.


Dinkins, in Albany, Finds Barn Door Open
Mayor David N. Dinkins was typically personable and typically measured as he came to the Capitol today to denounce the tentative state budget agreement and to plead for more money for New York City.
But while his gently persistent appeals were met with politeness, no one made any promises.
And some legislators questioned whether Mr.
Dinkins's trip to Albany, just two days before the 1992 budget was due, was simply too late to be effective.


Television Notes; NBC Tries Again With a News-Magazine Format
Although ABC and CBS have seen their faith in the news-magazine format rewarded with long-running programs that generate substantial ratings and profits, NBC's efforts to produce a successful news magazine have resulted in television's longest-running exercise in futility.
Since NBC initially attempted a news-magazine format with "First Tuesday" in 1969, the entries have included such quickly obsolete names as "Weekend," "NBC Magazine," "1986," "Prime-Time Sunday" and "Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow."


New Chief at NatWest As Investigation Begins
The chief executive of the National Westminster Bank P.L.C.
Britain's second-largest bank, resigned yesterday to devote time to a Government investigation of his role in the takeover of Manpower Inc., an American employment agency, by Britain's Blue Arrow P.L.C. in 1987.
National Westminster said in a statement yesterday that Tom Frost, the company's 58-year-old group chief executive, would be succeeded by his deputy, Derek Wanless.


Baby Without Viable Brain Dies, But Legal Struggle Will Continue
A baby girl born without a fully formed brain died yesterday after her lungs failed, ending an emotional quest by her parents to donate her organs for transplant in the hope of helping other babies.
But lawyers for the parents, Laura Campo and Justin Pearson of Coral Springs, Fla., said the couple would continue a legal struggle they began last week to allow infants like their daughter to be declared brain dead and make it easier for their organs to be donated.
Waiting several days for such infants to die allows their organs to decline along with their medical conditions.


Fighting AIDS, and Fighting One Another; As the Battleground Shifts, Old and Newer Groups Vie for Scarce Funds
With its staff of one, Mothers of Children With AIDS operates out of a donated cubicle in a church office.
Its brochure was the gift of an advertising agency and its incorporation papers were filed by lawyers working without charge.
Gay Men's Health Crisis also relies on donations and volunteers, to provide a wide range of services to people who suffer the symptoms of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
But G.M.H.C., formed in 1982 by six gay men, has grown with the epidemic to enter its second decade with a staff of 200 and an annual budget of $20 million.


The Cities' Turn
At Gracie Mansion, a dozen mayors will get a rare chance to press the two Democratic Presidential candidates on urban problems.
Page A17.


7 in Asian Gang Are Convicted
The reputed leader of a violent Vietnamese street gang and six other gang members were convicted in Federal District Court in Brooklyn yesterday on racketeering charges linking them to murder, robbery and plans to bomb a Chinatown restaurant.
The seven men were members of a gang called Born to Kill, which has terrorized restaurant owners and other merchants in Asian neighborhoods throughout the metropolitan region, officials said.
Federal prosecutors hailed the jury's verdict as a fatal blow to the 70-member-gang and as a warning to other gangs.


Observer; The Prisoner of VCR
I saw 42 movies in 1991, only eight of them in movie theaters.
The others were seen at home, where Americans see most movies these days.
We'll lament this sadness another day.
Today we deal with post-Oscar tristesse.
That's the remorse experienced when, having sat up all night watching the Academy Awards, people wake next morning realizing they hadn't seen half the movies in the competition, hadn't heard of most of the actors, can't remember who won a single Oscar last year, and don't give a hoot who won last night.


Careers; Job Seekers On the Move In Recession
THE effects of the recession in some of America's biggest states is prompting more workers to move in search of better job opportunities, according to a survey by one of the country's biggest moving companies.
The survey by Atlas Van Lines of 67,000 households that moved out of state in 1991 showed that coastal states like California and Massachusetts, where the recession has been particularly severe, had a net outflow of moves last year and that states in the Northwest, Midwest and the Sun Belt saw net inflows.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The American steel industry has undergone a transformation in the last decade that has drastically sharpened its competitive position.
Now the Bush Administration has decided not to extend protective quotas on imported steel.  [ Page A1. ]


Simms Is Looking Around But He Only Spots Giants
Barring a last-minute miracle, Phil Simms will return to the Giants this year as their backup quarterback.
Apparently, no other National Football League team has tried to sign him, not so much because he will become 37 years old during the next season, but because the Giants want to keep him for insurance.
Simms's contract extension, which paid him $1.4 million in 1991, expired after last season.
Since then, he has been free to sign with any other team, although the Giants have the right to match the offer and keep him or else let him go and collect two first-round draft choices as compensation.
Simms's look-see period ends at midnight tomorrow.


Mr. Waldheim's German Fans
"What is all this nonsense about?" demanded Premier Max Streibl of Bavaria, host of a luncheon last week for Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Kurt Waldheim of Austria.
The "nonsense" was the angry criticism by Jewish leaders of Mr.
Kohl's meeting with a chief of state notorious for lying about his service in the Nazi war machine.
But Premier Streibl was the one guilty of nonsense.
He indignantly noted that Mr.
Waldheim had been elected President by 55 percent of Austria's voters.
True, but so what?
Hitler also came to power through elections, a fact most Germans still struggle to understand.
For his part, Chancellor Kohl was provocatively callous.
He said he needed no advice on whom to meet, which doubtless plays well with right-wing voters in Bavaria.


Seagram Plans to Market New Diet Drink
The Seagram Company plans to re-enter the soft-drink business with a diet drink called Quest.
The product will be sweetened with Nutrasweet and have two calories for each bottle.
It is aimed at one of the only fast-growing areas in the lackluster soft-drink business, the "new-age" beverage market.
That market includes juice sparklers and natural sodas.


Ford Extends Cash Rebates
The Ford Motor Company said today that it would extend cash rebates of between $400 and $2,000 on selected 1991 and 1992 models until the end of June, hoping to increase lagging auto sales.
Ford, the nation's second-largest auto maker, said it would trim some rebates under the new program but most models would carry the same discounts as before.


Review/Television; Pair of New Sitcoms, One Warm and One Weird
How do you prefer your American family, warmly amusing or wacko ridiculous?
As far as television sitcoms are concerned, it's largely a matter of which network you choose to watch.
Traditionalist ABC, for instance, has a new series, Tuesdays at 9:30 P.M., called "Room for Two," about a mom named Edie (Linda Lavin) getting reacquainted with her adult daughter Jill (Patricia Heaton).
Old-style wisecracks are blended with inevitably touching moments.
Warm.
Tiresome, but warm.


Schramm Improving
The former Dallas Cowboys executive, TEX SCHRAMM, was recovering yesterday from quintuple bypass surgery after apparently suffering a heart attack.
Schramm's condition at Baylor University Medical Center was upgraded from critical to serious, but he remained in the hospital's cardiac intensive-care unit. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
'Le Nozze di Figaro'  Metropolitan Opera
A critic dispatched to report on changed personnel in Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" at the Met on Friday evening found himself distracted from the immediate task in ways good and bad.
The pleasant distractions came from the fine work of holdovers in the cast, not least, Heidi Grant Murphy in the small role of Barbarina.
The unpleasant ones stemmed from the cute touches of staging that have accrued to Jean-Pierre Ponnelle's ungainly production, most recently under the direction of Lesley Koenig.


Love Is a Success on Masters Launching Pad
At the same time it was solidifying its position as golf's fifth most important tournament, this year's Players Championship did much to clarify the picture for the coming Masters.
With the start of the first major championship of the year looming only 10 days away, several players showed by their play and their outlooks that they are in the prime of their preparation for the rigors of the Augusta National Golf Club.


Get the Candidates
In Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" the host insists on playing a merciless game called "Get the Guests." In the guise of describing a novel, he savagely mocks a young couple until the wife leaves the room hysterical.
More and more, says Fred Wertheimer of Common Cause, that sounds like the 1992 campaign.
The New York Times reports that in 1988, legislative draftsmen for Gov.
Bill Clinton acted to exempt him from a key provision of a new Arkansas ethics law . . .
Pressed by a TV interrogator, Mr.
Clinton acknowledges -- after ducking earlier -- that he experimented with marijuana in his youth . . .
The Washington Post reports that Jerry Brown, self-proclaimed scourge of insiders' influence, took $20,000 a year to serve on a friend's drug company board and called a Congressional chairman on the friend's behalf.


Novel Strategy Puts People At Heart of Texas Preserve
THE ecological heart of Texas consists not of desert and dust, but of deep, spectacular wooded canyons where eagles soar and rare songbirds nest, and thousands of crystalline springs bubble from the forested hillsides.
Beneath the surface lie vast, honeycombed formations of limestone where strange creatures whose kind have not seen the light of day for millennia live in subterranean rivers, caves and flooded crevices.
It is the Texas hill country, and a grand experiment in what might be called the New Conservation is under way to save its distinctive assemblages of flora and fauna.


Losses in TV Hurt Hachette Shares
Shares in Hachette S.A. fell 4.1 percent in hectic trading on the Paris Bourse today, after the leading French publisher said its 1991 results would be seriously affected by losses at the troubled La Cinq television channel, best known for its late-night soft-pornography programming.
In a statement, Hachette, whose American publications include Woman's Day and Elle, said that the problems at La Cinq would cost the company about $321 million in 1991.


Brown-Forman Asks For Account Review
The Brown-Forman Beverage Company said yesterday that it had placed its spirits brands account in review after dismissing Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
Phil Lynch, director of corporate communications in Louisville, Ky., said that the Brown-Forman Corporation division was seeking "new and better creative ideas and execution" for its brands, which include Southern Comfort, Canadian Mist and Early Times.


CHRONICLE
While most moviegoers were riveted this week by the Academy Awards, one group of film devotees was more concerned with picking the worst movies and performers of the year: the 365 voting members of the Golden Raspberry Foundation, which announced its choices on Sunday in the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel.
SEAN YOUNG, who played twins in the thriller "A Kiss Before Dying," had the dubious honor of coming out first in two categories.
She won worst actress for her portrayal of the twin who survives and worst supporting actress as the twin who is murdered.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Jazz Handles Bucks  Jeff Malone scored 30 points and Karl Malone 27 as the Utah Jazz defeated Milwaukee, 120-100, last night in Salt Lake City.
The Bucks' loss was their 21st in a row on the road.
The victory clinched a playoff berth for Utah, which leads the Midwest Division.
The Jazz led, 54-53, at the half before outscoring the Bucks by 17-5 in the first 6 minutes 16 seconds of the third quarter. (AP) Hornets 123, Magic 112: Muggsy Bogues had 21 points, 9 assists, 5 rebounds, 4 steals and a blocked shot as host Charlotte won for the 12th time in its last 14 home games. (AP)


TV Cartoon Plans Are Dropped
Animated characters that originated in advertising seem unlikely to cross over into children's television programming anytime soon.
Two proposals to base children's shows on such characters are no longer under consideration.
A spokeswoman for Kraft General Foods said yesterday that a proposed syndicated series based on Cheesasaurus Rex, a dinosaur character that appears in advertising aimed at children for the Kraft Macaroni and Cheese Dinner, was "a gleam in a brand manager's eye."


BRIEFS
*
Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc., La Jolla, Calif., signed a letter of intent to acquire Neomorphics Inc., a biomedical research-and-development concern, in a stock swap with a value of $21 million. *
Aluminum Co. of America, Pittsburgh, and Kobe Steel Ltd., Tokyo, completed a joint-venture agreement that creates two companies to produce sheet aluminum for the transportation industry.
One company will be in Japan and the other in the United States.


'Silence of the Lambs' Dominates Oscars, Winning 5 Awards
"The Silence of the Lambs" swept the top categories at the 64th annual Academy Awards ceremony last night, winning prizes for its director, stars and writer and receiving the ultimate award as best film of the year.
Jonathan Demme, who had scored a string of critical successes with offbeat films like "Handle With Care," "Melvin and Howard,' "Something Wild" and "Swimming to Cambodia," was named best director.


Their Wages Low, Single Mothers Get Little Help
Milagros Reyes took her baby boy to the hospital for a hernia operation, but had to rush away a few hours after surgery to get back to work.
Her 6-month-old son, bandaged and scared, was crying as she left, but she feared that a missed day might get her fired from her $7.79-an-hour factory job.
The same anxiety has also driven Ms.
Reyes to ignore the advice of her baby's pediatrician who says she should quit her job.
Her son, Juan Carlos, cared for by a series of poorly paid sitters, is severely underweight, the doctor told her.
But Ms.
Reyes feels she cannot afford to stop working.


In Russia-Ukraine Fight Over Navy, Crimea Lies at Heart of the Struggle
The quarrel between Russia and Ukraine over the Black Sea Fleet is not just about the great gray warships in this city's narrow harbor that, orphanlike, still fly the red hammer-and-sickle of the former Soviet Union.
As most Russians and Ukrainians are quick to point out, the fight now testing the survival of the Commonwealth of Independent States has deeper historical roots.
In many ways, it is really about the Crimean Peninsula itself, which is now poised for a referendum on its independence from Ukraine, and about Sevastopol, a navy town of faded elegance that dates to the reign of Catherine the Great.


Inquiry Continues Into Response at Crash
Investigators looking into the emergency response to the jetliner crash at La Guardia Airport nine days ago have found no indications of improper delays in getting the first ambulances to the crash site, people close to the inquiry said yesterday.


Ferries Belong in Our Transportation Future
To the Editor:
"The challenge to transportation planners in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut," you write (news article, March 13), "is to build more efficiency into what already exists." In assessing alternative transportation measures, however, you omit one important system: waterborne transportation.
Every workday this year, the Weehawken-based Port Imperial Ferry Bus System will move an average of 9,200 commuters away from Hudson River tunnel crossings, many of them from single-occupancy vehicles.
Our Hoboken-based ferries will handle 7,000 more commuters each workday.


Spain Sees Basques' Arrests Reducing Threat to Olympics
Cheered by the capture of the Basque separatist movement's top leader by the French police on Sunday, the Spanish authorities expressed hope today that the terrorist group would find it more difficult to attack this year's World's Fair in Seville and the Summer Olympics in Barcelona.
But while hailing the arrest of Francisco Mugica Garmendia, two senior aides and nine other guerrillas as a major blow to Basque Homeland and Liberty -- or E.T.A., as the group is known by its Basque initials -- the Spanish Interior Minister warned that Spain should not lower its guard.


U.S. Adds 7 Countries To Trade Barrier List
The Administration today broadened its list of countries that have barriers to American exports, adding seven countries in Latin America and Eastern Europe and expanding the chapter on Japan.
The annual list, prepared by the Office of the Trade Representative, is required by Congress to provide a benchmark for measuring the progress of American trade negotiators.
It is both a propaganda exercise, used by the Administration to boast of its accomplishments, and a leading indicator of trade cases that American officials are likely to investigate in coming months.


Betty Ourisman; Philanthropist, 66
Betty Lou Haydnet Ourisman, a former board member of the Arena Stage and Ford's Theater in Washington, who was long active in philanthrophic and cultural organizations in the capital area, died yesterday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
She was 66 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
She died of breast cancer, her family said.


INSIDE
Governing Without Privilege
Upset by the President's attacks on lawmakers' perquisites, Democratic Congressional leaders have begun reviewing those enjoyed by Federal bureaucrats everywhere.
Page A14.
A Pattern of Hospital Error
An examination of hundreds of deaths at hospitals in New York City reveals a pattern of mistakes in places strained by AIDS, drugs, violence and budget cuts.
Page B1.
Cambodians Return Home
On the first day of a United Nations campaign to repatriate 370,000 refugees, Cambodians began returning to their homeland.
Page A12.
Struggle Over the Crimea
The fight now testing the survival of the Commonweath of Independent States is really about the Crimean Peninsula itself.
Page A6.
Disney Deal for Channel 9
The Walt Disney Company is acquiring a 45 percent stake in stations in both the Los Angeles and New York television markets.
Page D1.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, named Zoe Baird senior vice president and general counsel. *
Artel Communications Corp., Hudson, Mass., a maker of fiber-optic systems, named Andrew C. Knowles chief executive.


Tokyo Stocks at 5-Year Low
Stocks posted sharp losses today in Tokyo, with the Nikkei index of 225 issues closing at a five-year low.
Arbitrage selling and fading hopes for a significant cut in the official discount rate erased modest gains in early trading.
The 225-share Nikkei average ended 323.36 points lower at 19,345.95, a decline of 1.64 percent.
About 220 million shares were traded.


For a Few More Days, Torrey Puts Off Future
Bill Torrey knows his prospective new bosses are impatient for his answer.
He knows they want to make changes in the Islanders and he knows they can't wait to get started.
But Torrey is a busy man.
He runs a hockey team.
He works on the management bargaining committee that is trying to avoid a players strike.
After 20 years as the chief executive of the Islanders, he realizes that he has been offered a reduced role under new management and he knows he might not even be around for the new era, if and when it comes.


New Leader's Lofty Goals For Bloom
HOPING to lift itself higher in the crowded ranks of New York agencies, Bloom FCA Inc. is importing from Young &amp; Rubicam a top executive with experience in worldwide account management and new-business prospecting.
George Guimaraes, 47 years old, is leaving Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, the North American division of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., where he has held the No. 2 post: vice chairman and worldwide marketing director.
At Bloom FCA, he will take the new position of chairman and chief executive of the New York headquarters.


Taiwan, Writing a New Constitution, Finds Little Common Ground
Several hundred leading citizens of Taiwan gather in a huge assembly hall each day to plan a harmonious and democratic future -- and then start yelling at each other.
The delegates are members of a new National Assembly, which 10 days ago convened a two-month session to revise the nation's constitution and chart the road to full democracy.
So far, however, the constitutional conference seems to have underscored rather than addressed the divisions on Taiwan.


METRO DIGEST
THE STRUGGLING SINGLE MOTHER
A growing number of single mothers are facing an agonizing choice, between the dead-end certainty of poverty on welfare and the grinding struggle to survive and get ahead in a low-paying job.
Often, these women cannot afford housing, health insurance or quality day care, and most of them get no child support from their children's fathers.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE MAYOR AND HIS HEADACHES
Today, Mayor Dinkins will move his office to that hoary national symbol of urban problems, the Bronx.
But when the Democratic Presidential contenders debate there tonight with the eyes of the nation upon them, their host will be not the Mayor, but Borough President Fernando Ferrer.
This situation is a metaphor for Mr.
Dinkins's political headache these days: How to make the case that Washington's neglect has contributed to New York's problems, and how to persuade his fellow New Yorkers that he can help solve those problems.
Political memo, B3.
GRAPPLING WITH THE GARBAGE CRISIS
The Dinkins administration proposed sweeping changes in the way the city disposes of its solid waste, including more than tripling the amount of refuse that New York burns and recycles by the end of the century.
B3.
At the Gotti trial, summations end in an uproar.
B3.
Canadians apologize for statement on USAir crash.
B3. 7 members of Vietnamese gang convicted in Brooklyn.
B3.
REGION  SCRAMBLING IN ALBANY
With just two days before the start of New York's new fiscal year, legislative leaders scrambled to hold together their budget deal in the face of a personal lobbying blitz by Mayor Dinkins and a bitter election-year battle among Senate Republicans over how to divide billions of dollars in aid to schools.
A1.
A REBUFF ON AIRPLANE NOISE
Residents of northern New Jersey and Staten Island who have been fighting to change air-traffic patterns near the region's airports to reduce noise will not see any route changes for at least a year, the Fedral Government says.
B7.
VETERAN LAWMAKER BOWS OUT
Repesentative Robert A. Roe, the chairman of the House Public Works and Transportation Committee, became the second senior member of the New Jersey Congressional delegation to announce that he would not seek re-election in the wake of a new redistricting plan.
B7.
A TROUBLED UTILITY
Northeast Utilities has run nuclear reactors for 25 years and gained a reputation as a competent operator of reliable plants.
But in the last few months, everything seems to have turned sour.
Equipment has broken; reactor operators have failed licensing exams; Federal officials have found that the company harassed three employees who pointed out safety problems, and a grand jury in New Haven is investigating the nandling of an incident at one reactor.
B7.
New Jersey Republicans begin drive for initiative and referendum.
B7.
L.I. family wins right to keep their home.
B8.
Our Towns B8


We and Pigeons Are of One Cosmic Dust
To the Editor:
I was glad to see your March 3 letter about pigeons, those very nice birds much maligned by unthinking humans.
I have also rescued pigeons and returned them to the "wilds" of their city streets and airspaces.
Often the birds had been struck by cars and were flopping pitiably in gutters when I found them.
They often recovered after a week or a month of rest and proper food and were able to fly away.


Duke's Hoping Hurley Can Steady His Hands
Ball handling is a primary concern as Duke prepares to face Indiana on Saturday in a Final Four semifinal at Minneapolis.
The Blue Devils committed 20 turnovers against Kentucky in the East Regional final Saturday night, 5 above their season average.
"We're just turning the ball over too much," said Mike Krzyzewski, the Duke coach.
"That's the aspect of offense that I need to be working on this week."


Nets Start Playoff Run With Sprint
The Nets, with their best record since the 1985-86 season but struggling to make the playoffs, defeated the San Antonio Spurs, 117-109, tonight with a big boost from Terry Mills coming off the bench.
The Nets improved their record to 32-39, playing against a Spurs team that was missing David Robinson, who is out for six weeks after undergoing surgery on his left thumb.
The Nets' starting center, Sam Bowie, returned after a six-game absence but saw only brief action.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.75
6.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.08
4.01
5.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.19
4.14
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.22
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.93
7.94
8.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.88
9.31
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.78
7.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Candidates On Television
Where voters can find the Presidential candidates and hear their views on television today:
Democratic debate, 7-8 P.M., on WABC-TV, Channel 7, in New York and on Cable News Network nationwide.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California discuss urban issues at Lehman College in the Bronx.


New Coach at Ole Miss
The Oklahoma State assistant coach, ROB EVANS, was hired yesterday as head basketball coach at Mississippi, becoming the first black in that job at the Southeastern Conference school.
The head-coaching job is the first for Evans, who has been a college assistant for 21 seasons.


Human and Mechanical Failures Plague Medical Care
In recent months New York City hospitals have had a run of well-publicized trouble.
A young Hasidic scholar died after emergency-room doctors had failed to notice a stab wound in his back.
A prominent Harlem lawyer died of a bleeding ulcer after waiting almost 11 hours in the emergency room and then being sent home, and a psychiatric patient was found dead in a shaft after wandering unnoticed from his room.
In each case, there was an investigation, and blame was assigned: to a resident without proper credentials, to doctors who did not recognize the seriousness of a patient's condition, and to aides who did not pay proper attention to a patient's whereabouts.
None of those inquiries, though, went beyond the specific case at hand.


N.H.L. Players Push Back Their Strike Deadline
Despite the leverage they possess because of the imminence of the playoffs and despite the fact that there was no new offer from the owners yesterday on a new collective-bargaining agreement, the National Hockey League players postponed their strike deadline from noon yesterday until 3 P.M. tomorrow.
Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the union, the N.H.L.
Players Association, said that the bargaining committee had unanimously rejected the owners' most recent offer and that the postponement was merely intended to allow every player in the league to vote today on that proposal before the next step is taken.


Challenge Brings Out the Best in Knicks
While much of the sports world has been focused on college basketball, the Knicks have created their own March madness during the last two weeks.
Riding a seven-game winning streak, the Knicks (46-25) are the hottest team in the National Basketball Association.


Easing of Abortion Curb Is Disputed
Contrary to the Bush Administration's recent assertion that doctors may discuss abortion in federally financed clinics, the rule that bans abortion counseling continues to apply to them, experts told lawmakers today.
Two weeks ago, the Administration announced that its rule forbidding abortion counseling in 4,000 Government-financed family planning clinics applied only to nurses and counselors, not to doctors.


Corrections
The Pulse chart on Thursday showing overseas telephone rates incorrectly described some of the calls cited.
The prices listed for France, Germany and Italy were the rates for calls from those countries to the New York area, not vice versa.


Sports of The Times; The Silence Of the Mets And You
EVEN though some Mets players are understandably more concerned about opening a subpoena than opening the season, a vow of silence isn't about to turn them into Trappist monks.
That vow won't also hide the mistaken belief by most people that the victim of the silence is the news media.
The real victim is you.


Iraqi Forces Shell Kurdish Rebels In Apparent Cease-Fire Violation
In apparent violation of the cease-fire agreement signed after the Persian Gulf war, Iraqi military forces are shelling and shooting at thousands of Kurdish civilians along their front lines.
The attacks, against about a dozen small villages and towns along the Great Zab River, have forced the entire population of 40,000 people to flee their homes since last Wednesday, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


A Timely Rescue for a Troubled Family
Before a steady rain kept Karen Stemberg from venturing to her backyard garden, she raked 20 bags of leaves in preparation for spring.
She thinks she will plant hyacinths this year, perhaps pansies as well.
Maybe even a tulip border, she mused, chin on her hand.
Until recently, she did not know whether it paid to labor on the house that she and her siblings, Rita, 64 years old, and Teddy, 59, stood a good chance of losing for failing to pay their property taxes.


Thatcher Adieu to Politicking, but Not Politics
With her chosen successor as Prime Minister, John Major, battling for political survival, Margaret Thatcher bowed out of the British general election campaign today to keep speaking engagements in the United States.
"Political swan song?" she said.
"Good heavens, no! I shall be active for a very, very long time."


Wang Seen In Retail Deal
Wang Laboratories Inc. is scheduled to sell its personal computers through Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's leading discount retail chain, analysts and a person at Wang said yesterday.
A company spokesman said Wang would neither confirm nor deny the report, but a person at the company said that Wang had in fact agreed to sell its line of PC's through Wal-Mart.


After Hiatus, Buchanan Rejoins Campaign Battle
Declaring himself "tanned, rested and ready," Patrick J. Buchanan announced today that he would be hitting the campaign trail after a two-week hiatus.
But as he sought to inject himself again into a Presidential campaign he had all but abandoned, Mr.
Buchanan declined to attack President Bush, his rival for the Republican nomination.
Instead, the conservative columnist directed all his biting remarks at Congress, castigating it for its privileges, the House bank affair and what he characterized as its hypocrisy


Clinton and Brown Agree to Series of Debates Before New York Primary


Canadians Issue Apology Over Jet Crash Report
Canadian officials apologized today for suggesting that the crash of USAir Flight 405 might have been averted if Federal aviation authorities had read a Canadian report concerning icing on the type of jet that crashed.
A Canadian official said today that the authorities in this country had not seen the report because the Canadians had neglected to send it.
In a letter to the Federal Aviation Administration, the Canadian commission investigating the crash of a jet three years ago in Dryden, Ontario, acknowledged that the commission had never sent its interim report to other agencies, which is standard practice.


On My Mind; Closing Our Eyes
About the downing of Pan American 103, only two major questions remain to be answered.
This is the first:
Will the truth be disclosed to the world -- the full truth, not just the part being recited at the United Nations?


Dinkins Offers Changes In Solid-Waste Disposal
Running out of ways to get rid of New York City's mounting garbage, the Dinkins administration yesterday proposed broad changes in the way the city disposes of its solid waste, among them plans to more than triple the amount of refuse that the city burns and that it recycles by the end of the century.
Specifically, city sanitation officials said that the administration will proceed with plans to build a large garbage incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Last week, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced that he would delay construction, raising hopes of those who would live near the plant that it would not be built.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Clinton Cites Schedule To Avoid Dicey Dinner
Campaign nightmare number 508:
Bronx Democratic leaders have invited local dignitaries to honor Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas at their annual money-raising dinner on May 14.
So far no problem.
The engraved invitation also notes, however, that "special recognition" will be awarded to Frederick W. Devine, president of District Council of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners for the New York region, for his contributions to labor.


Market Place; Cash Flood Still Going Toward Mutual Funds
American investors are continuing to pour money into mutual funds in huge amounts, fund managers said yesterday.
The quarter just ending is likely to be the industry's best ever, in terms of new cash being invested.
While some funds that sell directly to investors reported some slowdown in March, others, especially those that sell through brokers, said business was continuing to get better.
"It's like the basketball fans say," said Victor Ugolyn, president of the Enterprise Group of Funds, "it's March madness."


Officials Facing Loss of Privilege In Washington
The wave of public indignation that has led Capitol Hill to abolish some perquisites enjoyed by members of Congress now threatens the life style of Federal bureaucrats everywhere.
Upset by President Bush's attacks on lawmakers' privileges, Democratic Congressional leaders have begun reviewing those enjoyed by Federal officials.
Last week Paul W. Bateman, the White House Director of Administration, appeared before the House and Senate appropriations committees to defend White House perquisites, including gymnasiums and chauffeur-driven limousines.


Panel Orders a Hearing In Bizarre Harvard Case
Meeting in an unusual emergency session, the Massachusetts medical board this morning refused to suspend the license of a Harvard Medical School psychiatrist accused of seducing a student at the school and leading him to commit suicide.
After five and a half hours of deliberation the board deferred the case to a different agency, the Division of Administrative Law Appeals, for a formal hearing into the medical malpractice charges against the psychiatrist, Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog.


Review/Ballet; Royal Danish in a Beloved Bournonville Work
If the King of Denmark had not been offended in 1841 by August Bournonville, 140 dance critics from Asia, Europe, Israel and North America would not be sitting elbow to elbow in Copenhagen's charming and cozy Royal Theater this week.
Thirteen years after the blazing success of the Bournonville Festival that honored the great Romantic Danish choreographer (1805-1879) on the centenary of his death, the Royal Danish Ballet is celebrating the 150th anniversary of "Napoli." Considered Bournonville's signature work, it is also virtually Denmark's national ballet.


Review/Film Festival; On the Run in a Hostile Hungary
"Shadow on the Snow," the moody first feature film by Attila Janisch, a 34-year-old Hungarian director, evokes a wintry bleakness that is so concentrated it leaves a lingering chill.
Filmed in inky black-and-white, it traces the peripatetic movements of Sandor Gaspar (Miroslaw Baka), a grim young man who shuttles between a crude country cabin and a bare city apartment with his daughter, Rebecca (Zsofi Baji).
From Sandor's phone calls to characters who remain mostly off screen, it is obvious that he is desperate for money.
And with his sharp, vulpine features and air of generalized furtiveness, he stirs up suspicion and hostility wherever he goes.
He also has a stormy relationship with a girlfriend, Agnes (Johanna-Kreft Baka), who exudes more fear than affection during their tumultuous encounters.


'Free' Infant Formula Also Does Harm in U.S.; A Great Equalizer
To the Editor:
Re "Breast Milk for the World's Babies" (editorial, March 12):
Mother's milk changes to match the changing needs of the growing child, while providing the child with the mother's own antibodies to diseases.
Also as long as children are breast-fed, the holding, cuddling and skin-to-skin contact they receive with their feedings eliminate the disparities between rich and poor.


Hyman Kavett; Professor, 70
Hyman Kavett, a retired college professor and writer, died on Saturday at the Elizabeth Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 70 years old and lived in Union, N.J.
He died of a circulatory ailment, a family spokesman said.


Deciding When a Turnoff Is a Good Idea
IT is the nature of computer users to worry.
They worry about potentially big things, like computer viruses, hard disk failures, electromagnetic field risks, compatibility problems and rapid obsolescence.
But they also worry about little things, which is only natural in an industry where speed is measured in nanoseconds, size in microns and information in bits.
Lately, for example, I have worried about whether it is better to turn the computer off when I am going to be out of the office for several hours, or to leave it on.


Lukens Agrees to Buy Stainless Steel Maker
Lukens Inc., the large maker of plate steel, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Washington Steel Corporation, a producer of stainless steel, for $280 million.
The acquisition will strengthen Lukens's position in the area of higher-quality steel products.
Washington Steel, which is privately held, is the nation's third-largest producer of stainless steel, behind the Allegheny Ludlum Corporation and Armco Inc.
Washington Steel said the agreement with Lukens was the last major objective in the company's restructuring that began last summer.


As Addiction Medicine Gains, Experts Debate What It Should Cover
PEOPLE can be addicted to heroin or cocaine.
But what about gambling, sex or food?
That question has touched off a heated debate.
"Addiction medicine" is one of the fastest growing areas of psychiatry, and specialists are seeking recognition for the field.
But critics say the field's wide sweep has crossed the borders of true addiction.
The result, they say, is that some patients are ending up with the wrong treatments.


Corrections
A report in Chronicle on Thursday about New York City's "Tribute to Walt Whitman" misstated the year of his death.
The event marks the 100th anniversary of his death, not the 150th.


Republicans in Trenton Press Bid for Referendum Balloting
Fulfilling one of the main promises of their successful campaign last year to win control of the Legislature, the Republican majority formally began a drive today to amend the State Constitution to permit initiative and referendum balloting in New Jersey.
"The voters of New Jersey, by an overwhelming majority, are telling us that initiative and referendum is not just a good idea, it's a fundamental right they are entitled to," said Assemblyman Robert D. Franks, the Republican state chairman.


Devils Keep Teen-Age Goaltender With the Big Boys
The way the goaltending situation is for the Devils right now, it looks as if they will have to rely a great deal on Martin Brodeur, the 19-year-old they promoted from the juniors last week.
With Chris Terreri still bothered by back spasms and Craig Billington having re-injured his right knee on Sunday in Philadelphia, the Devils will keep Brodeur here rather than return him today to his junior team, as they had originally agreed to do.
The Devils can keep him because of the goaltender injuries.


I.R.A.-Linked Party Faces Test With Ulster Voters
Sinn Fein, the civilian wing of the Irish Republican Army, is struggling in the British parliamentary election to maintain credibility as a political force in Northern Ireland.
The campaign refocuses attention on the personal background of Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein's president, and his No. 2, Martin McGuinness, both of whom are running for Parliament.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Hear Attack on Waste Law
The Supreme Court today gave a sympathetic hearing to a constitutional attack on a Federal law that requires states to take responsibility for disposing of the low-level radioactive waste within their borders.
The argument, in a lawsuit brought by New York State against the Federal Government, raised the possibility not only that the Court might declare the 1985 law unconstitutional, but also that it could do so in a way that gives states new tools for resisting unwanted Federal regulation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  IRAQI KURDS FLEEING NEW ATTACKS
Iraqi forces, apparently violating the gulf war truce accord, are shelling and shooting at thousands of Kurdish civilians in a dozen villages along the Great Zab River.
The attacks have forced 40,000 to flee, U.N. refugee officials said.
A1  FIRST CAMBODIANS RETURN
An advance group of 527 Cambodians -- some joyous, some frightened -- returned to their homeland from refugee areas in Thailand.
As they made their way, the Government reportedly began a major attack against the Khmer Rouge.
A12
President Bush is pressed to modify U.S. embargo against Vietnam.
A3  WARSHIP AND METAPHOR
The dispute between Russia and Ukraine over the Black Sea fleet is not just about the gray warships in the Sevastopol's harbor.
It is about the future of the Crimean peninsula, which faces a referendum on independence from Ukraine, and about Sevastopol itself.
A6  BUSH MOVES TO AID RUSSIANS
Bush was reported planning to lump Russian assistance proposals with those for other former Soviet republics in hopes of overcoming election-year resistance in Congress.
A7
The I.L.O. predicted Russian employment of 11 million in 1992.
A6  SOUTH AFRICAN GOAL UNCERTAIN
Negotiators agreed to make every effort to bring about a South African interim government by June 30.
But It was not clear whether disagreements remaining between the Governt and the A.N.C. would be resolved in time.
A3  THE OLD ORDER GETS YOUNGER Whether the British election is won by the Conservative Party or by Labor, it will mark a generational turning point.
Former Prime Minister Thatcher, now 67, and many of her officials are leaving the stage to younger men and women.
A10
THE I.R.A.
CIVILIANS Sinn Fein, the civilian face of the Irish Republican Army, is struggling in the British election campaign to maintain credibility as a political force in Northern Ireland.
A11  Resolute Journal: Where polar treks are planned over coffee.
A4  Secretary Baker asked Savimbi to explain rebel killings.
A5  Algeria further tightened hold on Islamic fundamentalists.
A8  French Cabinet shake-up appeared certain after further losses.
A9  Spain sees Basque arrests reducing threat to Olympics.
A9  Taiwan's effort to write constitution underscores divisions.
A12  Israelis fear Levy's resignation may spur ethnic tension.
A13  National A14-18  12 YEARS UNDER CLINTON
A review of Bill Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas showed he could take justifiable pride in moving the state forward in several areas.
But it also showed that he sometimes took shortcuts in exercising his considerable influence.
A1  FRONT-RUNNER DECIDES TO DEBATE
After refusing requests from former Governor Brown to debate, Governor Clinton challenged Mr.
Brown to at least six debates before the New York primary.
A16
Democrats at a fork: toward order or the wilds of uncertainty.  A17
Mayors will force Brown and Clinton to address big-city problems.  A17
Jackson indirectly boosted the fortunes of Brown.  A18  KEATING CASE SETTLEMENT
Ernst &amp; Young and Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue will pay millions to settle claims that they helped Charles Keating defraud Lincoln Savings investors.
A1  GOVERNING WITHOUT PERKS
Upset by the President's attacks on lawmakers' perquisites, Democratic Congressional leaders have begun reviewing those enjoyed by Federal bureaucrats everywhere.
A14  THE REVIVAL OF STEEL
The American steel industry, long a symbol of the nation's industrial decay, in the past decade has undergone a transformation that has drastically sharpened its competitive position.
Now the Bush Administration has decided not to extend protective quotas on imported steel.
A1  SHIELDING STATES FROM U.S.
The Supreme Court gave a sympathetic hearing to an attack on a Federal law that requires states to take responsibility for disposing of the low-level radioactive waste within their borders.
A15  INTERPRETING ABORTION RULE
Contrary to the Bush Administration's assertion that doctors may discuss abortion in federally financed clinics, the rule that bans abortion counseling continues to apply to them, experts told lawmakers.
A18  A BRIEF, CONTROVERSIAL LIFE
A baby girl born without a fully formed brain died, ending an emotional quest by her parents to donate her organs for transplant in hope of helping other babies.
A14  A PSYCHIATRIST'S INFLUENCE
The Massachusetts state medical board is investigating charges of medical malpractice against a Harvard Medical School psychiatrist accused of seducing a medical school student and leading him to commit suicide.
A14  Tracing the deviant sexual behavior of a Philadelphia man.
A15  The Noriega case moved near closing arguments.
A15  Metropolitan Digest, B1 NEW THREAT TO BUDGET
An election-year battle over how to distribute $8.4 billion in school aid erupted in Albany, threatening the budget deal made over the weekend.
Lawmakers are frantically pushing to pass a budget before the start of the new fiscal year tomorrow.
A1  SINGLE MOTHERS' STRUGGLE
A growing number of single working mothers face an agonizing choice between the certainty of poverty on welfare and the struggle to get ahead in a low-paying job.
Many cannot afford housing, insurance or quality day care, researchers say.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-11  The new conservation: taking the widest view of habitats.
C1  A look at the earth's core.
C1  Doctors ponder whether addictions are truly diseases.
C3  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Mets urged to break silence.
B14  Basketball: Nets beat Spurs.
B11  Happy days at Cincinnati.
B11  Hockey: Strike deadline postponed.
B11  Obituaries B10  Manolis Andronicos, archeologist  Fashion Page B9  Lagerfeld in the spotlight.
Arts/Entertainment C13-20  "Silence of the Lambs" sweeps Oscars.
C13  Dance: Bournonville festival.
C13  Music: Elly Ameling.
C13  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Get the candidates.
Albany races its deadline.
Waldheim's German fans.
Theresa Pearson, baby girl.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: The prisoner of VCR.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: Closing our eyes.
A21  Nancy Bekavac: War in another world.
A21  Martin Jacques: Britain in political fog.
Continent cut off.
A21  Jurgen Mollemann: Down to the wire on trade talks.
A21


From Harassment Findings to Broken Pipes, Giant Utility Has a Run of Trouble
Northeast Utilities has run nuclear reactors for 25 years and gained a reputation as a competent operator of reliable plants.
But in the last few months, everything seems to have turned sour.
Equipment has broken, reactor operators have failed licensing exams and Federal officials have found that the company harassed three employees, including a top engineer, who pointed out safety problems.


U.N. Agency Sees Russia's Jobless Soaring to 11 Million This Year
Unemployment in Russia will soar to at least 15 percent this year as enterprises struggle to become competitive, the International Labor Organization said in a report issued today.
The report said unemployment would jump to 11 million this year in Russia, from about 3 million now.
But it added that unemployment could rise as high as 30 million in a workforce of 75 million if Russia lets oil prices soar to world levels and allows many floundering state enterprises to go bankrupt.


Gene Ward, 78, Dies; Wrote Sports Column
Gene Ward, who in 46 years with The Daily News rose from summer copy boy to nationally known sports writer and columnist, died Saturday at the North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 78 years old.
He died of complications following colon surgery, said his wife, the former Carol Alice Maley.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Instrumental d'Avignon
Florence Gould Hall
When Alice Tully Hall opened in 1969, it came with its own resident ensemble, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
The French Institute/Alliance Francaise was more cautious.
It opened a chamber music hall in 1988, but it was not until this season that the French Institute established a house band.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Dennis Rasmussen and Anthony Telford, pitchers; and Mark Parent, catcher; to Rochester of the International League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Traded Sammy Sosa, ouitfielder, and Ken Patterson, pitcher, to the Chicago Cubs for George Bell, outfielder, and cash.
Announced Wayne Edwards, pitcher, refused an outright assignment to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League to become a free agent.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Optioned Steve Chitren and Kevin Campbell, pitchers; Dann Howitt, outfielder-first baseman; and Mike Kingery and Eric Fox, outfielders; to their minor league camp for reassignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Optioned Lance McCullers, pitcher, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Announced that Don Carman, pitcher, was assigned to extended spring training.
National League  HOUSTON ASTROS -- Optioned Willie Blair and Bob Mallicoat, pitchers; Eddie Tucker, catcher; and Eric Yelding, infielder; to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Traded Terry Bross, pitcher, to the San Diego Padres for Craig Bullock, third baseman.
Optioned Julio Valera, pitcher, to Tidewater of the International League.
Sent Chris Donnels, infielder, and Orlando Mercado, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Optioned Francisco Oliveras, pitcher; Steve Decker, catcher; and Greg Litton and John Patterson, infielders; to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Craig McMurtry, pitcher, and Steve Lake, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.


Classical Music in Review
Montreal Symphony
Carnegie Hall
Charles Dutoit invited two British composers into his program with the Montreal Symphony on Saturday night.
Britten's "Four Sea Interludes" separates great orchestral music from great opera ("Peter Grimes") and gives it a life of its own.
For concertgoers, the Britten has been a rescue operation with happy conclusions.
Attempts to isolate Wagner's grander symphonic sequences are intermittently successful.
Currently lost to most non-operagoers are the interludes of "Pelleas et Melisande," containing some of Debussy's most awesome instrumental writing.


Pioneering the Computer Frontier
Two personal-computer industry pioneers said yesterday that they would establish a well-financed research center dedicated to pursuing the technical breakthroughs needed to create a generation of futuristic computers that have long been envisioned but remain tantalizingly out of reach.
David E. Liddle, until recently an executive at I.B.M. and the founder of Metaphor Computer Systems, and Paul G. Allen, co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation and now chairman of the Asymetrix Corporation and owner of the Portland Trail Blazers basketball team, said they had established the Interval Research Corporation with a 10-year financing commitment to support as many as 100 computer scientists and researchers.


Class Act For Home Or School Is Updated
THE Bank Street Writer goes back a decade, an eternity in personal-computer software terms, to the first primitive Apple II's, Ataris and Commodores.
It has evolved and improved to keep up with advances in hardware and is marketed as a classroom or family word-processing program.
According to the publisher, Scholastic Software, more than 150,000 copies are in use in classrooms.
At least one early version of Bank Street had separate writing and editing modes; you wrote the essay or letter or whatever in one mode, but you needed to switch to the other mode to change anything.
That was a real annoyance, but the limited memory of the machines that were then affordable made it necessary.


St. Luke's Cancels
The last concert of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's season, a performance of Bach's "St. Matthew Passion" scheduled for April 19 at Avery Fisher Hall, has been canceled because of budgetary restrictions.
Refunds for all tickets purchased through Lincoln Center for this concert can be obtained at the box office or by mail to Department AFH, Avery Fisher Hall Box Office, 10 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10023.
Information: (212) 840-0740.


Manolis Andronicos Dead at 73; Found Ancient Macedonia Tombs
Manolis Andronicos, a Greek archeologist who discovered royal tombs of ancient Macedonia, probably including that of Alexander the Great's father, died yesterday at a hospital in Salonika, Greece.
He was 73 years old and lived in Salonika.
Dr.
Andronicos had cancer of the liver and suffered a stroke a month ago, said a niece, Nina Travlou-Einhorn of New York City.
She said she did not know the immediate cause of death.


Physicists Clock the Ticking of Earth's Core
AN array of instruments that detect the faintest twitches in the Earth's gravitational field has for the first time taken the pulse of the planet's solid inner core.
The spherical core, 1,520 miles across, is sloshing around at a steady rhythmical pace inside a liquid outer core, probably formed of molten iron and nickel.
The discovery opens a new avenue for studying the detailed structure of the Earth's deep interior, from which physicists expect to be able for the first time to calculate the mass of the Earth's inner core and to infer compositions of both the inner and outer core.
The achievement is also expected to shed light on such enigmas as the nature of the electric dynamo believed to drive the Earth's wavering magnetic field.


In Paris, Lagerfeld Stole the Spotlight
Karl Lagerfeld was the towering figure at the fall and winter ready-to-wear shows in Paris that ended last week.
Other designers also played important roles in establishing the dominant styles of the season, which will influence the way women will be dressing seven or eight months from now.
Christian Lacroix was a very close second.
His energetic, adventurous clothes, which play continually with fabrics and colors, encourage the highest form of flattery: reverential copies by other designers.


Composer Mikis Theodorakis Quits Official Post in Greece
The Greek composer Mikis Theodorakis, who won fame for the film scores of "Zorba the Greek" and "Z," all the while dabbling in politics, resigned today from the conservative Government.
Mr.
Theodorakis said he wanted to focus his attention on music.
But his resignation came amid persistent reports that he disagreed with the economic austerity policy of Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis.


People
*
Ray Hirschman was named to the new post of executive vice president and executive creative director at Gillespie Advertising, Princeton, N.J.
He was previously senior vice president and group creative director of Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.


Patterns
New Faces, New Legs
There could be a supermodel shortage on Seventh Avenue next week during the New York fall fashion showings.
Several of the world's leading fashion models, including Linda Evangelista, Christy Turlington, Claudia Schiffer and Karen Mulder, will not be making the trip to the New York, according to their agencies.
But hold the wails and ululations.


Quick to Blame Israel
To the Editor:
You have unquestionably hit a new low in journalistic standards with "If Israel Sold Patriot Missiles . . . " (editorial, March 20).
To use an unsubtantiated and officially denied State Department leak to build a case against Israel is a low blow indeed.


Hugh Kerr, 82, Author And Theologian, Dies
Hugh Thomson Kerr Jr., author and emeritus professor of theology at Princeton Theological Seminary, died on Friday at the Princeton Medical Center.
He was 82 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of acute respiratory distress syndrome, a spokesman at the medical center said.


USAir Orders Boeing 757's
The Boeing Company said today that USAir had ordered 15 of its 757 twinjets and secured options for an additional 15 of the mid-sized airliners.
The firm orders are worth about $900 million, including spare parts.
Boeing also said that CSA, the flag carrier of Czechoslovakia, had signed its first deal for Boeing aircraft, with an order for five 737-500's valued at about $160 million including spares and training.


Economists Shifting Priorities
Prodded by three years of economic stagnation, a growing number of prominent economists are putting aside their criticism of the budget deficit as the worst of economic evils.
Instead, they are advocating a temporary rise in the deficit to generate spending for public works that would put idle people and machinery back to work.
The latest evidence of the new priority appeared yesterday in an open letter made public in Washington and signed by more than 70 economists, some of whom said they would not have signed it even four months ago.
Although a surge in retail sales has raised hopes that a recovery is finally under way, many economists say that without an injection of public spending, the recovery might not endure.


More Say They Are Sex-Case Victims
Scores of teen-agers from all over Philadelphia have told local counseling services that they had contact with a man with AIDS whom the police have charged with deviant sexual behavior with four minors.
The man, Edward I. Savitz, has told the police that he has had contact with up to a hundred teen-agers in the past few years, but medical experts have played down the risk, saying that most of Mr.
Savitz's activities apparently bore little or no risk of transmitting the virus that causes AIDS.


Stocks End Day Mixed; Dow Up 3.80
Stocks closed mixed yesterday in light trading, with blue chips holding on to small gains but the broad market down.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 3.80 points to finish the session at 3,235.24.
Traders said many investors held back as they awaited this week's batch of economic data for March, including the consumer confidence and the Chicago purchasing managers index due today.


Algeria Tightening Rein on Fundamentalists
More than two months after a coup halted free elections in Algeria, the confrontation between the Government and Islamic fundamentalists has deepened with the announcement of plans to dissolve 400 elected local assemblies still controlled by the Islamic Salvation Front.
The Government's move, which was made late Sunday, followed a communique by the Islamic Salvation Front in which the fundamentalist party appeared to take responsibility for the killing on Saturday of two soldiers in Algiers.


SCHOOL-AID BATTLE THREATENS ACCORD ON ALBANY BUDGET
An election-year battle over how to distribute $8.4 billion in aid to local school districts erupted here today, threatening the budget deal hammered out by state leaders over the weekend.
Always a bitter ritual of spring, the school-aid fight, which affects everything from class sizes to property-tax rolls in the state's 720 school districts, has taken on added urgency.
That is because lawmakers are frantically pushing to achieve a measure of voter respect by passing a budget before the start of the new fiscal year on Wednesday.
It would be the first on-time budget here in eight years.
Fiscal Tug-of-War
For New York City, at least $40 million of its school budget is at stake.
In a typical tug-of-war between the city and the rest of the state, city officials believed they had brokered a deal over the weekend to protect $80 million in their budget that had been threatened, only to find a proposal from suburban and upstate lawmakers today that would move half that amount into their school districts.
But even that faction, mostly Republicans, could not agree, falling into intra-party fighting and developing different plans for dividing the money.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Nail-Biting Time Nears For Democratic Party
The Democratic Presidential campaign is edging toward unknown territory, the kind of place that on medieval maps would be marked, "Here be dragons."
By all the conventional rules of navigation, Bill Clinton is sailing toward the nomination.
But if you listen to the winds of discontent blowing behind him and Jerry Brown, there is another message.
The fate and future of Governor Clinton are very much up for grabs with the Democratic electorate, as distinct from the Congressional Democrats and the people who make their living as lawyers, lobbyists and consultants in Washington.
As for Jerry and his coat of many colors, no leading Democrats think the voters will buy once they find out how many personas are hiding under those chameleon threads.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about Olympia &amp; York's attempt to arrange new bank loans misstated the amount the company has promised to contribute for a London subway line.
It is $:400 million, or about $690 million.


Census Shows Connecticut Is Richest State
Connecticut became America's wealthiest state during the 1980's, as its residents' incomes soared and its poverty rate declined, according to newly released 1990 Census Bureau data.
But there were also signs of increasing economic duress, evident in the rising costs of housing and the number of manufacturing jobs lost, even though the information was collected before the current recession.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about cutbacks by book publishers described James Silberman's job status incompletely.
After Summit Books was dissolved, he became vice president and senior editor at Little, Brown.


Amid Redistricting, Rep. Roe Decides Not to Seek 13th Term
Representative Robert A. Roe, the chairman of the House Public Works and Transportation Committee, today became the second senior member of the New Jersey Congressional delegation to announce in the wake of a new redistricting plan that he would not seek re-election.
Mr.
Roe, who is 64 years old and in his 12th term, is New Jersey's senior member of Congress.
He said in a statement released in Washington that redistricting did not influence his decision not to seek a 13th two-year term.
The other senior Democrat who has announced his retirement, Bernard J. Dwyer, who is in his sixth term, said redistricting had prompted his decision.


A Moment of Silence On CBS Says a Lot
The last seconds of Saturday's Duke-Kentucky thriller reminded CBS's Verne Lundquist of a self-taught lesson from the 1986 Masters when Jack Nicklaus stood over a birdie putt on the 17th hole that would put him in the lead.
"I had a moment to collect my thoughts before the putt," Lundquist said, "and I remembered saying to myself, 'Keep it simple and don't botch it.' "


French Cabinet Shuffle Seems Certain in Wake of Socialist Losses
After a second stinging defeat for his Socialist Party in local elections on Sunday, President Francois Mitterrand appeared certain to make changes in his beleaguered Government this week.
Asked if Government changes were imminent after the Socialists' loss of five local strongholds to right-wing parties in district elections, a presidential spokeswoman, Muriel de Pierrebourg, said, "One may assume so." While emphasizing that no official word had come yet from the President, she added, "If the President feels he must take account of the message of voters, there is no reason to wait beyond this week."


Howe Says He Was Coerced Into a Confession
Yankee relief pitcher Steve Howe said today that he was "scared to death" after his arrest on cocaine charges last December and signed a confession out of fear his house and pickup truck would be seized.
Howe broke down and cried on the witness stand as he told United States Magistrate Bart Erickson that he confessed because he was worried about his home, his family, his integrity and his career.


Prepare for Lockout In Spring of '93, Fehr Is Warning Players
For four weeks, Donald Fehr has been traveling through Florida and Arizona telling the members of the union he heads to expect their employers to employ a two-stage strategy in the next 12 months:
*Reopen the collective bargaining agreement in December.


Gantos Apparel Chain Names New President
Gantos Inc., a chain of women's apparel stores, yesterday named Michele Fortune president and chief operating officer.
Ms.
Fortune, currently executive vice president for merchandising and marketing at the troubled Hit or Miss store chain, will join Gantos on April 13.
The company is based in Grand Rapids, Mich., and has 158 stores in the Midwest and Northeast.


Dinkins, in Albany, Finds Barn Door Open
Mayor David N. Dinkins was typically personable and typically measured as he came to the Capitol today to denounce the tentative state budget agreement and to plead for more money for New York City.
But while his gently persistent appeals were met with politeness, no one made any promises.
And some legislators questioned whether Mr.
Dinkins's trip to Albany, just two days before the 1992 budget was due, was simply too late to be effective.


'Free' Infant Formula Also Does Harm in U.S.; Brain Food
To the Editor:
As a breast-feeding advocate, I was pleased to read "Breast Milk for the World's Babies" (editorial, March 12), which notes that 12 countries have complied with the World Health Organization admonition not to give out free samples of formula.
I would like to take issue with the statement that "In countries like the United States, breast-feeding doesn't mean the difference between good and poor nutrition." Although human milk and formula supply the baby the same number of calories, they are vastly different substances.
In the United States children do not die if they are not nursed.
However, there is an argument to be made that they may not get nutrition as good or the benefits of human milk.


Quotation of the Day
"You have the advantage here of being part of something -- and yet you know it matters to the rest of the world, too. Everyone cares about the Oscars out there. So it's a pretty heady mixture for everyone in Hollywood, where narcissism runs amok anyway." -- ROBERT CORT, head of a film production company.  [ C16:6. ]


A Day to Demonstrate Affection for the Stars And Some Dismay
By 10 P.M., the movie stars and moguls had left the Academy Award ceremonies outside the Los Angeles Music Center to noisy demonstrators protesting Hollywood's depiction of homosexuals in a number of films.
But the demonstrators, who had threatened to disrupt the Oscar ceremonies, failed to do so.
And members of the glamorous audience expressed relief mingled with sympathy.


Prenatal Womb Position And Supermasculinity
WHETHER you're a stud or a dud may depend on where you were in your mother's womb, at least if you're a gerbil, according to a new study in the journal Animal Behaviour.
Researchers at McMaster University in Ontario compared the sexual success of male Mongolian gerbils flanked by brothers in the womb with that of males that developed between sisters.
Bathed in fluids charged with testosterone flowing from either side, the males who were surrounded by brothers became supermasculine.


Spotlight on Bronx: Heat's on Dinkins
Today, Mayor David N. Dinkins will move his office to that hoary national symbol of urban problems, the Bronx.
But when the Democratic Presidential contenders debate there tonight with the eyes of the nation upon them, their host will be not the Mayor, but Borough President Fernando Ferrer.
After striving for months to spotlight urban problems -- and winning little public attention -- the Mayor found himself last week facing the magic media opportunity of the primary, but one-upped by Mr.
Ferrer.
The Borough President long ago arranged the televised debate at 7 P.M. at Herbert H. Lehman College, to be shown on WABC-TV and C-Span.


Showdown of Bush and Congress Shapes Up on Campaign Spending
Seeking an issue they can use to argue that they are committed to political reform, Congressional Democrats hope to move a campaign spending measure out of a long-delayed House-Senate conference this week.
The measure is sure to include voluntary spending limits for House and Senate races.
But Republicans have regularly opposed such limits, contending the limits would favor incumbents, a majority of whom are Democrats.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Paging NetworkInc., Dallas, filed for six million shares to be sold by certain stockholders and $200 million of senior subordinated notes, due 2002.
The shares will be sold through Prudential Securities and the notes through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


South African Foes Narrow Differences
Negotiators working on a time frame for South Africa's transition to full democracy agreed today to make every effort to bring about an interim government within three months.
It was unclear whether the disagreements remaining between the Government and its foremost negotiating adversary, the African National Congress, would be resolved in time to meet the target date of June 30 declared by a working committee of the convention, which is seeking to establish the terms and procedures under which the basic rules of Government are to be changed.


Quiet Trading for Treasury Bonds
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in quiet trading yesterday, as market participants awaited economic reports scheduled for release later in the week.
"No business is being done," one government-securities trader said.
"There are too many numbers coming later in the week to do much now."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Clinton Shifts On Debates, Agreeing to 6
Breaking from his posture of playing the standoffish front-runner, Gov.
Bill Clinton yesterday challenged Edmund G. Brown Jr. to at least six debates before the New York primary next week, a move that Mr.
Brown welcomed as "a major breakthrough."
The challenge was an abrupt about-face for Mr.
Clinton, whose campaign is struggling in New York to counter relentless broadsides from Mr.
Brown and aggressive news organizations here.
Less than two weeks ago, the Clinton campaign refused to commit to future debates, fearing that an appearance on stage with Mr.
Brown would give equal stature to the former California Governor, who is trailing badly in the delegate count.


'Free' Infant Formula Also Does Harm in U.S.
To the Editor:
I read with much joy and relief "Breast Milk for the World's Babies" (editorial, March 12), on the tragic consequences of distributing infant formula samples to hospitals and birth centers in developing countries.
But this deplorable practice is not limited to the third world.
My experience was in Miami, but I feel sure this is happening in every public hospital in this country.
Two years ago, partly because of my research work in Guatemala for a degree in anthropology, I began helping a Guatemalan Indian family living in Homestead, Fla., a small town 20 miles south of Miami that attracts thousands of migrant farm workers during the winter months.
When it became time for the woman to have her baby, she was taken to Jackson Hospital, the huge public hospital in Miami.
Like the women of her community who had come before her, she indicated she would bottle-feed because they all thought that was the way of the modern American woman.


23% of State Prisoners Test Positive for TB
Twenty-three percent of prison inmates in New York State and 6 percent of prison employees have tested positive for tuberculosis infection, according to the most thorough study to date of TB in prisons.
Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, the Commissioner of Correctional Services, released the results yesterday.
The tests included nearly all inmates and prison personnel.


Former Romanian Police Chief Appeals His Murder Conviction


An Unlikely Underdog; I.B.M. Must Play Catch-Up With Microsoft As It Begins to Ship Improved Software
I.B.M. finds itself in a remarkable position -- the underdog -- as it begins shipping the first copies today of a revamped and spruced-up version of its OS/2 operating system software for personal computers.
As recently as two years ago, before its bitter split with the Microsoft Corporation, such a turn of events would have been unthinkable.
The industry has historically viewed I.B.M. as routinely entering markets late, and then quickly dominating them through sheer size and marketing prowess.


Pakistan Crushes Militants' Attempts to Storm Kashmir's Dividing Line


Bridge
The end of the American Contract Bridge League's spring nationals here Sunday night was marked by an unprecedented triumph for two British visitors.
Sandra Landy, a former world women's team champion, and Michele Handley, who are due to represent Britain in the 1992 World Championships in Italy in August, snatched a last-round victory in the national women's Swiss team championship.
No other foreign players have ever won a major American women's team title.
Their teammates were Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Judy Tucker and Gail Greenberg of Manhattan and Dorothy Truscott of Riverdale, the Bronx, and they ended with a score of 177.6 victory points.
The four Americans thus qualified for playoffs which will eventually select the United States representative in the 1993 World Championships in Santiago, Chile.


How to Assist Small-Business Insurance
To the Editor:
"Some 'Worker Leasing' Programs Defraud Insurers and Employers" (front page, March 20) points up how far small companies are forced to go to obtain affordable employee health coverage.
Yes, many of us are forced to deal with the devil because of a system that is stacked against us.
Small-business owners are caught in the squeeze because we need to provide coverage to stay competitive, and we want to because it is right.
Consider, however, that small-business premiums have been increasing 30 percent to 70 percent each year.
The cost of insurance is typically higher for us than for the larger corporations who can buy in bulk, and tax policy discriminates against us: we can only deduct 25 percent of the cost of premiums, while larger companies can take a full deduction.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Remakes Home State in Own Image
When he was running for his fifth term as Governor two years ago, Bill Clinton made a promise to the people of Arkansas: He was not going to run for President in 1992.
"It was almost a 'read my lips' kind of thing," one local reporter recalled.
" 'I will not run.' "


After One Last Witness Dispute, Both Sides Rest in Noriega Trial
Rebuttal testimony in the drug trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega ended today, with lawyers for both sides formally resting their cases after a last dispute over two witnesses the defense called to establish an alibi for the deposed Panamanian leader.
One of the witnesses, Fernando Jaen, was detained on Sunday at the main airport of the Panamanian capital as he prepared to board the flight that would have brought him here to testify.


A.T.&amp; T. And 2 Unions Hold Talks
A.T.&amp; T. and its two main unions began contract talks yesterday covering nearly a third of the union workers in the sprawling telecommunications industry.
There has been little talk of a strike this year, but recent moves by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, such as planning the replacement of large numbers of human telephone operators with voice-recognition computers, have infuriated the unions and underscored job security as the top priority in the negotiations.
Since the 1984 breakup of A.T.&amp; T. into a long-distance carrier and seven "Baby Bells," the former Bell System has struggled to modernize its equipment and reshape itself as a nimble competitor.
This has hurt A.T.&amp; T.'s unions.
Modern equipment needs fewer workers to tend them, and smaller, lower-cost phone companies can offer the lucrative corporate market better prices.


And the Winners Were . . .


By Design; Sporty High Style
When two of Paris's top designers sent models down the runway wearing cozy cashmere sweater sets at last week's fall shows, it was a sure sign that casual fashion is now high style.
The outfit that provoked the most applause at Yves Saint Laurent's show was a classic red sweater set paired with a full black floor-length velvet skirt.
For Chanel, Karl Lagerfeld showed pullovers for evening that reached the ankle, worn under equally long cardigans.
Some viewers may have been reminded of the sweater styles that the American designer Halston made popular in the 1970's.


Bush Is Pressed on Vietnam Embargo
The Bush Administration is under growing pressure from American business leaders and foreign allies to modify its embargo against Vietnam.
In response, officials say, the Government may be preparing to move to a new phase of relations with Hanoi, which recently pledged to remove some major obstacles to the resolution of the issue of Americans still missing from the Vietnam War.


Chess
The players in their twenties who have designs on Gary Kasparov's world title may be divided into two types: those who copy his playing methods and those who practice fighting against them.
We may take the Russian grandmaster Boris Gelfand and the Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk as prominent examples, respectively, of each type.
As the misfortunes of chess combat would have it, both of these extraordinarily promising players were eliminated from the current series of matches to pick the 1993 challenger for Kasparov.
So although many fans give either one of them very good chances of becoming the champion's rival, neither can qualify until the 1996 title match.


Resolute Journal; The North Pole, Anyone? Get Your Earmuffs Here
The Japanese have tried it with motorcycles, the Norwegians with snowmobiles, the Swiss with mountain bikes, the French with pack horses from Quebec.
Each March, as the sun begins warming northern latitudes after three and a half months of darkness, thoughts turn to one of the last great challenges, a trek to the North Pole.


Soil Degradation Study: There Goes the Farm
MORE than three billion acres of land, amounting to 11 percent of the world's vegetated surface area, have become seriously degraded since World War II, an environmental research group has reported.
The soils, mostly in Asia and Africa, have lost much of their capacity to produce crops or lumber or support livestock, the group, the World Resources Institute in Washington, said in a report last week.
In total, they represent an area the size of China and India together.


Review/Music; One Chord but Many, Many Variations
Strange things can happen in the spaces between the steps of the Western chromatic scale.
The concert on Wednesday night at the Alternative Museum by David First, a guitarist and composer, used finely calibrated pitch combinations to make the whole gallery throb and buzz and shimmer with invisible turbulence.
His first piece, "Apology," was a solo for amplified acoustic guitar.
It opened with a drone and flamenco-like modal runs, slightly reminiscent of "The End" by the Doors.
Then Mr.
First started bending notes and warping harmonies.
He shifted to folky fingerpicking but continued to slide major or minor chords toward less defined sonorities, like John Fahey discovering the microtone.
"Apology" rambled, but as its chords melted, it was a lesson in the arbitrariness of conventional harmony.


Q&amp;A
The Biggest Seed
Q.
Which plant has the largest seed?
A.
A tall palm tree called Lodoicea maldivicia, which grows only in the Seychelles in the Indian Ocean, produces the largest single seed known in the plant kingdom, said Dr.
Andrew Henderson, a botanist and research associate at the Institute of Economic Botany at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.


Classical Music in Review
'Amadis'
Gene Frankel Theater 24 Bond Street East Village Through Sunday
When ancient opera assumes modern disguise, there had better be compelling reasons for it to do so.
One looked for those reasons on Friday night when Robert Press's Measured Breaths Theater Company presented its Wild West version of Lully's "Amadis." But six-shooters and cowboy boots, rather than clearing up an already muddled story line, simply added to its original awkwardnesses.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Urban Problems; Democrats Give Cities Their Day
After months of campaigning through snowy New England towns, Midwestern farms, Sun Belt suburbs and other locations where the problems of big cities were at a far remove, the Democratic candidates for President will be forced to confront the problems of urban America intensively today for the first time in this long Presidential campaign season.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California are to answer questions from more than a dozen mayors at Mayor David N. Dinkins's residence, Gracie Mansion, and will later debate for an hour on urban issues in the New York City borough that is a metaphor for urban decay, the Bronx.


Books of The Times; Where Satire and Sentiment Collide
Primitive People  By Francine Prose 228 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
The primitive people in Francine Prose's eighth novel are the snooty denizens of a bucolic Hudson Valley town: suburban hipsters whose idea of politically correct fun is dressing up as Indians, Eskimos and black pop stars for Halloween.
They babble on at length about the evils of wearing fur and consuming white sugar, though they also say things like, "You can see the purpose of an occasional war or plague from a housecleaning point of view." As seen through the eyes of a Haitian refugee named Simone, these people provide Ms.
Prose with plenty of opportunities to satirize the mores and spiritual foibles of upper-middle-class America.


Bid to Limit Gas Supply Makes Gains
Campaigns by hundreds of independent drillers to curb bulging supplies of natural gas in the Southwest scored one victory in Oklahoma last week and appear to be headed for others soon in Texas and Louisiana.
Oklahoma's Democratic Governor, David Walters, signed a bill last week that is expected to reduce annual gas output there by about 5 percent.
The Texas Railroad Commission today scheduled a vote on April 27 on a narrower plan for production cutbacks, and Louisiana is considering a similar measure.


Designers Plan Drones To Probe Atmosphere
BETWEEN the sky above and the earth below lies a place that scientists study only with great difficulty: the critical region of the atmosphere where the highest clouds form and gases interact with radiation from space.
This zone, too high for most aircraft to reach and too low for thorough satellite observations from space, is prompting the development of a new class of robot airplanes to monitor ozone depletion and global warming.
Atmospheric scientists conclude that they must explore this rarefied region, lying from 10 to 20 miles above the earth, if they are to understand basic mechanisms of global climatic change.
And the best way to get instruments up to this region and keep them there long enough for meaningful observations, they say, is with remotely piloted aircraft.


CHRONICLE
ELLEN KING, a retired first-grade detective with the New York City Police Department's sex crimes unit, is not quite sure what all the fuss is about, but a stellar group of speakers will gather to pay her homage on Thursday evening.
GERALDINE FERRARO, HUGH DOWNS and LINDA FAIRSTEIN, the chief of the Manhattan District Attorney's sex crimes unit, will address the guests at a cocktail party in the Westbury Hotel, a benefit for the Rape Crisis Intervention Program at Mount Sinai Medical Center.


